TRANSCRIPTION: KZOO/2023-02-19-21H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Hawaii. Waka re no asa ni aisa reru hodo Aisa reru hodo kanashii koi wa
arimasen Daikan yashiki furu ame mo, gohyaku rakan ni chiru hana mo Anata to
futari mo omoide bakari Iwami Ginzan Ah, hitori zaka Ah, wasureru tame no osake
no aji wa Nomu hodo usuku samete yuku Izumo no kamisama okorasete Kokoro
midareta kono mune wa anata ga kizanda Nomiato bakari Iwami Ginzan Ah, hitori
yado Kisetsu no hana ni te ga fureru tabi Setsunai koi wa kaori tatsu Kokemusu
soribashi hagurebashi Akai hono wa yamatsu tsuzi anata to Moichida kuru hazu
datta Iwami Ginzan Ah, hitori zaka Nagayuko Iwami Ginzan Hitori zaka Daichi no
ibuki to Ushio no sachi to Daichi no ibuki to Ushio no sachi to Semai itabanya
yume mo aru Gankou yakata sono kuchiguse wa Tema wo oshimuna seikon komero Hojo
ippon shugyo no michi da Koide migaita, koide migaita kokoro ii Kozaiku no you
no hojo sabaki Ijitto ikizama sarani imore Iwame hakuyo ja onaji misan no maenya
dasen to mata to yasareru Hojo ippon shugyo no michi da Ichigo ichi e no, ichigo
ichi e no kokoro ii Iwami Ginzan Chizen ga sodateta inochi wo morai, hito wa
inochi wo tsunaideku Chiroi mae kake kiriri to shimete, itsuka jibun no noren wo
ageru Hojo ippon shugyo no michi da Ten ni todoke yo, ten ni todoke yo kokoro ii
Kokoro ii Kokoro ii Kokoro ii Kokoro ii Kokoro ii Kokoro ii Kokoro ii Asu no
koto sae Asu no koto sae Asu no koto sae Wakari wa shinai Hoka ni ii yatsu ni
mitsukuna to iu Shiawase ni anaremaku datte, tsuite yukimasu ne anata Asu no
kumo ga mie datte, tsuite yuku Muda ni suru mayo, nido nai haru wo Uki no sanra
shito, futome ga warau Shiawase ni anaremaku datte, sotto sakimasu ne anata Soba
ni anata ga ireba ii, ireba ii Soba ni anaremaku datte, futome ga warau Kata ni
sugareba, yose yo to tereru I love your profile Even if I can't get rid of
happiness I'll keep following you I want to live for you I'll keep following you
Miyako Harumi Ukigusa Guraishi Music I want to live for you I want to live for
you I want to live for you When a woman drinks alcohol If you understand the
feeling of loneliness Please don't stop me Music I drink alcohol But I can't
forget regret I'm going to forget The shadow hat in the glass Please don't call
me Music In the apartment at night In the room alone On top of the cold tatami
The memory of you The smoke from the cigarette Please, don't throw me away
Miyashiro Hitorizake Sakura Festival Calendar Sakura Festival, a festival in the
Japanese-Japanese society, is held this year. There are 15 contestants in the
71st Sakura Festival. They are studying Japanese culture and Japanese traditions
to become the representative Japanese-Japanese women. The show will broadcast
the Sakura Festival calendar, which introduces the contestants in action. The
broadcast will be from Monday to Thursday, from 2nd to 3rd, from 5pm. The rerun
will be from 3rd to 5pm, from Monday to Thursday, from 9am. The Friday broadcast
will be from 9am to 10pm. The program is... The program is...<|fr|><|translate|>
<|fr|><|translate|><|fr|><|translate|><|fr|><|translate|> The sponsor of the
show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The
sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show
is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of
the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The
sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show
is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of
the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The
sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show
is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of
the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The
sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show
is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of
the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The
sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show
is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of
the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The
sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show
is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of
the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The
sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show
is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of
the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The
sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show
is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of
the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The
sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show
is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of
the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The
sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show
is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of
the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The
sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show
is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of
the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The
sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show
is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of
the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The
sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show
is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of
the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The
sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show
is... The sponsor of the show is... The sponsor of the show is...