TRANSCRIPTION: KZOO/2023-02-19-22H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 lunchtime. 12 o'clock in the afternoon. It's the 6490th time. It's still dark
outside, but the sun is rising faster. Tokyo time is 6.23 today. Oh, I forgot to
drink the smiley Kanyu Shaved Ice. I'll have two. Thank you for the power. Let's
start with the headline news. The Defense Ministry announced that the Air Self-
Defense Force had a joint training with the US military yesterday. The Korean
military is also training with the US military. It is seen that it was launched
by the North Korean military. North Korea is... Was it Mars 15? What are you
thinking? The US Secretary of State said on the 18th that he had a conversation
with a major Communist Party politician in China. He said that he was unable to
deny the US's belief in the international law on the air raid in China. On the
other hand, the big knight said that he had a specific use of force for the
attack on Chinese airspace. He said that he had made a clear violation of the
international law and the civil aviation agreement, and that he had a serious
argument. I think it's your fault. Two weeks after the big earthquake that
struck Turkey and Syria, the Turkish disaster emergency countermeasures
committee announced that the emergency activities that had continued in the
southern disaster area on the 19th would be completed. The number of deaths that
hit Turkey and Syria exceeded 46,000. The new corona virus has reported 14,239
infections nationwide yesterday. In Tokyo, 992 people were infected. It's going
to be a lot of trouble if we don't increase our immunity. This is the economist
Takuro Morinaga. Hello, Mr. Moitaka. Hello. Thank you for your time. Thank you.
It's been sold for over 150,000 copies, but it's the ABE Heart Recovery Record.
Mr. Abe has been saying that he has fought for the sake of the country. Mr. Abe
had various problems with the Morikake and Sakura parties. However, I think that
what is written here is the truth. I think he is the only politician who has
fought for the sake of the country after the war. In fact, the Ministry of
Finance is written in this article. If you don't follow your own will, you will
go to defeat the government. In other words, the Ministry of Finance is above
the political system chosen by the people. In the ABE Heart Recovery Record, the
first-ever presidential election was held and the people gathered. In the
meantime, the Ministry of Finance decided to take a stand. I think that's what
it says. The staff around me, Mr. Takahashi, who is now a professor at Kaetsu
University, and Mr. Kikuo Iwata, who worked for the Ministry of Finance and the
Ministry of Finance, and Professor Yamada Koichi, who is now a professor at Yale
University, I think that the people of the military were able to fight with each
other. But what I'm saying is that if you pay a tax in the deferred period, the
economy will be in a hurry. If you are a person who is a little bit of an
economist, you will understand. However, in 2019, when the second tax on
consumer goods was not paid, at that time, the Ministry of Finance had to go to
the point where they could improve the final document and protect Prime Minister
Abe. I think that if they hadn't done that, they wouldn't have been able to pay
the tax in return. Some people often say that the ABE Mix is a failure, but I
think that if they didn't have consumer tax and tax increase, they would have
gone in a good direction. What Mr. Ikushima is saying is that Japan's oil power
is mostly on the side of economists. That's right. But that's what the textbook
says. It's a combination of financial problems that should be eliminated by the
government. The ABE Mix will be the last solution for vienen, but you also said
that you didn't want to pay the tax for 10 years because it's the People's
Restoration tomf Normally-етеpe. Although I was in trouble while I was in the
moon on this point. What about his policy? Untalkable The former prime minister
H sensing the lights and not above the fragrance söz données she possible
Shimonid autopilot sortie Sheying Eliminated I thought that was not going to
happen. That was the reason for the deflation. It's easy to be a pawn, but it's
hard to fight. Well, today's issue, the current issue of the Weekly News, is
about the July July issue of the Weekly News. Ueda-san said that the sake of If
you put it in the right place, it will be a loss. That's right. In that context,
this is also a very current situation. The university of Tokyo, Watanabe
Tsutomu-sensei, says that the influx of money is stopped by the increase in
annual taxes. What is this? Mr. Watanabe has been saying that it is necessary to
eliminate the deflamindo to realize the high cycle of economic growth and the
culture. If we create a situation where the annual tax increases for that
purpose, it will be inevitable that the number of people will rise a little, and
that normal economic activity will run into consumption. I think so. What I find
very strange is that the effect of the increase in annual taxes is only for the
elderly. If it is the case, the company will decide the tax, so it will not
increase. If we do the same thing with tax, for example, to halve or cut the
consumption tax, the same thing will happen. However, when I read Mr. Watanabe's
book, I don't see any talks about the current tax. Maybe...I've never talked
about it directly, so I don't know. Maybe Mr. Watanabe is a member of the Zai
Seikin group. I'm not sure. Otherwise, I can't explain it. It's very strange. In
the first place, the annual tax is increased, but the annual tax increases the
health insurance of everyone. I don't know how to increase it. On the other
hand, there are many books in the weekly post. You are talking about the zero-
cost capital of Saito Kouhei, the economist, but can you explain this a little
more easily? I've been reading the commentary book since I was in college. This
is an excellent commentary book. I haven't read the last book, which was the one
that I was reading in the middle of the lecture. What surprised me the most was
that Marx's most fundamental problem was that his work was boring. He was
manualized and did the same simple work, but only the norm. His work was
explodingly increasing. It's exactly like that now. I think it's important that
everyone can do a more independently fun job. I think it's exactly like that.
I've been doing it myself, but if I do it with fun, my work will be boring. The
zero-cost capital is from NHK's new book, which is 1023 yen. I hope you will
read it. Thank you very much. Next, Yakkun will appear. Yakkun is currently on
sale. Kansai Yamata is on sale at Time's Kahara, Veretania, and Aya. You can
also order the product at Don Quijote, Nijia, Marukai, and Sam's Club 7-Eleven.
Ochi Tsunagou. This month, Yakkun Hirohide will be here. Good morning, Yakkun.
Thank you for having me. Every week is interesting. I can imagine that you will
come to my shop just by listening to my work. Thank you. Next month is also
good. I'm sorry. My face is a little cloudy. Your face matches the face of Mr.
Morikawa. You have five children. Have you talked about the future of your
family? No, not at all. You haven't talked about your caretaker, right? No, I
haven't. But my mother and my mother are old enough to talk about it. That's
right. When you have a child, you talk about caretaker in your life. In the
second half of your life, you will think about things that young people can't
think about. So I think I have to prepare for various things. But I don't talk
about my ancestors. Yakumaru, do you plan to move to another place? I haven't
been able to come back to Japan this year, but I've been able to talk about it
with my family. As the lifestyle changes, I think it's natural to live. My wife
and I are two people, so we can live in a house. We can live in a house with a
key. We can throw away garbage if we separate it. Now we do everything
ourselves, like what day is Monday, what day is Tuesday, what day is Sunday. So
I think there are many things that I like about a mansion. Do you sell your
house? I sell it. Do you have a lot of memories? That's right. If I don't think
about my memories, I think I can sell it anytime. But I can't make memories like
that. Did you live in a mansion too? I lived in a mansion in Hawaii. So I felt
the good things about the mansion. We heard a very good story. This month, we
talked to Mr. Hirohi Yakumaru. What is your dream? I want to maintain the
current situation. As a lifestyle, I want to change my house and live in a house
every three months. What do you mean? I want to live in Okinawa, a hot spring,
or overseas. If I can live in a house like that every three months, I can live
there for the next 25 years. I couldn't do that before, but now I can do it
anywhere. I want to live in a house like that every three months. It's a dream.
You used to live in three places in Canada, Hawaii, and Australia. Yes, I lived
in Chivalry Hills. I still remember your words. You said you wanted to slow down
and change your life. I thought it was a wonderful expression. There are things
in our world that we should learn. It's a lifestyle that we should learn. Thank
you very much. It was fun. Is it effective for making a longization? I will do
my best. 二次夜前転にて 生放送育島広市のおはよう一直線 今日はね先ほど薬君と介護の話も出ましたが 明日ですね介護コンサルタント中村澄子さん登場しますね
早朝テックのコーナーは歌手の久美子さん登場ということで こちらもお楽しみください さあお待ちどうさまでした 続きましては 断礼今日の1ページ断礼さんの登場ですね
断査今週もよろしくお願いします 皆さん育島さんおはようございます断礼です 今週もよろしくお願いします 断礼今日の1ページあなたも参加してみませんか
都市農業のお話です 都市農業これは市外地およびその周辺の地域において行われる農業 もう少しわかりやすく言いますと 都市に暮らす人たちにとって身近な農業のこと
コロナ禍の影響もありアクセスのいい菓子農園で野菜作りを始める 都会の人たちが増えていると言いますが これも都市農業の一つです
平成27年には都市農業振興基本法という法律も制定され 農林水産省を中心とした様々なプロジェクトも行われています
都会で暮らしながら土と触れ合えたり取れたての野菜が食べられたり これだけでも十分いいことのように思いますが
都市農業が広がっていくと他にもたくさんのメリットが期待できるそうです ではここで国が示している都市農業の多様な機能と言われる 6つの機能をご紹介しましょう
まず新鮮な農産物の供給 自分の生活圏で野菜が生産されていて それがすぐ手に入るというのはいいですよね 次は身近な農業体験 交流活動の場の提供
野菜作りを通じた交流これも楽しそうです そして災害時の防災空間の確保 いざという時に避難場所として使える農地も増えているそうです
そしてそしてこれは説明不要かもしれません 安らぎや潤いをもたらす緑地空間の提供 緑が広がる風景は見ているだけでほっとしますよね またこちらも大事です
国土環境の保全 アスファルトに覆われた都市部は都市型の豪雨災害が心配です 農地はこうした災害の予防にもつながります そして最後は都市住民の農業への理解の情勢
田んぼや畑がない地域の人たちにも農業に関心を持ってもらうというのも 都市農業の大切な役割です 以上のような機能を持った都市農業
農地を守っていこうという取り組みだけでなく 住宅地の中の使っていない土地を農業と関わりのある空間にしていくという 積極的な取り組みも始めようとしているそうです
また国自治体企業大学などさまざまな立場の人たちが手を取り合って 楽しいイベントやプロジェクトがたくさん行われているとのことなので
皆さんもぜひ都市農業にご注目ください 段礼今日の1ページ 今朝は今注目したい都市農業のお話でした それではまた明日 段礼でした 早くなりましたね
詳しくはtbs.comのホームページをご覧になっていただいた方が数字の番号を間違うと大変ですからね よろしくお願いします
たくさんのメールも届いておられありがとうございました 毎日育島さんの明るい話し方たまに滑るギャグ ありがとうございます 薬としつつラジオから元気をもらっています
実はですねごぼう茶飲んだことないんですがお通じにいいなら これぜひとも試してみてください夜飲めますんでね
野菜やヨーグルトは意識してとっていますが腸の動きが弱いのか 千穴茶を飲まないと聞きますけどちょっとで急に来たりなんかすると大変ですよね
やはり毎日総会に出てくれるのは理想なのでぜひ試してみたいと思いますねということでね スイーツ大好きヒロさんまあでもあの歩くということもね重要なので
運動まず重要ですねはいそれから石巻 竹ちゃん昨日の今頃は鶴子さんと森永拓郎さん バイバイバイバイってなってねー
老婆話ばっかしてましたよどちらの森田くさんも大好きですっていうことでありがとうございます
いやーいくしまジュンさん森永拓郎さんの豪華リレーの今朝も元気になりましたっていうね
アプロウ上田さん九春到来ストッパーいくしまさん頼みよっていうことありがとうございました 素敵な一日をせーの Have a nice day! Thank
you! Good luck! いくしまヒロシのおはよう一着線をお送りしました この番組はブルクベーカリーハワイ チャーリーズタクシー エルダース栄養科学研究所
広市電機 関西山と 砂糖製薬 サンヌードル テイクアウトケータリングのタツオ図 メディケアスペシャリスト小林木箠 以上各社の提供でお送りしました
この後は森本武郎をスタンバイをお送りします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします
スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします スタンバイをスタンバイします Where the time is now.