TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-01H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at midnight. This is Charles Carroll. President Biden has promised a
back-you crane for as long as it takes on a surprise visit to Kiev. Lager's
police have confirmed that the body found in a river is that of Nicola Bulli,
who went missing more than three weeks ago. An inquest jury has accused police
of a catastrophic failure to protect the five people shot dead in Plymouth by a
man who was allowed to keep a shot gun. Doctors have voted to go on strike in
England in a dispute about pay. Anglican leaders representing three quarters of
the global faithful say they're splitting from the Church of England because of
its decision to bless same-sex partnerships. Also tonight, a potential
breakthrough in the treatment of stroke patients and why fruit and veg are
missing from supermarket shelves. President Biden has pledged his unwavering
support for you crane, on a surprise visit to Kiev just days before the
anniversary of Russia's invasion. He arrived in the capital this morning after a
10-hour train journey from Poland. President Zelensky, then accompanied him on a
walk through the city's streets before a joint press conference, where Mr. Biden
announced more military, political and financial support for you crane and
tougher sanctions against Moscow. Russia's former president, Dmitry Medvedev,
said that the visit could only have happened because his country provided safety
guarantees to President Biden. Our international editor Jeremy Bowen has sent
this report from Kiev. The sirens wailed as the two presidents walked out into
Kiev's bright winter sun under the blue walls and golden domes of St. Michael's
Church. The timing felt too precise for the alarm to be a coincidence though
there was some Russian air activity far away in Belarus. The two men stayed in
the open air to lay wreaths at Ukraine's memorial for war dead. A point was
being made. Ukraine was still under attack and the leader of the world's most
powerful country, the United States had come to an active war zone to show
support for his ally. President Velodimir Zelensky, President Biden arrived here
by train like all the other leaders who visited Kiev. The Americans warned the
Russians at the weekend that the visit was happening, but tried to keep its
secret at home. Before they were driven to St. Michael's president, Zelensky
welcomed his guest at a brief ceremony at his official residence. Thank you very
much for coming Mr. President. The huge moment that's supporting the Ukraine and
what can I say? He said President Biden was visiting at the most difficult time
for Ukraine. President Biden responded with strong words of support. You and all
Ukraine is reminded the world every single day with the media the word courage
is. Remind us that freedom is priceless. It's worth fighting for. As long as it
takes and that's how along we're going to be with you Mr. President, for as long
as it takes. With the spring fighting season in sight the war is delicately
balanced. In eastern Ukraine, Russia has started a new offensive and President
Vladimir Putin is due to make his own big speech about the war tomorrow. Russia
has mobilized several hundred thousand new conscripts and despite heavy
casualties and huge losses of equipment, the Russian war effort grinds on. The
hard reality of Russian aggression has forced NATO leaders, especially Joe
Biden, to make some tough decisions. The biggest so far might come soon. Ukraine
is pushing the Americans and other Western allies for more powerful weapons
including modern warplanes, as well as continuing shipments to replace the huge
amounts of shells and rockets it's expended. It wants to win to drive Russia
out, not just hold its own in a long war of attrition. The Ukrainians want a
decisive upgrade as soon as possible. Time might not be their friend. President
Putin seems to believe that Russia can't tuff it out longer than the West.
President Zelensky wants to be able to act before voices in NATO calling for
negotiation and a peace deal that hands Russia territory get any louder. As
President Biden visited Kiev, fierce fighting was continuing on the front lines
in the east of Ukraine. Russian forces are stepping up their assault on Buck
Moot, which they've been trying to capture for more than six months and where
they've made advances in recent days. Our senior international correspondent,
Olegirren, sent this report from the outskirts of the city. The battle for Buck
Moot is now at close quarters, inside the city and on the outskirts. Ukrainian
troops are still defending every inch, but the enemy is closing in. It's
hellish, according to President Zelensky, who says Buck Moot must be defended,
but not at any cost. We joined a Ukrainian mortar team on the outskirts, keeping
the Russians at bay on their section of the front line. A soldier called Victor
tells us, Russia will always be a problem. He says the troops are fighting, so
their children won't have to. My eldest son will have to finish what we don't,
he says. I don't want this. None of the soldiers who have sons and daughters
want this. We want to end the war here and now. But with Russian forces gaining
more ground, Ukraine may have to give up the fight in Buck Moot to save lives
and resources for battles elsewhere. President Biden's trip was cloaked in
secrecy, only a handful of his closest advisors in the US knew it was happening,
as our Washington correspondent, Nomiya Akbarly, explains. States will stand
with Ukraine for as long as it takes, continue to be fully in line with public
opinion here, but there is some resistance among Republican politicians, who are
increasingly opposing continued aid to Ukraine. Ah, World Affairs editor John
Simpson is in Kyuf. He assesses the timing of Mr Biden's visit and the message
it sends to Moscow. As a move on the geopolitical chessboard, the visit comes at
a highly critical moment. Vladimir Putin is to make a major statement tomorrow
about the future of the war. And China's top diplomat has just arrived in Moscow
at a time when the Americans are warning that China's thinking of supplying
Russia with weapons. For his part, Ukraine's President Zelinsky is in an
optimistic mood. He told me the other day that Ukraine just had to hold on until
it could launch its own counteroffensive. But the EU's Foreign Affairs Chief
Jose Burrell gave a stark warning yesterday that unless Europe supplied a
Ukraine with more weapons, the war would be lost. So President Biden's
appearance in Kyuf couldn't have happened at a more dramatic time. It was a
rallying cry to the west, a warning to Russia and China, and above all, a
binding assurance to Ukraine that the US wouldn't let it be defeated. Diplomats,
with long memories, are already comparing it to President Kennedy's speech at
the Berlin Wall in 1961. His trust and Boris Johnson have added to the pressure
on Rishi Sunak to help Ukraine by sending fighter jets. The two conservative
former prime ministers made the pleaers they spoke at length in the House of
Commons during a general debate on Ukraine. It was must trust its first
contribution as a back bench MP since 2012 when she became a minister.
Lancashire police have confirmed that a body found on the stretch of the river
wire yesterday is that of Nicola Bully. 45-year-old went missing more than three
weeks ago while walking her dog in the village of St. Michael's on wire. In a
statement, as Boris's family said, they would never be able to comprehend what
had gone through and what she had gone through in her final moments. Nick
Garnett reports from Preston. The news nobody wanted to hear. The body found in
the river wire less than a mile from where she was last seen was Nick Libeli.
Lancashire police's assistant chief constable Peter Lawson spoke to reporters
outside the forces headquarters in Preston. Sadly, we are now able to confirm
that yesterday we recovered Nicola Bully from the river wire. Nicholas's family
have been informed and are of course devastated. Our thoughts are with them at
this time as well as with all her loved ones and the wider community. Detective
Superintendent Pauline Stables read a statement on behalf of Miss Bully's
partner, Paul Ansel and their daughters. We will never be able to comprehend
what Nicky had gone through in her last moment and that will never leave us. We
will never forget Nicky. How could we? She was the centre of our world. She was
the one who made our lives so special and nothing will cast a shadow over that.
Last week police revealed that class Miss Bully as a high risk missing person.
They highlighted alcohol as a factor as well as medical information about her.
That information was released with the knowledge of the family and in an effort
to explain the specific vulnerabilities police were referring to but the actions
were condemned as victim blaming. An internal investigation into the decision is
being carried out. The home secretary, Suella Brevman, raised concerns with the
chief constable about the release of those details. Today she said she hadn't
been wholly satisfied by his reply. Digital police have said throughout they had
two priorities for this investigation to provide answers for the family of
Nicola Bully and to bring her home to her loved ones. The family have asked for
their privacy to be respected. An inquest jury has said there was a catastrophic
failure in the firearms licensing unit at Devon and Cornwall Police before the
gunman Jake Davison unlawfully killed four adults and a child in Plymouth in
August 2021. Davison, who was 22, shot them with a legally owned gun in the key
area of the city before killing himself. The families of the victims said today
that the decision to allow him to own a shotgun despite a history of mental
health issues and violence meant that he had been granted a license to kill. Our
West of England correspond on Jenny Kumar reports from the inquest. Jake Davison
killed his mother at their home on August 12th, 2021 after a row. He went on to
fatally shoot four people at random, including a three-year-old girl. The jury
concluded that there were serious failings by police and they should not have
granted the gunman a license in 2018 because of a lack of medical information,
his self-declared autism and his history of violence. They also found there was
an unsafe culture in the firearms licensing unit and staff when adequately
trained. A decision to return the gun and license after police removed it in
2020 because Davison had assaulted two children was described as fundamentally
flawed. The fatal shootings happened weeks after police gave the gun back in
July 2021. Patrick Maguire, the solicitor representing the families, gave a
statement outside court. The system has hopelessly failed us. In particular, the
Davison and Cornwall Police Force has failed us. They have failed to protect our
loved ones. Warning signs were ignored and a license to kill was granted. The
chief constable of Davin and Cornwall Police will curse said lessons will be
learned. Half of Davin and Cornwall Police are deeply sorry for the loss of
those families and for the feelings in my force that led to Davison have an
economy they shouldn't have. The families of those who died say they want to see
seismic changes in the licensing system, so no one else has to endure the
torment they have. Junior doctors in England have voted overwhelmingly to go on
strike over pay. The British Medical Association, the union that represents
them, says almost everyone who cast a ballot agreed to industrial action. The
union is now planning a three-day walkout next month. The health secretary,
Steve Barclay, said the announcement on the day thousands of ambulance staff
went on strike again in England and Wales was deeply disappointing. Here's our
health correspondent, Sophie Hutchinson. This is a significant escalation in the
industrial action in the NHS, so-called junior doctors make up just over 40% of
all doctors in England, in fact most medics below the level of consultant.
47,000 were balloted to strike and the majority agreed. Their union, the British
Medical Association, is now planning a three-day walkout, the longest single
strike in their history. It's likely to hit the NHS hard, heaping pressure on
the government. The doctors now join nurses who've staged six individual strikes
and ambulance crews who walked out again today in some parts of England and
Wales. All are calling for above inflation pay increases. The doctors say they
want to restore pay in real terms to 2008 levels, which would mean a 26% pay
rise. The BMA has accused the government of recklessness, saying ministers have
refused to enter meaningful negotiations. The government says it's met the BMA
to discuss paying conditions, but that pay in line with inflation is
unaffordable, and that the industrial action will mean more cancelled
appointments for patients. A group of conservative Anglican church leaders from
around the world have said that they will refuse to recognise the Archbishop of
Canterbury as the head of the global Anglican Communion. The announcement
follows the Church of England's decision to allow prayers of blessing for same-
sex couples. How do you fairly report? This is the first time that the
Archbishop of Canterbury's leadership has been rejected by such a large group of
senior Anglicans. The statement is signed by the heads of ten out of forty-two
provinces in the worldwide Anglican Communion. They say they no longer consider
just in well-be to be leader of the global Communion, and they have disqualified
the Church of England from being their mother church. Archbishop Willbe said
earlier this month he would not cling to his role as head of the Communion after
he led the Church of England to allowing prayers of blessing for same-sex
couples. A statement from Lambeth Palace said any formal change would need to be
agreed by the other bodies that lead the Communion. Unlike the Catholic Church,
as head of the Communion, just in well-be doesn't have any formal authority over
other Anglicans around the world. So this rejection by conservative archbishops
is largely symbolic of the divisions that already exist within the global
Anglican Church. Two further earthquakes have hit southeastern Turkey near the
border with Syria. Officials said the larger of the tremors near the city of
Antichia had a magnitude of 6.4. At least three people were killed in more than
200 injured. The earthquakes earlier this month killed more than 46,000 people.
Coming from Antichia are correspondent Laura Bicker. There is fear, some panic,
and the small aftershocks keep coming. Lines of ambulances and rescue crews are
trying to get to some of the worst affected areas where the walls of badly
damaged buildings have collapsed. A number of structures that were left standing
after the tremor on February the 6th have no crumbled, including a bridge. The
Hataimir has said that there are people trapped under the rubble. Many cracks
and roads have become deep scars, making it more difficult for the emergency
services to get where they may be needed. Researchers in the United States say
they've partially restored movement in the arms and hands of two people who've
had a stroke. One volunteer was able to cut and eat a steak by herself for the
first time in nine years. However, more research is still needed to develop the
technology and to determine exactly who will benefit. Yes, our health and
science correspondent, James Gallagher. Strokes disrupt the blood supply in the
brain and lead to South's dying. People can still have the desire and intent to
move, but the damage means the instructions from the brain can become so weak
that nothing happens. Heather Rendelik from Pittsburgh had a stroke when she was
still in her twenties. She learned how to walk again, but for nine years she was
unable to open or close her left hand. In the experiment, she had electrodes
implanted in her neck to stimulate and excite the nerves. Now they can respond
to even the weak instructions from the brain that were still getting through. As
soon as the device was switched on, Heather noticed the difference. So the very
first day I came into the lab and they turned the stimulation on for the first
time, I actually was able to open my hand for the first time in nine years, and
my family and I were in tears of just overwhelming joy and happiness and it was
an amazing experience. Heather was one of two people to take part in the
experiments which have been published in Nature Medicine. Dr Marco Capagroso
from the University of Pittsburgh says the results show there is the potential
to have a huge impact on people's lives. The team believe the field could
advance quickly as they're using technologies that are already approved for
managing severe pain, but for now it will take more clinical trials to work out
who benefits and how to move the equipment from the laboratory to the home. The
British retail consortium has explained why some fruit and vegetables have
disappeared from supermarket shelves. A spell of poor weather in parts of Europe
and North Africa as disrupted supplies, especially of tomatoes, here's our
business correspondent Theo Leggett. Pictures of empty shelves and supermarkets
and complaints about shortages of some products, especially tomatoes, have been
circulating on social media for several days. Now the British retail consortium
has admitted that harvests have been affected by what it calls difficult weather
conditions. During the winter months, a large proportion of the produce we
consume is grown in southern Spain and Morocco. Both regions have been affected
by poor weather in recent weeks, including storms and a cold snap. This has
affected crop yields and growing times, making it more difficult for wholesalers
and retailers to get hold of the supplies they need. Along with tomatoes,
cucumbers and peppers are understood to be in short supply. The BRC says
supermarkets are working with farmers to ensure customers are able to access a
wide range of fresh produce. Rishi Sunak has condemned the rewriting of Rold
Dahl's books, saying that they should not be airbrushed. Dahl's works, which
include the BFG and Charlie and the chocolate factory, have had references to
things like characters, appearance and weight changed. The Rold Dahl's story
company and the publisher, Puffin Books, said that they had been updated to be
more suitable for modern audiences. Our media and arts correspondent David
Silato takes up the story. Charlie the chocolate factory. A much-loved
children's story. Millions have read about Augustus Gloop, who was in the book a
nine-year-old boy who is so enormously fat. He looked as though he'd been blown
up with a powerful pump. However, in the latest version he's so enormous, he
looked as though he'd been blown up with a powerful pump. The word fat has gone.
In fantastic Mr. Fox, the tractor's colour black has been removed, then now just
murderous brutal-looking monsters. And these are just a few of the changes that
have been made to Rold Dahl's books to make them less judgmental. The author,
Salman Rushdie, says its absurd censorship. A view shared by the philosopher,
Kathleen Stock. We don't seem to think children can cope with words like fat
anymore. We need to teach them the words don't have to hurt them rather than
telling them that they do hurt them and we're going to protect them from them.
The Rold Dahl's story company said today, it's not unusual to review the
language of books and said they had maintained the irreverence and sharp-edge
spirit of the original text. This isn't the first time children's writers have
been updated. Rold Dahl did it himself. Korean Les Nick Obestine, professor of
children's literature from the University of Reading. Even back in the 1970s
there were already discussions around his texts and for instance the Unpleumpas,
which were originally from Africa, were already changed much earlier and I was
interested that the discussions mostly have been about the changes that are
taking place currently. And while this has provoked a degree of fury, it's also
worth noting that the Dahl estate has just done a huge deal with Netflix, adding
a bit of extra sensitivity to the books can be very helpful. Business-wise.
Scotland's finance secretary Kate Forbes has become the third candidate to take
over the leadership of the SNP after Michael Astergens' surprise resignation
announcement last week. Ms Forbes joins Abseusef, the health secretary and Ash
Regan, a former minister in the contest, which is likely to be dominated by the
issue of independence and a row over trans rights. Here's our Scotland
correspondent, James Shaw. These three candidates represent a generational shift
for the SNP. All are under 50 and have forged their careers while the party has
been in power in Scotland. Kate Forbes, the 32-year-old finance secretary, is
promising competent leadership and a broadly based campaign to deliver
independence. On gender recognition reform, Ms Forbes, whose a member of the
socially conservative free Church of Scotland, says she would not have voted for
the bill, but isn't against reform as such. She says the concerns raised by the
UK government about its impact on equality law need to be dealt with. I have
never been averse to reform of the gender recognition act. And so I think we do
need to reform it to make it less onerous, but in so doing we need to look at
the amendments that would make it compatible. The candidate most likely to be
seen as continuing Nicola Sturgeon's policy agenda is the health secretary,
Humsa Yusuf. Mr Yusuf, whose 37 has more ministerial experience, but opposition
parties have criticized his handling of COVID recovery and winter pressures in
the health service. He said he is not as firmly committed as Nicola Sturgeon to
the idea of using the next general election as in effect a referendum on
independence. Mr Yusuf suggests the SNP needs to build support for independence
before seeking another vote. Let's be realisticness, achieve this independence
by making sure it's a settled well of the Scottish people. It becomes a settled
well. It becomes impossible for politicians and Westminster to ignore. Ash Regan
resigned as a minister in the Scottish government because of her opposition to
gender recognition reform. She has suggested she supports the idea of
campaigning for the next election as an independence referendum. The former head
of the government's National Food Strategy has welcomed plans by the Mayor of
London to give all primary school children free meals. Henry Dimbleby said the
scheme, which is funded for one year from September, should be extended across
England. Here's our education reporter, Vanessa Clark. It's estimated there are
800,000 children across England living in poverty who don't receive free school
meals or need children in their first three years of primary school as well as
those in families earning less than £7,400 are eligible. But in London, from
September, every primary school child will receive a free school meal a plan
which its Mayor Sidy Kanz says is vital. At least to a situation where you have
not parents, skipping meals to their kids can eat. Some of the stories I've
heard are heartbreaking of children without a pack lunch, not receiving free
school meals, pretending to have lunch so they're not embarrassing for other
children. Senator Kanz, who was up for a re-election next year, says he is able
to fund this scheme because of higher than expected canceled tax and business
rate returns. But there are concerns that it's only for a year and it excludes
secondary school pupils. In Wales, all primary school children will be given
free lunches by 2024. The former head of the government's National Food
Strategy, Henry Dimbleby, told that today a program this scheme should be
extended across England. There are a lot of people who just don't like the idea
of universal benefit, even though these improvements work, not just on an
ideological basis, but most for those children who already on free school meals.
So it's ideology that's stopping this and what's great about this is that it
should make the case irrefutable to roll this out. The Department for Education
says more than a third of pupils in England and I receive free school meals. In
the city, the 100 share index ended the day up 10 points at 8,014. On Wall
Street, the Dow Jones was closed today for a public holiday. On the currency
markets, the pound is trading at $1.20.3 and against the Euro sterling is at 1
Euro 12.6, which makes a Euro worth 88.8 pence. Now a first look at the morning
papers, a number of the front pages this morning feature Nicola Bully, after
police confirmed that her body has been found. The headlines in the Sun, the
daily express and the Daily Mail, quote her family's statements saying that she
can rest now. According to the Times, Rishi Sunak has been told that some
members of his government are prepared to resign. If a deal he's trying to reach
with the EU risks Northern Ireland's place within the UK. The paper says the
Prime Minister spent several hours yesterday in meeting Euro skeptic
conservative MPs trying to address their concerns about a new agreement on post-
Brexit trader arrangements. And several papers lead on President Biden's
surprise trip to Kiev. The Guardian's correspondent describes the visit as
arguably the most consequential made by a US president to a European country
since the end of the Cold War. A vast collection of precious artefacts stolen
from Cambodia decades ago have been returned to the country after surfacing in
London. The Crowns, necklaces, amylates and other treasures from the Angkor
period are many centuries old. See the hat and has been following the story.
Young Cambodian archaeologist had been in London marveling over the collection.
The 77 items including Crowns, earrings and a large bowl that's thought to be
solid gold can be matched to stone carvings on the walls of the Angkor Wat
temple complex, the dates to the 12th century. They were in the possession of a
known antiquities smuggler, a British man named Douglas Lachford. He died while
awaiting trial in the US in 2020. The Lachford family had promised to return his
stolen collection to Cambodia, but the authorities didn't know what they'd
receive. As the head of the country's antiquities investigations team, Brad
Gordon explains, they certainly didn't expect it to be abruptly handed over in a
car park last summer. There was a vehicle, the door was open and inside were
four boxes of Cambodia's greatest treasures. I felt like crying. I just thought,
wow, the crown jewels of the Cambodian ancient civilization had ended up here in
the UK and it was all packed up in four boxes in the back of a car. The return
of the looted jewelry will be portrayed as a victory for Cambodia's
authoritarian leader, Qun Sen, a head of parliamentary elections this summer.
Politics aside, this unexpected event is being celebrated in Penom Pen. After
decades hidden in a London warehouse, these treasures will soon go on display,
ready to shine once again. Our main headline again, President Biden has promised
to back Ukraine for as long as it takes on a surprise visit to Kiev. BBC News.
Read tonight by Charles Carroll. Now if I look at the weather, here's Louise
Lear. Good morning. We started Monday on a windy note with gales across the
country but closed the afternoon on a mild note in fact temperatures across East
Anglia 17 Celsius by the middle of the afternoon way above where they should be
for this time of year. This mild theme is set to continue for today but we will
start to see and feel a change as we move into Wednesday. But let's take a look
at Tuesday's weather in a little more detail. A cloudy grey start, first thing
in the morning, a very mild start. The cloud thick enough out towards west
facing coast for a little bit of light patchy rain and drizzle. And there'll be
more nuisance rain moving across the western hours drifting north into the
northern hours as we go through the morning, not as windy here as Monday but
nevertheless still quite a blustery start to the day. We keep the cloud for most
of the afternoon but generally across the country there will be a few holes in
the cloud. East and Scotland, East and England favoured spots for that to happen
and therefore temperatures will start to climb 13 or 14 Celsius, not out of the
question. So not a bad day on Tuesday but the change will come through
Wednesday. There's a cold front that's going to sink its way south from the
northwest and it's going to introduce slightly cooler, fresher conditions as it
does so. So as we go into the early hours of Wednesday morning, we'll start to
see some showery rain moving in from the northwest, that'll be across the
Midlands first thing in the morning, sinking southeast towards the London area
as we head towards the latter stages of Wednesday morning. Behind it, though,
quite a clearance, sunny spals coming through, a few scattered showers driven on
by some fresh north-westilly winds and some of the showers in the far north of
Scotland across the mountains could turn a little more windy. So top
temperatures by the time we get to Wednesday have six to eight Celsius in
Scotland and Northern Ireland, eight to 11 Celsius across England and Wales.
That's it. Enjoy your Tuesday. Now ready for it. Time for the art book of the
week. Blake Ritzen reads super-infident, the transformations of John Dunn by
Catherine Rundell. The power of John Dunn's words, nearly killed a man. It was
the late spring of 1623 on the morning of a sentient day and Dunn had finally
secured for himself a celebrity fortune and a captive audience. He had been
appointed the Dean of St Paul's Cathedral two years before. He was 51, slim and
aptly bearded and his preaching was famous across the whole of London. His
congregation, merchants, aristocrats, actors in elaborate ruffs, the whole sweep
of the city came to his sermons carrying paper and ink, wrote down his finest
passages and took them home to dissect and relish, pontificate and argue over.
He often wept in the pulpit, enjoy and in sorrow, and his audience would weep
with him. That morning he was preaching at Lincoln's inn. Word went out and
people came flocking to hear him speak. That morning, too many people, there was
a great concourse of nobleman and gentleman, and in among the extreme press and
thronging as they pushed closer to hear his words, men in the crowd were shoved
to the ground and trampled. Two or three were endangered and taken up dead for
the time. There's no record of done halting his sermon, so it's likely that he
kept going in his rich or authoritative voice as the bruised men were carried
off and out of sight. A quarter of a century before that, the same man, then
about 23 years old, sat for a portrait. He wore a hat big enough to sail a cat
in, a big lace collar and exquisite mustache. Here was the author of some of the
most celebratory and most lavishly-sexed poetry ever written in English, shared
among an intimate and loyal group of hyper-educated friends. Licence my roving
hands and let them go behind before above between below. Oh, my America, my
newfound land, my kingdom, safelyest, when with one man, man. Sometime religious
outside or in social disaster, sometime celebrity preacher and establishment
darling, John Dunn was incapable of being just one thing. He re-imagined and
reinvented himself over and over. He was a poet, lover, essayist, lawyer,
pirate, rick isn't preacher, satirist, politician, courtier, chaplain to the
king, dean of the finest cathedral in London. There are few writers of his time
who faced greater horror. Dunn's family history was one of blood and fire. A
great uncle was arrested in an anti-Catholic raid and executed. Another was
locked inside the tower of London where, as a small schoolboy had done, visited
him, venturing fearfully in among the men convicted to death. As a student, a
young priest whom his brother had tried to shelter was captured, hanged, drawn
and quartered. His brother was taken by the priest hunters at the same time,
tortured and locked in a plague-ridden jail. And see, Dunn watched in horror and
fascination as dozens of sailors burnt to death. He married a young woman and
more clandestine and hurried by love, and as a result found himself thrown in
prison. Once married, they were often poor and at the mercy of richer friends
and relations. He knew what it was to be jealous and thwarted and bitter. He was
wrapped by life-threatening illnesses with dozens of bouts of fever, at least
three times it was believed he was dying. He lost over the course of his life,
six children. He lost Anne at the age of 33, her body destroyed by bearing
twelve children. He thought often of sin and miserable failure and suicide. He
believed us unique in our capacity to ruin ourselves. He wrote, nothing but man,
of all and then-ummed things, doth work upon itself within born-sting. He was a
man who walked so often in darkness that it became for him a daily commute. But
there are also few writers of his time who insisted so doggedly and determinedly
on all. His poetry is wildly delighted and captivated by the body, though
broken, though doomed to decay, and by the ways in which thinking fast and hard
were essential joy akin to sex. He kicked aside the patraque and traditions of
idealized, sanitized desire. He joyfully brought the body to collide with the
soul. In his sermons, he reckoned us a disaster, but the most slick, tack-killer
disaster that has ever been, as he got older, he grew richer, harsher, sterner,
and drier, yet he's still asserted. It is too little to call man a little world.
Except God. Man is a diminutive to nothing. Man consists of more pieces, more
parts than the world doth, nay than the world is. Joy and squalor. It stands
life and work, tell that it is fundamentally impossible to have one without
taking up the other. Dunsaw analyzed, lived alongside, even saluted, corruption,
and death. He was often hopeless, often despairing, and yet still he insisted at
the very end it is an astonishment to be alive, and it behoves you to be
astonished. You cannot claim a man as an alchemist, and fail to lay out the
gold. This then is an undated poem, probably written for Anne Moore, sometime in
his twenties, known as Love's growth. I scarce believe my love to be so pure as
I had thought it was, because it doth endure v. cystitude in season as the
grass. Only thinks I lied all winter when I swore my love was infinite, if
spring make it more. But if this medicine, love which cures all sorrow with
more, not only be no quintessence, but mixed of all stuffs, painting soul or
sense, and of the sun is working vigor borrow, loves not so pure and abstract as
they used to say, which have no mistress but their muse, but as all else being
elemented to, love sometimes would contemplate, sometimes do. Read the opening
stanza, and all the oxygen in a five-mile radius rushes to greet you. It's a
poem with gleeful tricks and puns in it. But if this medicine, love which cures
all sorrow with more, there's a small, private gift for Anne Moore, no matter
how many millions of other people have read it since the poem was different for
her. Love here writes, is a mixture of elemental things, as all else being
elemented to, and so love sometimes would contemplate, sometimes do. Anne is
more daring than he sounds. The thirteenth century theologian Thomas Aquinas'
ideal was the mixed life, one of contemplation and action. Done, hijacks the
Aquinian ideal for his own erotic purpose. The do is sex. It's the same impulse
as in another poem, The Ecstasy, where bodies must join as well as minds, else a
great prince in prison lies. True sex he insists is so played out in flesh.
Love's growth hangs on the idea of apparently infinite love made more. Which
once you have read all that he wrote is wholly unsurprising. John Dunn was an
infinity merchant. The word is everywhere in his work, more than infinity, super
infinity. In a sermon he wrote of how he would one day be with God in an
infinite, a super infinite and unimaginable space, millions of millions of
unimaginable spaces in heaven. He loved to coin formations with the super
prefix, super edifications, super exultations, super dying, super universal,
super miraculous. It was part of his bid to invent a language that would reach
beyond language, because infinite wasn't enough. Both in heaven, but also here
and now on earth, Dunn wanted to know something larger than infinity. That
version of Dunn, excessive, hungry, longing is everywhere in the love poetry.
Sometimes it was worn lightly, who has yet written about nudity with more glee,
more jokes. In to his mistress going to bed written in his twenties, the speaker
attempts to coax his lover out of her clothes. Full nakedness, all joys are due
to the, as souls unbodied bodies unclothed must be to taste whole joys. The poem
could be seen as one of domineering masculinity except that at the end of it
there's a joke. Only the man stands naked. Then, there is the wilder, defiantly
odd done, typified by the poem for which most people know him, the flea. The
speaker watches a flea crawl over the body of the woman he desires. Mark but
this flea, and mark in this, how little that which thou deneist me is. Me it
sucked first and now sucks thee, and in this flea are two bloods mingled be.
When the poem was first printed in 1633, the typographers used the long s, a
letter that looks almost identical to an F for the words sucked and suck. Which
offers readers of the third line, another more extravagant rendering. Done, does
not in his love poetry insist on sweetness. He does not play thee, my lady is a
perfect dove game, beloved by those who came before him. What good is perfection
to humans? It's a dead thing, the urgent, the bold, the witty, the sharp, all
better than perfection. He took his galvanizing imagination and brought it to
bear on everything he wrote, his sermons, his meditations, his religious verse.
In the 21st century, Duns' imagination offers us a form of body armour. His work
is protection against the slipshod and the half-baked against anti-
intellectualism, against those who try to sell you their money-written vision of
sex and love. He is protection against those who would tell you to narrow
yourself, to follow fashion in your mode of thought. It's not that he was a
rebel, it's that he was a pure original. They do us a service, the true,
uncompromising originals. They show us what is possible. To tell the story of
Duns' life is the ask a question. How did he possess of a strange and
labyrinthical mind navigate the corresponding social and political labyrinths of
Renaissance England? What did his imagination look like when he was young and
how was it battered and burnished as he grew older? Did it protect him from
sorrow and fury and resentment? Despoiled the suspense, it did not. Did it allow
him to write out the human problem in a way that we, following on 400 years
later, can still find urgent truth in? It did. Dark texts, he wrote to a friend,
need notes. And it is possible to see his whole body of work as offering us a
note on ourselves. How John Duns saw us with such clarity and how he sat down
what he knew with such precision and flair that we can seize hold of it and
carry it with us. He knew about Dred, and it is therefore that we can trust him
when he tells us of its opposite, of ravishments and of love. Super-infinite by
Catherine Rindell was read by Blake Ritzen. It was a bridge by Richard Hamilton
and produced by Allegra McElroy. And now the shipping forecast issued by the Met
Office on behalf of the Maritime and Coast Guard Agency at 0015 on Tuesday, 21st
February. There are warnings of gales in Viking, North at Sera, South at Sera,
Fisher, Bailey, Ferros and Southeast Iceland. The General synopsis at 1800.
Atlantic low, 1000, expected Southeast Iceland, 980 by 1800 Tuesday. The area
forecasts for the next 24 hours. Viking North Sera, South at Sera. North West
City 7 or Gay late, becoming variable 2 to 4, then South East to late 5 to 7
later. Rain, fog patches later in Viking. Sera or Good, occasionally very poor
later in Viking. 40s chromaty, West becoming cyclonic, then South or Southwest
later, 4 to 6. Rain, fog patches in 40s. Modra or Good, occasionally very poor
in 40s. Fourth-time Dogger, West backing South later, 3 to 5, occasionally 6 at
first. Rain, Modra or Good. Mission, West or Northwest 6 to Gay late, becoming
South 3 to 5 later. Drizzle, fog patches. Modra or Good, occasionally very poor.
German bite, Humber Thames, West backing South later, 3 to 5. Drizzle, fog
patches in German bite. Modra or Good, occasionally very poor in German bite.
Dover White, West becoming variable 2 to 4. Fair, Good. Portland Plymouth,
variable 2 to 4, fog patches. Modra or Good, occasionally very poor. Biscay,
cyclonic becoming West later, 3 to 5. Thundery showers, fog patches. Modra or
Good, occasionally very poor. Trafalgar, northerly or northeastly, 3 to 5, but
east to late 4 to 6 at first in South East. Thundery showers, Good, occasionally
poor. Fitzroy Soul, cyclonic 3 to 5, becoming Northwest 4 to 6 later. Thundery
showers, Good, occasionally poor. Lundy Fastnet Irish Sea, Southwest 3 to 5 very
Northwest 4 to 6 later. Drizzle, Modra or Good. Alan Rockall-Mallen, Southwest 4
to 6 very North or Northwest 5 to 7 later. Rain, Good, occasionally poor.
Hebrides Bailey, cyclonic becoming West or Northwest later, 5 to 7, occasionally
gale 8 in Bailey. Rain, Good, occasionally poor. Bear Isle, Northwest backing
South later, 4 to 6. Variable 2 to 4 becoming Cyclonic, mainly West, 6 to gale
8, perhaps severe gale 9 later in Southeast Iceland. Rain, Snow, near Iceland.
Good, occasionally poor, but very poor, near Iceland. Now the weather reports
from coastal stations, 423 00. Tyre automatic, Southwest by West 4, slight
drizzle, 1.5 miles, 1,012 falling slowly. Stornway, South Southwest 3, slight
rain, 5 miles, 1,011 falling slowly. Owick, West by North 5, 9 miles, 1,06
rising. Wick automatic, West by North 3, 8 miles, 1,010 now falling. Aberdeen,
Southeast by East 1,16 miles, 1,012 rising slowly. Boomer, West by South 4,
1,014 now rising. Bridlington, South by West 3, 1,064 falling slowly. Sandetti
light vessel automatic, West Southwest 5, 2 miles, 1,021. Greenwich light vessel
automatic, 5 miles, 1,023. St Catherine's Point automatic, West Southwest 4,
1,022 falling slowly. Jersey, Northeast 1,000 missed, 1,300 meters, 1,023
falling slowly. Channel light vessel automatic, 1,023. Silly automatic,
Southwest 1,16 miles, 1,022 falling more slowly. Milford Haven, Southwest by
West 2, 7 miles, 1,021 falling slowly. Abbotforth, Southwest by South 3,32
miles, 1,021 falling slowly. Valley, South Southwest 4, recent fog, 3 miles,
1,094 falling slowly. Liverpool Crosby, South 2, 7 miles, 1,099 now rising.
Valencia, South Southwest 3, slight showers, 4 miles, 1,099 falling slowly.
Ronald's Way, Southwest by West 3, 1,017 falling slowly. Malin Head, Southwest 4
missed, 2 miles, 1,014 falling slowly. Macri-Hanish automatic, Southwest by West
4 moderate drizzle, 1 mile, 1,014 falling more slowly. Now the weather forecasts
for the ensure waters of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, valid for the
following 24 hours. The general situation, high pressure over France, will build
a ridge north over the British Isles with the winds easing off for a time over
southern coastal waters. A band of rain will move east or southeast over the UK
through Tuesday and Wednesday, with strong winds expected over northern and
western areas. Great breath to Ratri-Hed, including Orgney. West, backing
southeast 3-5, then veering south or southwest 5-6 later. Occasional rain, good
occasionally pour. Ratri-Hed to Barracapon Tweed, South or southwest 3-5,
occasionally six later. Rain at times, good occasionally pour. Ratri-Hed to
Barracapon Tweed to Whitby, West or southwest 3-5, rain at first in north, good
occasionally moderate at first in north. Whitby to Gibraltar Point, South or
southwest 3-4, occasionally five at first. Many fair, mainly good. Gibraltar
Point to North Portland, suddenly or southwest at E3 or 4, occasionally five at
first, mainly fair, mainly good. North Portland to Salcyville, westly or
southwestly becoming variable 2-4, mainly fair, mainly good. Salcyville to Lime
Regis, variable 3 or less, mainly fair, mainly good. Lime Regis to Lands End,
including the Isles of Silly. Central becoming southwest later, 2-4, mainly
fair, mainly good. Lands End to St. David's Head, including the Bristol Channel.
South or southwest 2-4, increasing 3-5 later. Mainly fair, mainly good. St.
David's Head to Great Ormed Head, including St. George's Channel. Northwest 3-5,
occasionally six later, occasionally drizzle, good occasionally moderate. Great
Ormed to the Mull of Galaway. South or southwest 3-5, occasionally six later,
occasionally drizzle, good occasionally moderate. Isle of Man, South or
Southwest 3-5, occasionally six later. drizzle, good occasionally moderate. Lock
foil to calling for lock. South or southwest, three to five, veering north or
northwest, four to six later. Rain or drizzle, good occasionally moderate. Malav
Galloway, to Malav Kintyre, including the 4th of Clyde and North Channel.
Southerly or southwest, three to five, veering north or northwest, four to six
later. Rain or drizzle, good occasionally moderate. Malav Kintyre, to
Ardnamurkum Point. Southwest, four to six, veering north, west, five to seven
later. Rain or drizzle, good occasionally poor. Ardnamurkum Point, to Cape Rath.
South or southwest, three to five, increasing five to seven, veering west or
northwest, four to six later. Rain or drizzle, moderate or good, occasionally
poor. Shetland Isles, west or northwest, five to seven, becoming variable two to
four, then south or southwest, four to six later. Showers then rain, moderate or
good, occasionally poor. That completes the shipping bulletin. That brings us to
the end of another day here on BBC Radio 4 in a moment. We'll be joining the
World Service. I'm Amanda Litherland here at Broadcasting House in London. I
hope that you have a very peaceful night wherever you are. Thank you for
listening. Levi, good night.