TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-00H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 After the news, a BBC correspondent gets birthday wishes in the House of
Commons. BBC News at 11 o'clock. Leaders of the G7 Group of Advanced Economists
say they'll punish any countries that help Russia evade sanctions imposed after
its invasion of Ukraine. This evening the EU has approved its 10th round of
sanctions against Moscow. Washington also pledged to send Kiev another Â£1.6bn
worth of weapons. The Ukrainian MP Kyra Rudek says this will help her country
end the war for good. We need to ensure that we are the generation that finishes
this war for long so that Russia cannot attack again. And as of right now, I do
not see a leader in the free world or an organisation that would say, I will
step up and vouch that Putin would not break his word. Police in Northern
Ireland have arrested a fifth man in connection with the shooting of an off-duty
officer in County Tyrone. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell remains in a
critical condition in hospital after he was attacked outside a sports complex in
Oma on Wednesday. Junior doctors have announced they'll hold three days of
consecutive walkouts next month as part of a dispute about pay. They'll start on
the 13th of March. The Union, the British Medical Association, said doctors have
been left with no choice but to take action. The government says the decision is
deeply disappointing. The Coast Guard has stood down in search for two people
who are believed to have been on board a tugboat when it capsized in the River
Clyde. The alarm was raised just after half past three this afternoon. The World
Health Organisation says it's working with the Cambodian government to tackle an
outbreak of bird flu in the country. An 11-year-old girl died from the H5N1
variant of the virus earlier this week. It's part of a global rise of cases in
birds, mammals and humans. Cricket England are trying to capitalise on their
dominant position in the second test against New Zealand in Wellington. They
lost Harry Brooke early on day two but are currently 416 for seven. BBC News
When I'm alone at night, I get the idea there's somebody walking about up there.
A reimagining of the classic thriller which inspired the term gaslighting. Those
two gaslights slowly fade down to about half their usual brightness and then I
hear noises. Johnny Vegas directs Rebecca Knight and James Purfoy. So are you
afraid of me now or something? No, I am not. Oh, that's good. Or should you be?
Gaslight. You're convinced that you're going mad, aren't you? Sit down where I
told you. Available now on BBC Sounds. Now BBC Radio 4 with insights from across
the US, it's time for America's presented by Justin Webb and Sarah Smith and
starting a little closer to home. Order order again. This is the second panel of
the morning and we welcome Marianna Spring, the disinformation social media
correspondent of the BBC. The most important message today is happy birthday.
Oh, thank you. I'm sure you think in no way you'd rather spend your birthday at
a select committee. Oh my goodness, you know you've made it in life when you
testify before a select committee before the age of 30. The birthday girl is
here with us today. Happy birthday. Misinformation. Yeah, I was amazed that they
knew it was my birthday. I couldn't quite work out how they'd figured it out.
But I was taken aback when they said happy birthday. I assumed it was, that was
why you were there. There was another reason. There was another reason. I was
there to talk about some of the reporting and investigations I've done and also
to talk about America's undercover voters. I think it went down well. There are
ways that we can improve social media literacy through the reporting we do. And
there's a project and investigation I've been doing for the BBC's America's
podcast. And it's five characters that I created based on data from the Pew
Research Centre. They're supposed to reflect US voters sitting across the
political spectrum. They are different ages from different places, different
backgrounds, etc. And that's just an opportunity to explain to the audience how
different people are targeted, even on the same topic and understanding the
subjective social media worlds that you can be a part of. And in the background,
a police car coming to get you, Marianna. I'm so pleased to see America's
plugged in the corridors of power. And a happy belated birthday to you,
Marianna, which I can wish you because I'm here in London at the America's
worldwide headquarters. They've finally let me in and I brought you a birthday
present. I brought you the famous Air Force One M&Ms. There's a box for you as
well. I'm sure you've had them before, Justin, but these ones are signed by Joe
Biden. Yours are probably signed by Harry Truman or something. So you can add
that to your collection. I love it. Thank you, Sarah. That's fantastic. Now, our
gifts suggest to me, Sarah, that you've had a pretty exciting week as well. I
have. I travelled from Washington to Warsaw on the President's plane. It wasn't
technically Air Force One because he wasn't on it. And of course, you know why
that is. It's because he had snuck off 24 hours earlier and had appeared in Kiev
and he had quite the journey there as well, taking a 10 hour train journey. So
he was in Ukraine for a whole about 24 hours in total, 20 hours of which were on
this special train. Rail Force One is being called and he did take one
photographer with him. So we've seen pictures of it. It's rather smart. It's all
fitted out with a conference room and leather sofas and it's got beds and you
know, any of those pictures of him there working. I'm sure he managed to get a
nap as well. And of course, it was all done so that he could launch this
surprise, which really meant it had a lot of impact, I think, in popping up in
Kiev unexpectedly. There were security reasons as well, obviously, why he didn't
take very many journalists with him, why it wasn't announced in advance. But I
find a wee bit more about that by talking to some security officials on the
plane. They did tell Moscow several hours before he arrived in Kiev that he was
going to be going for deconfliction purposes, is the quote they said, I do not
bomb this train because if you do, you will kill the president of the United
States. And that's probably an escalation that you don't want. They were still a
bit worried though, because just because Moscow knows what's going on, that
doesn't mean that the world will get to all the units on the ground. And you
know, maybe somebody would still take a pot shot at the train. They decided
apparently it was a risk worth taking because and I quote, the Russians suck at
dynamic targeting. In other words, they can't hit a moving target. So they
thought a train was probably safe enough for the president. That's a staggering
revelation actually, isn't it, about what America truly believes about Russia's
military capabilities? Yeah. And those sorts of things. What's fascinating is
you got all that from being there behind the scenes. And it's such an insight
actually into how when you're a reporter in the field, when you're a
correspondent in the field, those are the moments you pick up stuff that's
really interesting. Yeah. Okay, let's get started. This is America's broadcast.
America's America's from BBC News. Let me start off with two words made in
America. My name is Ted Cruz and my pronouns are kiss my ass. Well, I think if
they win, I should get all the credit and if they lose, I should not be blamed
at all. We saw freedom in our very way of life with her on the vine. When 9 11
happened, we didn't ban planes. We secured the cockpit. The president says the
effect of I'm the president taking up to the Capitol now. Nobody should have to
go to jail for smoking weed. Right. It's Justin in America's increasingly
crowded worldwide headquarters in London, England. It's Sarah, the BBC's North
America editor. I have popped into the HQ on my way back from Warsaw. And it's
me, Mariana. I'm also here with Justin and Sarah. Time to find out where Anthony
is. You've got a holiday home in South Carolina, haven't you these days? I have
an idea there. Sadly, no, I am back holding down the Ford in the Washington
Bureau of BBC News all by myself. So it's been a pretty huge week for President
Biden and therefore for American politics with that trip to Ukraine, where he
was underlining his commitment to this battle as he kept repeating for as long
as it takes. And we'll talk about that in a bit more detail. I mean, one of the
things that struck me was just how passionately he clearly believes in this
fight. He means it when he says he thinks that this is an existential battle
between democracy and freedom fighting autocracy and that the outcome in Ukraine
will probably shape the world order for decades to come. You and all Ukrainians,
Mr. President, remind the world every single day what the meaning of the word
courage is. It's astounding. It reminds us that freedom is priceless. It's worth
fighting for for as long as it takes. And that's how long we're going to be with
you, Mr. President, for as long as it takes. So as we mentioned, he got there by
train and then he was visiting various different sites. There was a visit to St.
Michael's Cathedral, which of course has those famous Golden Domes and had his
picture taken there. And one of the things he was really keen to stress was and
he said this directly that Putin a year ago, when the invasion first started,
thought he would take even days or weeks. And it's been a year and the US
president is still able to visit and wander around the streets with President
Zelensky. And so visually he was demonstrating that as well as his commitment to
Ukraine. And President Biden then went to Poland on Tuesday for a speech outside
the castle in Warsaw. And that's where I caught up with him. I was there to
watch that speech and listen to him as he got quite personal about Vladimir
Putin. When President Putin ordered his tanks to roll in Ukraine, he thought we
would roll over. He was wrong. America, Europe, a coalition of nations from the
Atlantic to the Pacific. We were too unified. Democracy was too strong. It was
shorter than usual. It was only about 20 minutes. It was a complete contrast
with the speech he gave in Warsaw about a year ago. This was the new Joe Biden
that we saw delivering the State of the Union address where he seemed much more
vigorous and lively. That's the one that showed up in Warsaw. So it was quite
interesting just to watch the optics of all of that as well as listen to what he
had to say, which was important. And then on Wednesday he had a big set piece
summit with the NATO leaders from the Eastern flank countries that border
Ukraine. So the ones who are obviously the most worried about Russian aggression
to reassure them that America has their back. We will defend literally every
inch of NATO, every inch of NATO. And this is an important moment. I look
forward to the discussion and the next steps we can take together and to keep
our alliance strong and to further deter aggression. So that leads us on to our
first guest because before Biden got to Ukraine, we've been speaking, haven't we
Sarah, to a senior official in the Biden administration. She is Karen Donfried,
who's the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs. We started by
asking her if Ukraine had the weapons now that it needed to cope with a spring
offensive from Russia. I think the amount of assistance that the United States
has provided Ukraine, I do think is something that will be written about in the
history books. The quality of assistance we're giving and the speed with which
we are getting that assistance to the battlefield in Ukraine, I think is nothing
short of remarkable. This administration, President Biden, is committed to
standing with Ukraine. I think we have demonstrated that over the past year.
You've seen the assistance we've given evolve over the past year as the fight
has changed. If we look back to a year ago, we were focused on javelins, anti-
tank weapons, and then early this year the focus has been on tanks as we help
prepare Ukraine for this next Russian offensive. Quite frequently before some of
those things have been sent, like Patriot missiles or the recent agreement to
send tanks, the US has said absolutely not. An all part of President Biden's
commitment to avoid any direct conflict between the US and Russia. And he says
that it's essential to avoid World War III. So you have the US saying, no, we
can't send surface wear missiles, then they agree to. We can't send you tanks,
then they agree to. At the moment the US isn't committing to sending fighter
jets. You probably will at some point agree to that. It looks as though there's
been mission creep through this. President Biden has been explicit in saying
this is not a war between the United States and Russia. This is a decision on
the part of Vladimir Putin to undertake a full scale invasion of his weaker
neighbor, Ukraine. Might does not make right. President Putin can end this war
tomorrow. My boss, Secretary Blinken often says if Russia stops fighting the war
ends, if Ukraine stops fighting, Ukraine ends. The second point about how the
nature of that security assistance is changing, I don't think that should be
seen as a negative. I think it is a reality of escalation on the Russian part.
And I think it really is an action that underscores President Biden's words
about standing with Ukraine for as long as it takes. When you say for as long as
it takes, if the Ukrainians decide that they want every inch of their territory,
including Crimea, is that a fight that America's going to stay in? We are not
telling the Ukrainians what to do. President Zelensky has been explicit in
talking about a just and a sustainable peace. He, as you know, put a peace plan
on the table last winter. We had President Putin suggest a ceasefire over
Orthodox Christmas. We also heard President Putin say to President Erdogan, I'm
willing to sit down with the Ukrainians and negotiate once they realize and
accept the new territorial realities, the new territorial realities that Russia
has illegally annexed yet more of Ukrainian territory. That is not just nor
would that be sustainable. So I think our focus is on what the nature of that
peace would be, but it is for the Ukrainians to decide what and how this war
ends. Does that mean then that this is a war for Ukraine or as the Ukrainians
say, is it a war that is being fought on behalf of all of us because we're all
threatened? So I would take a three level analysis to this. I would say in the
first instance, this is about Ukraine's existence. A second level is what
happens in Ukraine has significant implications for the European security
landscape. I don't think we can underestimate the palpable fear in the Eastern
flank countries of the NATO alliance about what Russia's ambitions are. Third
level of analysis is this matters for global stability. If we as members of the
United Nations turn a blind eye to what Russia is doing in Ukraine, what does
the UN Charter mean? So we are standing up for a rules based world order. My
final question on that, you've brought something up that's really fascinating
and much wider, but it's important, isn't it? It's how steadfast America is
really permanently committed to that rules based order for the world. And you've
had the Trump presidency and the possibility of another Trump presidency as
well. So I suppose my question is how steadfast a partner is America in doing
those things that we've always associated with it in the past. I do believe that
the broad bipartisan support we have seen in support of Ukraine, which I do
believe we see continuing in this new Congress, is there and that the American
public as a whole does believe in these values we are standing up for. We are
going to prevail in this. And I think in so doing, we are showing the world that
when we as democracies come together in support of what we believe in, it is
something powerful. That sends a message not only to Russia, but also to China.
And also China, which does, of course, underpin huge amounts of why America is
backing Ukraine. That was Karen Donfried, the US Assistant Secretary of State
for European affairs. She was talking to us last week. And of course, she is a
Democrat. She's appointed by a Democratic administration. What then about the
broader right in America, the Republican Party and those they talk to, she
mentioned their broad bipartisan support. And she's right in the sense that the
Republicans have been broadly supportive of what America has done in Ukraine.
But it was May last year, wasn't it? 57 Republicans in the House of
Representatives voting against the $40 billion bill, which would deliver aid to
Ukraine. Quite a few of them in the Freedom Caucus. We've heard about that group
before. Indeed, we've heard from members of it. The Republicans who are most on
the right, they've been pushing what they say is an America first agenda. But
the interesting thing now is what actually, well, that means. Yes, you've
hearing more criticism from some Republican members on the further right of the
party, particularly this week as well. You had representatives tweeting that the
president shouldn't be in Ukraine and Poland. He should be in Ohio, where there
was that train derailment and the chemical spill, saying that he's now spent
more time in Ukraine than he has on the US-Mexico border. Why is he worried
about Ukraine's borders when he should be worried about America's borders? And
you feel that consensus, that bipartisan consensus is just starting to creak a
little bit now that we're a year into this war. So it's going to be interesting
to see how that develops. And let's talk about it to Victoria Coates, a foreign
policy veteran and more of a mainstream Republican. She was a national security
adviser to President Trump between 2017 and 19. And she also worked in the
George W. Bush administration. So she has experience of different Republican
administrations. Victoria, hello. Thank you so much for joining us on America's.
It's a pleasure. And hello from me as well from Justin Victoria, and huge thanks
from me too. Thank you, guys. Victoria, I've just come back from Poland, where I
was watching President Biden deliver that speech in Warsaw and obviously had the
trip to Kiev before that. What did you make of this week's visit to Eastern
Europe from the president? Well, I think it was an important gesture of American
support for Ukraine at this critical junction, at this one-year anniversary. And
the president had a very dramatic speech in Warsaw with tremendous theatrics. I
think his reelection campaign got a lot of great B-roll out of this trip. But I
was a little worried that what we didn't get was a clear declaration of a
strategy for both the United States and NATO to end this war and to bring it to
what we would consider successful conclusion for Ukraine. We heard a lot about
the fight for freedom. I think we can all support that, but not so much about
how we were going to win. And I think that's where you really are getting some
concerns out of the American people. Certainly by last summer, it was clear that
the Ukrainians were having remarkable successes where we had predicted abject
failure. And so if we were planning to do things like move in Patriot batteries,
Abrams tanks, longer-range missiles, why didn't we do that so they could get
this wrapped up last fall, once the weakness of Putin's military was revealed?
And I have a big problem, not with President Zelensky requesting arms. That's
his job. He's the president of Ukraine. But how this all gets each of these
debates gets publicly played out in the press, which I'm sure Putin watches with
great amusement as Berlin and Washington and Paris are all sort of batting these
things around like ping pong balls, trying to decide who's sending what tank or
what missile. So I think getting everybody in NATO onto the same page about what
we're going to do, because what NATO can't tolerate is an emboldened Putin who
might take a bite out of a NATO member. It's been quite clear in the last few
opinion polls that have been published on this that public support for America's
backing of Ukraine seems to be slipping, not disappeared, but slipping a little.
Why do you think that is? I think it's because of these concerns about how the
aid is being delivered. I think that the United States should focus on lethal
military aid. That's what we do best. I think civil society aid is much better
handled by the EU. And then we can look at reconstruction when that becomes a
viable topic. And we also have a domestic situation here in the United States
with a very bad chemical spill in eastern Ohio. And I think Americans look at
this and say, how can the president be in front of a light show in Warsaw with
cold play in the background? But he couldn't stop by East Palestine, Ohio first
and be with the suffering Americans before he went to pledge solidarity with
Ukraine. But that's a fascinating point you bring up. And we've covered East
Palestine on this podcast, Victoria, because what you get to then is the
politics of this within the Republican Party. And you've got JD Vance, the
senator up there saying exactly what you've just said, why on earth wasn't Biden
here. But you've also got Ron DeSantis now saying, oh, the Russians aren't up
too much. They wouldn't be capable of attacking a NATO country. In other words,
the kind of mood music among some in the Republican Party now seems to be
isolationist. Is that not fair to say? I understood his remarks to mean that the
degradation of the Russian vaunted military machine and the revelation of its
shortcomings should actually be an advantage for the United States and NATO. And
I agree with that, especially if we can conclude the Ukraine war in a way that
doesn't give Putin a false sense of victory and embolden him to go forward. And
I think Governor DeSantis and really anybody who might be running on the
Republican side in 2024 would agree that we do have this pressing issue of
China, which in many ways dwarfs all of our other national security challenges,
but they have to be seen under that umbrella, especially if China is involving
itself in Ukraine. I would say the worst case outcome is if China and Russia
look like the joint victors and Ukraine and NATO look like the joint losers. And
I think that is not a equation that Governor DeSantis or anyone else would
embrace. And are you saying that any serious presidential candidate on the
Republican side is going to stand four square against those on, well, I mean,
they're kind of on the fringes of the party, but some of them pretty loud
voices. And I'm thinking of Tucker Carlson on Fox News, et cetera, et cetera.
Has Putin ever called me a racist? Has he threatened to get me fired for
disagreeing with him? Does he eat dogs? These are fair questions. And the answer
to all of them is no. Who really don't see the Russians or President Putin as
particularly evil or particularly America's enemy? You're saying to us that the
Republican Party is not going to go any closer to that position any further down
that road. The folks that actually believe that are pretty limited. You know, I
work a lot with Freedom Caucus members who are very clear on the challenge from
Russia, but where I think everyone's united, including Tucker, would be an
understanding that we face this almost existential threat from communist China.
I would argue that over the course of this year, Xi has really functioned as
Putin's banker, you know, keeping the Russian economy afloat, buying Russian
exports. So I already see China active in Ukraine, but if they start shipping in
arms, then you really do have two very significant challenges in a way
metastasizing and combining in Ukraine. And that's going to be a very
interesting issue for those who see China as a big problem, Russia as less of
one. When they come together, what do you do? Victoria, really great to talk to
you. Anthony's with us now from Washington. Hi, Anthony. Hey there. So we heard
from Karen Donfried, a Democrat serving in the administration, and then also
there from Victoria Coates, a Republican who worked in two different Republican
administrations with their views on what's going on. What did you take away from
that, Anthony? I think Justin made a good point asking about Ron DeSantis to
Victoria and pointing out some of his views now on the United States should be
focusing more on domestic policy and the borders here rather than the borders in
Ukraine. And Ron DeSantis actually, he was a founding member of the Freedom
Caucus. He was a war hawk. He was an anti-Russia hawk. He was very critical of
Vladimir Putin, very critical of the potential for Russian expansion in Ukraine.
So I think it's telling now to see, he's got his finger to the wind. He wants to
try to figure out where the Republican base is. He's going to want to try to win
Republican primary votes if he runs for president next year. He is modulating
his position. He is moving to where the base is. And so if he's moving, I think
that's a very good indication that there will be struggles ahead if Joe Biden
and the Democrats want to pass more funding for Ukraine militarily and finding
Republican support for that. But here's the question, Anthony, looking a bit
further ahead to the next president, if that president is not Joe Biden, if the
Republicans managed to get DeSantis elected or someone else, what then? I think
Vladimir Zelensky and the Ukrainian leadership, they are very aware of the
politics in the United States. They have shown that they are very in tune with
what's going on in Western countries and how to tailor their message to try to
win support in Western countries. So I think they know what's happening with the
Republican party. And I guess that's the big question. If Ron DeSantis is
sitting in the Oval Office, is he going to go back to his kind of core beliefs
that we thought he had before he ran for president about robust American
military, very active internationalist kind of foreign policy? Or is he going to
feel like he owes it to the Republican voters or saying we need to reel this
back and not support Ukraine as much? I think if Donald Trump wins, I think it's
much clearer that I think US foreign policy towards Ukraine is going to change.
And that is going to be more friendly towards Vladimir Putin and Russia, because
that's the way Donald Trump was the first time he was president. So how's it all
playing out with our voters, Mariana? Our undercover voters who I spoke about at
the start are five characters who have social media profiles across all the main
platforms have been seeing loads and loads of stuff about Biden's trip to
Ukraine. Brittany, our populist right voter, she's been seeing a lot of content
that's undermining this strong image that Biden sought to project. There was
lots of outrage with people suggesting that a lot of this had been propaganda
stunts, talking about the air raid sirens, when Biden was in Ukraine. There's
this one particular viral clip that's misleading that was all over Brittany's
social media feeds in particular. It suggests that Joe Biden actually fell down
the stairs when he was getting out of his plane when he arrived. And it's
misleading because it wasn't Joe Biden, even though he has fallen down the
stairs before, but not in this case. And a lot of people were using that again
to suggest that he's old, that he's frail, that he doesn't know what's going on.
But what perhaps has been the most prominent on several of the voters feeds is
this comparison between Biden and his trips to Poland and Kiev and his speech,
and then Donald Trump's trip to Ohio and contrasting those two things and
saying, look, look, look, Biden doesn't care about Americans. Donald Trump does.
And what really struck me was that Gabriella, who is our apolitical voter, she
wasn't interested in politics before. Love Gabriella. There have just been loads
and loads of posts comparing Biden and Trump. And it's interesting because Trump
hadn't really cut through to apolitical Gabriella's social media feeds before.
It was Ron DeSantis, who was the person who was coming up again and again. But
this week, I was really struck by how well he'd managed to cut through to that
kind of voter. But also this idea that, you know, Ukraine and the money and
support being given to Ukraine is part of the cost of living crisis that people
are experiencing. And that's something that we know Gabriella has been
interested in for quite a while. And what about our voters on the left? When you
look at someone like Democratic mainstay Michael, he's broadly supportive of
Biden. Whereas when you look at progressive left, Emma, a lot of the content on
her feed is not supportive of Biden or supportive of the speech or the efforts
in Ukraine or anything else. It's about criticising the Republicans by
suggesting that they are linked to Russia, that they're supporting Russia, that
they are a puppet for Putin, talking about Marjorie Taylor Greene, for example,
or that Republicans are traitors for giving data to pro Russians, all of that
kind of idea. And then also taking aim at Trump, which is what often happens
saying, oh, look, Trump's actually staging his own stunt in Ohio. And it's
actually about trying to push Trump water. And it's all part of his own scheme
that he's cooked up. And it just reminds me that people love to hate Trump as
much as they love to love Trump on the other side. That's it. Thanks for getting
in touch again with your questions about wider matters as well. We love hearing
from you. Keep emailing americast at bbc.co.uk questions and comments as well.
You can also send us a message or voice note via WhatsApp to 0330 123 9480. See
you later. Bye. Bye. A Barricast was produced by Phil Marzuk and Alex Pickles.
Lem Sisay is a one off. Are you the poet? A woman said to me in the street. Lem
Sisay isn't anyone else. Now I can say she said that I finally met Benjamin
Zaffenaya. Lem Sisay explores uniqueness. You are a visible original pinnacle of
miracle. We're talking about being the one and only non graduate in the room.
You just said you failed. You are the Lord Mayor of Manchester. Lem Sisay is the
one and only. Are you that poet? Tony Walsh. On Friday mornings at 11 30 on
Radio 4 and BBC sounds. Now on BBC Radio 4 we're off to Westminster where MPs
marked the anniversary of the invasion of Ukraine. Today in Parliament. Order.
Order. Good evening. This is Mark Darcy at Westminster where MPs interrupt their
debates to join the minute silence for Ukraine. Slava, Ukrainey. The
surveillance commissioner tells MPs and peers that Britain shouldn't be using
CCTV with Chinese technology implicated in repression in Xinjiang. I cannot
think what business we have of even contemplating handing them public money. And
why are new systems needed to decide compensation when infrastructure companies
like National Grid want to use someone's land. As much as 600,000 kilometres of
additional distribution network cabling lines could be required by 2050 across
the country. But first the House of Commons paused its debates to allow MPs in
the chamber to take part in a national minute silence to mark the first
anniversary of Russia's invasion of Ukraine. MPs began to file into the chamber
minutes before with defence ministers Alex Chalk and Andrew Murison amongst
those taking their place on the government front bench. Just before 11 o'clock
the deputy speaker Dame Rosie Winterton stood up. Order. We shall now observe
the national one minute silence to mark the one year anniversary of the full-
scale Russian invasion of Ukraine. The main doors to the chamber were opened.
MPs rose from their seats in the background Big Ben chimed 11. Slava, Ukrainey.
Order. Order. We'll now return to the debate on the private members bills. Dean
Lassen. Thank you Madam Deputy Speaker and may I also echo the comments of
Slava, Ukrainey and pay tribute to all of those in Ukraine at the moment and
those who have families here in the UK and around the world that are thinking of
their loved ones and those that were lost. The conservative Dean Russell who'd
been speaking just before the silence he resumed his speech. This was a day for
debating new laws proposed by individual MPs and at the start of the day
Labour's Sir Chris Bryant made a plea for the government not to block his bill
to seize Russian assets to pay for the rebuilding of Ukraine. It was too far
down the agenda to be debated. Some under Commons rules it couldn't go forward
if a single MP objected to it. As you know my private members bill entitled the
seizure of Russian assets and support for Ukraine is up potentially for its
second reading later on today. As I understand it the government is toying but
hasn't made perhaps a final decision on this with objecting and if a single
person objects then it doesn't go forward for its second reading today. He
referred to the text chosen by the Speaker's Chaplain for prayers before the
House began its work. Because as we just heard in the prayers the lamentation
over Israel could equally easily be said over Ukraine today. We want to do
everything we possibly can as fast as we possibly can to support the people of
Ukraine. A few hours later his bill was indeed vetoed by government whip and
Chris Bryant took the opportunity to complain. I am genuinely astounded by the
way that the government has responded and called down this bill today. To be
frank I'm not just astounded I'm furious about it. He promised to keep bringing
his bill back and predicted the government would end up passing something very
similar but that attracted a rebuke from the conservative Sir Christopher Chope.
He's expecting his bill to be able to take priority over all the other bills
just because he thinks a lot of himself and he thinks he's got a good cause.
Lots of us have got good causes but we don't argue the toss with the rules. The
Deputy Speaker Nigel Evans rather wearily replied that both complaints had been
put on the record. Now a bill to provide a binding arbitration system between
landowners and companies like National Grid who want to use their land has been
approved by MPs. The Electricity Transmission Compensation Bill was proposed by
the conservative former cabinet minister Dr Liam Fox who said the existing
system was skewed in favour of infrastructure companies when they wanted access
to say build a line of new pylons. If National Grid tell you that you get a
certain amount of compensation and you don't like it you end up effectively
having to go to the court system which can be hugely expensive for individuals
and therefore there is not much point in having rights in law if you effectively
can't enforce those rights because it's too expensive to do so. He said
infrastructure companies often dismiss complaints about the compensation they
offered so his bill would set up an affordable binding arbitration process. When
one of my constituents who was actually the genesis of this bill went to
National Grid and said I'm not willing to accept your treatment in this I'm
going to go to see my MP they were told fine go and see him he won't be able to
do anything about it. Well Mr Deputy Speaker one of the great things about being
an elected member of parliament is that we can do something about it and I hope
that individual is listening and watching as we actually do something to redress
that balance in the David and Goliath struggle. Another conservative Greg Smith
said the need to expand the electricity grid to cope with increased demand for
power and new generators like solar farms meant there would be many more
disputes about land rights in the future. We're seeing a huge increase in the
number of companies wanting to install solar panels particularly on the roofs of
distribution centres warehouses up and down the country but are finding that
they actually can't because there isn't a nearby substation to take the power in
and if we are to have that revolution in solar energy on the rooftops of the
United Kingdom such fundamental change to distribution and to substations is
going to come. A point echoed by his conservative colleague Rob Butler. It's
estimated that as much as 600,000 kilometres of additional distribution network
cabling lines could be required by 2050 across the country that is an absolutely
staggering figure and will inevitably have a serious impact on landowners. But
that was why Labour shadow business minister Seema Malhotra, the only non-
conservative to speak in the debate, had some reservations about the bill. We
still remain to be fully convinced that this legislation is necessary or that it
wouldn't in some ways in which it could be implemented hinder the government's
own express mission to expand the electricity infrastructure to enable the
greater use of low carbon technology. She accused the government of failing to
act decisively to switch Britain to greener energy sources. It doesn't need me
to say that the government has failed on a multitude of funds to get to grips
with energy security in tackling the climate crisis but I do hope that there
will be ways in which we can move forward in the interests of our nation. That
comment seemed to annoy the energy minister Graham Stuart who said it showed
that Labour preferred appropriating land rather than respecting property rights.
He confirmed the government's support for the bill and a few minutes later it
was approved and sent off for scrutiny in the House of Lords. Well after that
MPs backed a bill to protect cooperatives and mutuals from being turned into
companies and their assets being used as a windfall. The organisations which
don't have shareholders are primarily found in the financial sector and include
credit unions, insurers and building societies. Labour's Sir Mark Hendrick
brought in the bill to provide extra safeguards to stop them being demutulised
and protect any assets or surpluses they'd built up. Countries that have adopted
provisions like this have much more robust cooperative and mutual business
sectors. The removal of the incentive to demutulise means that they can continue
to grow in line with the interests of the members they serve. Sir Mark said the
ability to access legacy assets incentivise demutulisation. At present it is not
possible for an existing society or those setting up a new society to prescribe
demutulisation. This leaves mutuals vulnerable to those simply aiming to
liberate the legacy asset. Share it out amongst those they choose and convert it
into a business, into an investor owned company. This has resulted in much of
the UK building society sector being lost and their businesses then either
failing or transferring to non-UK ownership. His plan had backing from across
the Commons including the conservative Joe Gideon. We shouldn't allow capital to
be blown of the whim of speculators and investors. It is important to lock
capital in the places where it belongs for the benefit of the people it was
invested for. Mark Eastwood, another conservative, revealed that he used to work
for the co-op insurance group collecting what were called penny policies. We
would collect pennies from people in their houses that would provide for their
funeral costs in the future. That has obviously expanded now but people will
literally give me a year's advance. I got 52 pence or if they were particularly
well off they would give me 10 pence a week and that would be 52 pounds. As
another conservative Greg Smith was praising the mutuals in his constituency, a
Labour MP Matt Weston interrupted. Does he agree with me that if we had actually
retained more of the mutual building societies of the 70s would we have still
had the same financial crash of 2008? Greg Smith said there were many factors at
play at the time but he accepted. There does need to be for a successful economy
that diversity and spread of different models of different institutions fully
commercial cooperative for any society's mutuals, that is part of as a committed
free marketeer which I accept he perhaps is not. That is the building blocks for
a successful economy. And with the backing of the government the bill passed
without a formal vote and now goes off to the House of Lords. Now calls to stop
Chinese made surveillance technology from operating in Britain have been backed
by the independent surveillance watchdog Professor Fraser Sampson. He told
Parliament's Human Rights Committee there was a strong moral case for the UK not
to touch technology that was being used by the Chinese state for surveillance
and repression in China's Xinjiang province. When it is used by that state
through the police to identify individuals using algorithms that purport to be
able to guess their ethnicity and racial cultural heritage and then intern them
in those camps and then torture and interview them while being filmed with those
same devices and then subject to all the other appalling treatment that the
Foreign Affairs Committee set out very clearly in 2021. I cannot think what
business we have of even contemplating handing them public money. Professor
Sampson was being questioned by the independent peer Lord Alton who is behind a
move to change the law to get such technology out of the UK. Lord Alton was
worried about cameras manufactured by companies that had direct links with
Xinjiang. And the persecution of Uighur Muslims with one million of whom are
thought to be held in the camp's fair. And what the amendment does as you know
is obliges the Secretary of State to publish a timeline for the removal of
physical technology or surveillance equipment from the government's procurement
supply chain where there's evidence that a supplier has been involved in modern
day slavery, in genocide or crimes against humanity. Professor Sampson agreed
with that. If that company has been involved in the design, building and
operating of those camps, then to say, well, we simply sell cameras and we can't
be held responsible for what they're used for, that has profound implications
actually for our buying it at all and probably still more for our buying it for
our police to use. And he was also concerned about the possibility that images
gathered by Chinese-made cameras in the UK might be harvested by the Chinese
state. If you have any reason to believe that the data from some of those
systems about anything is being improperly shared with the state that doesn't
necessarily wish us well or at all because you haven't agreed it, I don't think
there's room for any further discussions. The Human Rights Committee was also
concerned about the domestic impact of fast evolving mass surveillance
technologies. Professor Sampson said they could revolutionise policing, but they
might also have a chilling effect on the right to protest. The capability
currently exists for extraordinary amounts of vehicle data to be collected
through the Automated Nonplate Reader System. Layered on top of that, there may
be capability for identifying individual device information from phones in a
vehicle. Layered on top of that, there may be other intelligence patterns that
say the person who was seen as protest X was also seen as protest Y. Take those
things together to what extent would people rightly worry that if there was to
be a further protest in the future there will be some form of tracking to see
whether they're going to attend, such that they won't go. There were plenty of
other concerns too. If you're arrested and the police take a mugshot or a DNA
sample or both, the theory is that they're supposed to destroy that information
in most cases if you're then released without charge. But Human Rights Barista
and Labour peer Lady Kennedy was concerned as to whether that was happening as
it should. There are clear rules set out in legislation concerning how long DNA
samples, for example, can be maintained and fingerprints and so on. I just
wondered whether in your experience there is a culture of compliance with those
restrictions or whether there's a sort of default where they end up being kept
when they shouldn't be kept. Yes, it's the second. It's really clear and I think
it's occurred on every visit we do, every police officer. There is almost a
culture of there are three categories. There's deleted, there's retained and
there's not deleted. One reason records were not deleted was the idea that they
may one day help solve a major crime. Conservative MP Dr Caroline Johnson
wondered if that really happened. Well, you talked about the non-deletion
culture and people's worry that if they deleted that particular record that
could be the record that solved a crime or prevented a crime or caught some
particularly egregious criminal. Is there any evidence of that happening? There
was no real data on that, Professor Sampson replied. Lady Kennedy wondered what
some future government might do with millions of DNA records. Suppose some
future official decided to use it for different purposes. Let's look and see who
on this database have signifiers for certain kinds of mental illness,
schizophrenia or whatever. I mean, I chaired the Human Genetics Commission so I
know that there are not many absolute signifiers of things. But even just a
suggestion that somebody might be carrying a gene for something. This was a one-
off hearing but it gave MPs and peers on the committee plenty of food for
thought about the impact of technology on policing and on human rights. You're
listening to Today in Parliament with me, Mark Darcy. Should sex offenders in
England and Wales be banned from changing their names so as to escape the
vetting systems which are designed to protect children and vulnerable people?
Next week, MPs will be considering that issue twice. There's a backbench debate
on Thursday and before that the Conservative MP Mark Fletcher will be presenting
a bill under what's called the 10-minute rule which allows him to propose a
change in the law in a 10-minute speech. He told me why. My 10-minute rule bill
is something that came through constituency casework. So I had a constituent
come to me who'd been through a horrific crime and the person who was put in
prison that committed this crime, and it's a sex offender, and I discovered that
they were able to change their name. And this seemed to me to be absolutely
ludicrous. But upon further research, I discovered that Sarah Champion and the
Safeguarding Alliance have been doing a lot of work around trying to stop sex
offenders, changing their name and getting effectively a new identity and new
documents, including DBS checks, through their new name and ending up working
with some of our most vulnerable people. And I want to stop the sex offenders
being able to change their name. What's quite interesting about this is the
phasing of this. People can actually change their name when accused of a sex
offence before the trial to something that maybe their neighbours wouldn't
recognise. Absolutely. It's becoming more and more common that those who are
charged are changing their name immediately. And that's something that's
actually about bench business debate the day after, and which I'm going to talk
about that as well. But it's for those who are on the sex offenders register at
the moment, I think if you have been found guilty of a crime, then you surrender
certain rights. And whilst you remain on the sex offenders register, I don't
think it's appropriate that you are able to change your name. And I think we
need to clamp down on that because of the loopholes and the vulnerabilities that
it creates. Now, this is a 10-minute rule bill. It doesn't have of itself a
realistic prospect of becoming law. But is this the kind of issue that you're
hoping that maybe the Home Office would pick up and put into some passing
criminal justice bill or something of that like? Absolutely. We've got the
victims bill that is coming up shortly. And I very much hope that between the
Home Office and the Ministry of Justice, they will see that this is a major
issue for victims. This is something that could potentially create further
victims. And from my perspective, I want to put this firmly on the radar. And I
appreciate that 10-minute rule bills have a role in Parliament and we all know
that they're perhaps not law creators in and of themselves. But this is a way in
which we put it on the radar. And I think the fact that the people backing it,
there are several select committee chairs, a former Home Secretary and a former
Justice Secretary, I think shows the strength of feeling across the
backbenchers. And have you had any conversations with government ministers about
this? Yes, I haven't yet spoken to the Deputy Prime Minister, who I very much
want to sit down with, but I have spoken to some of the relevant ministers who
are looking after the victims bill. And I want to make sure that they are aware
of this situation and they're aware of the background. It's not actually an
uncomplicated issue. There are issues around common law rights to be able to
change your name and identity. But personally, I think there is a bespoke
approach in which we can do this. Sarah Champion, the brilliant member of
Parliament for Roverham, has a particular approach as well that could well be
worth pursuing. But this is definitely something we need to sort. Mark Fledger.
Plans to make it easier for people in England, Wales and Scotland to request
flexible working have cleared the Commons. The proposals brought in by a Labour
MP Yasmin Qureshi and supported by the government would allow employees to
request flexible working from day one in a job. Sean Curran reports. At the
moment, you can request flexible working once you've been in a job for six
months. But you have to explain what impact your new working arrangements would
have on your employer. The private members bill introduced by Labour's Yasmin
Qureshi changes the existing law and gives everyone the right to ask for
flexible working from day one. The requirement to explain how it would affect
the business is removed and there has to be a consultation before an application
is turned down. She told the Commons giving people the chance to balance work
and home life would open employment opportunities for everyone. This bill is
also for the mothers who have to leave their jobs because their jobs don't
support flexible working. The bill is also for those with chronic long term
conditions, the disabled and the most vulnerable in our societies. Those who
desperately need the flexibility so they can continue to work whilst managing
their health conditions and the toll they can take on their mental health. It's
also a bill for the working families, those with young children who are working
hard and trying to make ends meet in a cost of living crisis. Conservative James
Daly supported the bill but cautioned against what he called flexibility for
flexibility's sake. He said his local authority in Bury had decided that most
staff could carry on working from home. And that may well be a good thing, may
well be a bad thing, who knows, that's the decision that's been made in respect
to that. But there are considerations to be made. I have real and serious
concerns regarding the impact of taking a huge sector of the workforce out of
Bury Town Centre, the money that those people bring in to the urban centre,
something very, very important. The Shadow Business Minister Rachel Hopkins said
the bill had Labour's full support but she called on the government to do more
to improve workers rights. This bill is a step in the right direction but
workers still need greater protections. Flexible working should not be a nice to
have or a job perk, it should be an employment right. We need to see this bill
as a starting point, not the end point. Following years of dragging their feet
over their pledge to make flexible work in the default, the Conservatives have
only agreed to back these watered down proposals. The Business Minister Kevin
Hollenreich stressed that the bill gave workers the right to request flexible
working and not a right to insist on it. This is not a right to impose on
businesses flexible working. I think that would be absolutely the wrong thing to
do. We know there are many burdens on businesses right now, not least some of
the challenges around the cost of living. To add further burdens would be, in
our view, a mistake if they were something that would be an imposition. The bill
now goes to the House of Lords. Sean Curran. But the days legislating wasn't
done. A short time later a Conservative MP Robin Miller steered through his bill
to improve help for service veterans. He wants to widen the role and
responsibilities of veterans advisory and pensions committees. There are 13 of
them across the UK and they advise and liaise with veterans and their families
doing things like helping them move into civilian life and liaising with
government, local authorities, health services and business. Robin Miller
explained why he wanted to expand their role. Monitoring and advising on the War
Pensions and Armed Forces Compensation Scheme is an important but essentially
limited function. There is now a much broader range of support available to
veterans and there is a real opportunity to make a difference by linking and
coordinating these services on behalf of individuals. Broadening the role of the
VAPC enables the committees to better identify gaps in provision and
coordination and such scrutiny, as we all politicians know, has the potential to
provide further helpful incentive for action. Robin Miller and his bill too was
approved by MPs and now goes off for detailed scrutiny. Now the incantations and
complicated procedures of the Commons can be baffling enough for adults in the
public gallery, still more for a six year old. I have selected the instruction
in the name of Secretary Chris Heaton Harris, Secretary of State to move
formally. The question is as on the order paper as many as are of that opinion
say aye. The contrary no. I think the ayes have it. The ayes have it. A lot of
jargon there but that was the moment MPs agreed to set aside their normal rules
so that they could bring Dahy's law into effect. That's the law named after six
year old Bathy McGavin from Belfast who's waiting for a new heart. It will
activate an opt out organ donation system in Northern Ireland which has been
delayed because of the continuing deadlock over resuming devolved government in
Stormont. Northern Ireland Secretary Chris Heaton Harris explained. This
amendment and its consequential amendments would allow for the regulations
needed to give effect to Dahy's law to be made without need for the election of
a speaker. Now obviously I want to see an assembly in place and the assembly
should have done this but nonetheless as it's already been made by a number of
members honourable and right honourable across the House, I do recognise that
this issue is so important that it warrants an exceptional intervention from the
government. Exceptional indeed because Dahy's law was being added to a bill
about postponing Northern Ireland elections. The Commons rules don't normally
allow this kind of parliamentary gymnastics. A bill about elections couldn't
normally be stretched to cover organ donations. What's needed is for the speaker
to allow what's called an instruction to committee to be put to MPs and if they
agree the scope of the bills then magically extended. It doesn't happen very
often because if it did every bill could potentially be about everything and
chaos would follow. But there's one reason why this instruction was allowed.
Unanimity. The Shadow Secretary of State has already offered our support for
Dahy's law. A shining example of what can be achieved when devolution in
Northern Ireland is working and a reminder of what its dysfunction can delay.
Dahy's law should have passed months ago at Stormont but I am proud that we are
making it a reality here today. Labour's Shadow Minister Tonia Antoniazzi
putting the opposition support on record and she was joined by the DUP's Gavin
Robinson. There is very rarely joy associated with Northern Ireland issues when
they come into the House of Commons. But Dahy McGowan and his family have
brought joy to this chamber today and no broader than me than his smile and his
smile from the gallery up above and the gallery when he was in the special
gallery as well has been warming for us all. Yet more support came from the
SDLP's Claire Hannah. This bill is like a few that we've been through recently,
a bit of a sticking plaster on failure but there is some real good coming out of
today. Thank goodness in the progress of Dahy's law. I want to speak to Dahy.
And she addressed Dahy directly. To your family, to your mum and dad and now to
your wee brother you should be so proud of all that you've achieved together.
It's a huge progress that you've got. You've been a hero to so many people and
we all just hope that you get good news and that you get a new heart soon and
that we're all with you and it's important that we do say well done to this
lovely family for all they've achieved. In short, all the Northern Ireland
parties plus the government plus the opposition and the SNP had agreed on making
this one very specific change and that allowed the Speaker very exceptionally to
find a way to make it happen. A point made by the Alliance Party's Stephen
Farry. Our collective thanks to House officials who have worked very creatively
over the past number of days to facilitate this and of course to yourself and Mr
Speaker for your engagement with this issue too. I'm sure the Teddy Bear will be
greatly cherished for a very, very long time. The Speaker had invited Dahy to
his residence and presented him with a Commons Teddy. Dahy, who was watching
from the public gallery, was seen to high five his dad when MPs backed the
change. And that's all from us for this week. I'm Mark Darcy. The studio manager
was Chris Murphy and the editor Alicia McCarthy and that was Today in
Parliament.