TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-15H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Just say, open BBC Sands to get started. BBC News at two o'clock Shami Mbegam,
who left the UK as a teenager to join the Islamic State Group, has lost a legal
challenge to the government's decision to take her British citizenship away. She
was 15 when she travelled to Syria in 2015. The government maintains that Ms
Begham, who's now 23 and living in a Syrian refugee camp, could still present a
security risk. But her lawyers argue she was a child victim of human
trafficking. Gareth Pierce, one of her legal team, said they would be
challenging the decision in the public interest. The implication, the outcome
that we face is that no British child who has been trafficked outside the UK
will be protected by the British state if the Home Secretary invokes national
security. The National Secretary of the GMB Union, Andy Prendergast, has accused
the government of trying to do a tawdry backroom deal to resolve strike action
in the NHS. Talks between the Health Secretary Steve Barclay and the Royal
College of Nursing are taking place this afternoon. Mr Prendergast says his
union, which represents thousands of nurses and ambulance workers, should have
been included. In the past few minutes, it's been announced that ambulance and
other health workers in unison will strike on March 8. British Steeles confirmed
it intends to close its coking ovens in Schonthorpe with a loss of 260 jobs. The
company's Chinese owners are blaming high inflation and energy costs. Unions say
the plan is devastating. Official figures show that people from ethnic
minorities no longer have a higher COVID death rate than white people. The
statistics tracked mortality rates from January to November last year. The Queen
consort pulled out of a charity visit scheduled for this morning, a week after
contracting COVID. Buckingham Palace says she's making excellent progress but
needs more time for a full recovery. BBC News In 15 minutes on Radio 4 we'll
have the concluding part of the latest series of Faith, Hope and Glory â€“ Carol
Russell's epic drama series charting the emergence of modern multicultural
Britain. But first it's the archers, and Kirsty is in hiding from her next door
neighbour. Guess who I just bumped into when I got home? So Guess who was
waiting outside the house with the frozen shepherd's pie? Brian? Yep, Brian. He
wanted to say thank you for us having him over the other night. That's nice. No,
that's not nice, Roy. Oh yeah, it's not, you're right. Because now he's gone to
throw on some overalls and help me with painting Phoebe's old room. He'll be
back any minute. I take it you don't want that? No, I don't. I just wanted a
little piece with my paintbrush. What are you getting home? Well, we got the
architect over this week and I don't think I can get away for another couple of
hours at least. Oh, so looking forward to some time to just chill out and paint
without having to tiptoe around Brian. Oh come on, Kirsty. Have some sympathy. I
have. On several occasions. May as well have an adjoining door so he doesn't
have to bother ringing the bell. I'm sorry but- No Roy, you need to get home as
soon as possible and help. Well help how? I don't know but he's your daughter's
grandad. What's that got to do with anything? Just get back as soon as you can.
Brian, come in. Right, where do you want me? What on earth did you say that for?
Because I don't want to be the one who stands between him and his daughters. I
thought Tom was going to finish off planting the broad beans. Don't change the
subject. Suggesting he go with them sounds like you want him to go. I do. If
that's what he wants. Helen, you're making no sense. Dad, Lee is a very
experienced physiotherapist. If he can get a green card he'd find work out there
quite easily. I can't pretend his only choice in life is to watch his children
get on a plane and move to the other side of the world. But suggesting he go
with them and set up a life in America. I've turned this over and over in my
head, Dad. I see how much he's hurting. And it is a valid and real option. The
only thing stopping him is us, him and me. It'd be selfish to try and keep him
here. So what if he decides to do it? I don't know. If Lee chooses to move to
California, what happens to you and the boys? Would you go with him? I don't see
how that's possible. With the boys schooling and my work here. So if he goes,
that's it for you, Dad? Dad, I wish it was simpler. I wish Mabel and Evie loved
it here and didn't want to go abroad but they really do. And Lee's cut up about
it. If he needs to be with his children, who am I to stand in his way? I love
him too much for that. Besides, we'd still be here living our lives but his side
of things would be pretend. It's a very noble approach, Helen, but it's a risky
one too. One that could cost you your happiness. Well, right now it is Lee's
happiness I'm thinking about. I know he's been so quiet since last night and not
even joy speaking to me. Oh, well, that'll make judging the pancake competition
fun. Yeah. Have you had a chance to speak to Lillian yet? One problem at a time,
Helen. He's asleep in the armchair. Yes. How long? Just over an hour. Can't he
sleep at his own house, in his own chair? Apparently not. He started off well,
really tried to help. But he can't really distinguish between the old paint and
the new. The colours are too similar. At least he tried. So I convinced him to
come down for a break and one cup of tea and two digestives later he's gone.
Maybe you should wake him. Me? Yes. I was really looking forward to some telly
in me, feet up after the day I've had. Join the club. I was meant to be soaking
in the bath around about now. But how can I with Brian in the living room? We
could just go out to the pub, leave him a note in case he wakes up. How does
that help? I don't know. Wouldn't it be too horrible for him to wake up with no-
one here? Well, maybe he won't wake up and he'd still be asleep when we get
back. Either way, I'm starving so... Well, look, I know it's my turn but I
haven't had a chance to cook. I thought you said he brought the shepherd's pie.
Oh, yeah. I'll go and put it in the oven. Tony? Lee! You come to collect me for
the pancake competition. In fact, shouldn't you be over there flipping pancakes
already? Natasha and Pat are there with Helen. They seem to be doing okay
without me. You were all gung-ho yesterday. Yesterday seems a long time ago.
Listen, Lee, is this about the girls being excited about San Francisco? They
confided in you, too? No, Helen did. Right. Only because she was trying to get
her thoughts in order. Did she tell you she suggested I move to California with
them? Yes. Wow. So she's really been thinking about it. She's obviously looking
for a way out. Nonsense. She's literally asking me to leave, Tony. Oh, maybe I
shouldn't be discussing this with you, but... Lee, she's reminding you there is
an option where you get to be closer to them. No matter what it costs Helen and
the boys... So she's willing to let me go. I'm not sure willing is the right
word. She's been in knots about this. She seemed pretty calm and clear last
night. It's not an easy situation for either of you, but each day she sees you
enjoying being a father with Mabel and Evie. She's acutely aware of what you'll
be missing when they go. I asked her. What about us? She didn't say anything.
It's not her decision to make. It's yours. I know my daughter, Lee. She doesn't
want this to be more difficult for you than it has to be. Sooner or later, the
girls will be getting on a plane, and it seems you have a decision to make.
It'll be all right if it was just one decision. I thought this was about me and
the girls. Not me and Helen as well. Maybe I'm just not good at judging this
kind of thing. I don't think that's it. Then why would she tell me going was an
option? Because if she faced the same situation with Jack and Henry, what would
you tell her? Stay and let your boys go? What she said took every bit of love
and strength she has in her, Lee. She suggested it because she loves you, and
she knows how much you love your girls. What am I supposed to do, Tony? I don't
envy your situation, but I will say this. Being a good parent isn't just about
being in the same house or the same country as your children. Of course it's the
ideal, but when it's not possible, that's not the end. There are a dozen ways
you can be present in each other's lives in a meaningful and real way, even long
distance. I keep worrying they'll think I don't love them. Maybe an Eevee are
old enough to know you love them, Lee. I see it whenever you're together. Yeah?
Yes. And you have this knack of making all four children feel loved, without
ever feeling like they're competing for first place. Why do you think they all
get along so well? That is true parenting in my book. The UK's canals and rivers
are teeming with a plethora of love. Morphing, sorry. I don't know what it is
about this chair and that narrator's voice. It puts me right to sleep. Don't
worry, Brian. That was for the best of us. You're probably more tired than you
think you are. Maybe an early night would do you good. Yes, yeah. I'd better be
off. Oh, and don't forget the shepherd's pie. It's already in the oven. Oh,
good. Good. Give yourselves a night off cooking. Thanks. Well, why don't you
stay? What? What's a massive shepherd's pie? It's too big for two. I know. Joy's
food parcels are very generously portioned. Yeah, listen, thank you, but I
couldn't possibly impose after the embarrassment of dropping off. Oh, well. And
you've got something for your dinner, have you? Yes, yes, yes. Don't worry about
me. Well, there's no point in defrosting another dish when there's plenty to go
round. Really? Well, if you're both sure. Of course. Well, I might go and get
change if that's OK. Maybe you'll crack open a decent bottle of wine from next
door. Oh, sounds great. I'll bring some over. Well, it'll be ready by the time
you get back. Excellent. I'll see you both in a moment. Yeah. Ow! What's going
to you? He was ready to leave. Oh, come on. He did bring the pie over. It's
freezers. Stop full of them. I'm only trying to find the silver lining. There
isn't one, Roy. Our house has been taken over. Quality wine and good home
cooking isn't the silver lining. It's not that I don't feel awful for him. And
my heart goes out to him. It really does. But... I won't say it. Brian's company
isn't exactly... He always asks about work. And before I know it, he's going on
about ways to develop the rewilding site that are diametrically opposite to my
basic worldview. He means well. I know. And I hate myself for saying this, but
once he's had a couple of drinks, he doesn't know when to stop. And I'm so tired
of having to smile politely and wait for him to wind down. I don't know what's
worse. When he's out like a light on the sofa or when he's railroading the
conversation. Well, do you want to call him and tell him not to come? Oh, sure.
There's nothing mean about that. You're the one who wants rid of him. And you're
the one who keeps inviting him back. I do not. You literally just did. You did,
didn't I, yeah? I'd better get changed, too. And tonight, you're doing all the
clearing up. Thanks for coming out for a walk with me. Oh, you don't have to
thank me. It's nice. Walked those pancakes off. They were quite full on, weren't
they? Sorry I was late tonight. That's OK. You've got a lot on your mind. I
have. Especially after what I said last night. I haven't stopped thinking about
it since you said the words. I kept wondering what you meant. You suggesting I
go? You could have asked me. I was right there. Yeah, but I'm a typical man,
aren't I? A dumb bloke who's happy to get lost in his own thoughts and ask for
directions. And? I thought, why is the woman I love looking for a way out? Why
is she keen for me to leave the country? Keen? Lee, that's not what I said and
it's certainly not what I meant. I know. I spoke to your dad. Oh. He was great.
He cleared a few things up. Such as? Such as? What would I say to you if it was
your decision to make? And then I spoke to Alicia. And tonight I'll be speaking
to Mabel and Evie themselves. So you've come to a decision? I have. The way I
see it, if you can be courageous enough to support me moving away to be nearer
my girls, even if it means losing us, then I ought to be man enough to let my
girls be happy. To let them go and try out San Francisco for themselves. I told
Alicia I want video calls, visits in the holidays whenever possible, and I need
to trust they'll always know I'm their dad. Know how much I love them. And then
I have to do everything I can to be a meaningful, present part of their lives.
So you're staying? I'm staying. And this way I get to be a good dad to my
daughters and to my sons too. I've been trying these past few days to think of
how I might tell the boys that you might be moving far away. I just couldn't do
it. I couldn't find the words. Good. Because I'm not. Adil has some tough love
for Roy and Linda is about to up the ante. That's when we return to Ambridge
this evening at seven. Back to this afternoon. Our drama Faith, Hope and Glory
is next. But first, let's look ahead to Moneybox Live at three o'clock. Here's
Adam Shaw with details of what's coming up in today's programme. There have been
calls to limit the tax-free lump some people can take from their pensions and to
increase the state pension age. Internet searches for pension questions have hit
record highs. Add to that a cost of living crisis, unstable markets and the end
of the tax year fast approaching. It all means a lot of people are looking at
their finances and investments. So today we're looking at pensions, investment
portfolios, savings and any of the financial questions which may have been
bothering you. If you've a question or a concern, you can email us at moneybox
at bbc.co.uk or you can tweet us at Moneybox. Moneybox Live is just after three.
Adam Shaw. Now on Radio 4, the concluding part of the latest series of Faith,
Hope and Glory. It's 1968 and the Biafran War is raging. In Cardiff, Faith and
Trevor find themselves fighting for the future of their nightclub in the
aftermath of Enoch Powell's Rivers of Blood speech. Faith and Trevor by Carol
Russell. ITN foreign correspondent Peter Sissons has been shot and injured as he
reported from the front line of the Biafran War. Right. Awwww. Mm-hmm. I'm
starving. Trying to listen to this? Hold on. Trevor, pass your plate. Serena,
Hope, take your hand out the planting. Come on, Evie. I just want to hear the
news. It's too depressing for the children. Listen to it later, please. Oh,
okay. That's better. Do you know the way to San Jose? I'm going back to find
some peace of mind. Daddy, my school's prepped in for the starving Biafran
children. Can I have some money, please? We don't have money to give away.
Winston, stop playing with your food. Hey, do you know why they're starving?
Because there's a famine. And there's a famine because there's a war. Like the
one you told me about in Vietnam. You remember that? You told her that? Yes, I
do listen to you, Daddy. What's this war about? I can't wait to hear the answer
to that. Well, it's a bit like this. The simple version. On the continent of
Africa, there's a piece of land that's home to three groups of people. One, the
biggest, called the Hausa. And they live in the north. Another, called the
Yoruba. And they live in the west. And the third, called the Yibo. And they live
to the southeast. Serena, I hope this sounds like it's going to take a while.
Don't worry. I'll keep you short. Right. In 1914, a British man, whose name was
Frederick Lugard, brought these three groups together and created one country.
He called it Nigeria. But this was a problem, because these three groups were so
different. I mean, they have different ways of looking at the world and
different things that are important to them. Hey, are you still with me? Yes,
Daddy. Right. What's happened now is that one of the groups, the Yibo, want
their independence. Do you know what I mean? Of course I do. I'm tired. It means
freedom. Well, that's me told, innit? The Yibo people, who've called their
country Biafra, want to make their own choices. But the Hausa people don't want
them to be independent. And that's why they're fighting. But the children are
starving because food and medicine can't get to the Biafranz. Well, I want to
help feed the children. Well, this happens to start you off. Mum, why are you so
mean? Because if I left it to your father, he'd give away every penny we have.
And that's why we make such a good team in 11. Get up in the morning saving for
practice, so that every mode can be... Oh, he's relaxed. Oh, good evening. Good
evening. Are you Meilin? Yes. Is she Oma? Yes. Come in. Come in. Thank you. Come
in, please. Take a seat, Isiah. Thank you. At the end of the day, I'm going to
be a little bit tired. Thank you. At work, they call me Isi. It's easier. Oh,
no. I will call you by your name. Isiahoma. Because if I can say Tchaikovsky, I
can say Isiahoma. You are the very first person I have met in this country. Who
has even tried to say the name my father gave me? Daphne told me you need help.
What can I do for you? I first need for you to understand how it is. If you
don't have to tell me the whole story, you can just tell me what I can do to
help. I want you to know, I came here to study. I left my husband, Ikinna, and
my 10-year-old daughter, Adamma, behind. When I left them, my intention was to
get my qualifications and go back home. And the war was nothing but a speck of
dust in the future. When the war began, Ikinna and Adamma lived with my mother
close to the border with Cameroon. Lived? Your mother is... Yes. We thought they
were safe because they were out of the way and close to the border. We thought
they would have time to get away. But they didn't. No. My mother was killed as
they left the village. And I took the time to bury her. Maybe... Maybe if it
hadn't, they could have made it across the border with Adamma. Instead, he drew
their fire and sent Adamma on with their neighbour and enough money to get to
London. She is here? Yes. But I'm staying in the Knosses hostel. I finished as a
cadet and I'm just six months into my SRN training. I cannot look after her. And
if I stop the training now, I don't know if they would ever let me back to
finish. Do you want me to help you find a room? No. One of the Nigerian nurses
in the hospital where I work told me that her daughter is fostered by private
arrangement with a white family. I need someone like that. Someone who would
foster Adamma while I finish my studies. I can give money for her food and
anything she needs. The problem is I need them tonight. Matron let us stay with
me in the hostel last night, but she cannot stay with me tonight. And the family
have to be white? The Nigerian nurse said that white families are chosen because
it gives our children a better chance to integrate into the country. It puts
them ahead, she said. Do you trust me? I don't have a choice. All right. Fair
enough. I know someone who might be able to help. She's black and has a daughter
the same age as Adamma. If your daughter has to be away from you, she might be a
little happier if she's with a child her age. The only problem is my friend
doesn't live in London. She lives in Cardiff. In Wales? When could you get time
off? I'm off this Thursday. But what about your daughter can stay with me until
then? Thank you, Malin. If your friend is anything like you, Adamma will be in
the best hands. Wait, Stunt! Don't let me come up there to you! Hello, Mrs Isaac
speaking. How may I help you? Fit, girl! I have a big favour to ask. I hope
you're not about to tell me you're not coming for the club's anniversary Friday.
Don't try and stop me. No, one of my nurses needs help. And you are just the
person to help her. Oh, after everything your cub web of nurses did to help me
find joy, just tell me what she needs. Isioma just lost her husband and her
mother in the Biafran war. And her only daughter, Adamma arrived from Nigeria
two days ago and needs somewhere to stay. And you thought of me? How lovely. For
how long does Isioma? Isioma, two and a half years, give or take. Can you do it?
Bring her a comb. What about Trevor? Sure. If it was up to Trevor, this house
would be full of children. Plus, Serena hopes I was asking for her sister. This
is the closest she's going to get. Then we will see you on Thursday afternoon.
And I get an extra day with you? I cannot wait. They've pulled out. And I've
tried, Rodri, but he's already booked. Geraint won't answer the phone and Derri
told me to do one. Oh, what am I missing in hiding? I've looked at our accounts
for the last six months and we've lost a third of our revenue. You're still
making a profit, mind? But only just. When did we start losing profit? End of
April. Then again from the beginning of this month. Why am I not surprised? Pass
our ledger over here. What's that mean, though? Enoch Powell made his Rivers of
Blood speech on the 20th of April. They're looking at these numbers. By the
beginning of May, we'd started to lose audience. That was five months ago. Do
you really think that's the reason people aren't coming and bands are
cancelling? I do. I mean, just the other day, I read about him stirring up more
trouble, saying some tripe about immigrants changing the character of England at
the Tory Party Conference. That's what I think this is. So what are we gonna do?
I don't know. We could try a couple of the London boys, but short notice for
Friday. I know, but we gotta try. All right. Will do. But if I don't have any
luck, I think you and Faith should do the anniversary. What can you believe?
It's been one whole year. It's been good, though. So the last few months, you
haven't responded to my idea about you and Faith. What do you think? Well, I can
ask, sir, but I wouldn't owe that much hope. It might be just a thing to bring
the audience in if people knew he was gonna be you and Faith. In fact, I could
call my mate and see if I can sell him a story to the paper he works for about a
black-owned jazz club celebrating his first anniversary in the middle of Enoch
Powell's Britain. What do you think? It could work. It'll bring out those who
want to support us. You think you can sell out to Faith? I'll definitely give
him my best shot. Right. Let's drink to that. To resilience and perseverance.
Right. I better get out there and be the convivial host. You all right, Trev?
I'm all right. I just, uh, got up too fast. You sure about it? Yeah, yeah, yeah.
We don't look well. Maybe you should go home. No, no, I'm all right. Just, uh,
just a bit of a bit tired. Yeah. Once we get through the anniversary
celebrations, I'll take a week off. Only got to get to Saturday. Go on. You get
out there. I'll stay in here for a bit. God. God. Mummy, what time are they
coming? Oh, if the London train was on time, they'll be here soon. Wait, why am
I wearing my best dress? To give a good impression. Who? I want to give Adama's
mother the impression she can't trust me with her daughter. Why wouldn't she
trust you? I wouldn't trust many people with you. I would need to know that they
could and would look after you the way I do. Understand? I think so. Do me a
favor. Get the jug of orange squash from the kitchen and bring it home. Okay,
Mummy. Take your time with it. I don't want you to spill a single drop. Okay,
Mummy. I'm home. I'm in the living room. Buy the skin of your teeth, man. Yeah,
I know. I'm sorry. Don't worry. You are here and they are not. You all right?
You look great. Are you sure you're all right? I'm fine. Just a bit tired. Let
me go make you some sorority. This is them. Daddy, do you think a farmer will
like me? Of course she will. Just be yourself, love. I'm scared. It's okay,
love. Don't worry. They sound lovely. It's a sight for sore eyes. Are you all
right? It's Yoma Adama. It's a pleasure to meet you. Come in, Gautu. My husband
and daughter are in the living room. Trevor, Vosma. This is Yoma and her
daughter, Adama. Pleasure to meet you. And you. Adama. Nice to meet you all.
What? No bootsy? Up to the last minute he was hoping to find someone to take
over his shift, but no luck. Serena Hope, come meet Adama properly. Hello,
Auntie Melene. This is Adama. Hello, Serena Hope. You have a pretty name. Thank
you. So do you. Would you like to come to my room? Yes, please. Would you like
some orange squash? Yes, Yoma. Yes, please. Do one for me, Trevor. Right. So, my
name tells me you're looking for a family to look after your daughter while
you're studying. Is that right? Yes. But I'm not sure I like the idea of being
so far away from her. I understand that. I would feel the same. But you need
somewhere your daughter will be looked after. If I find any right place to leave
a little black-colored girl where she will be taken care of, it won't be easy.
Most black-colored people have to work so it will be hard to find a home. The
people I spoke to said it's best to foster our children with white people. It
gives them a better start in England, gives them a chance to learn about the
country and the culture from the country people. I understand. If that's what
you prefer. But you need someone now. That is true. You have a lot of books. My
daddy bought them for me. Have you got lots of books at home? I did. And my
father bought them for me too. Is he coming to England? I don't know. What's
your favorite book? Pippi Longstocking by Astrid Lengren. That's my favorite
too. My favorite thing she does is sleep upside down in bed. Me too. My Nana
used to get so upset when she found me sleeping upside down in my bed. Did you
just say your what? My Nana, my mother. Nana. I like that. How'd you say daddy?
Nana. Repeat after me. Nana. Nana. My Nana and my Nana. Is that your language?
Yes. It's called Ibo. And we are Ibo people from Biafra. I think collecting
money to help feed the children in the war. Did you have enough to eat? I was
lucky. We lived near the border with Cameroon, so we were able to get food from
there. So you went to the middle of the war? Not until the end. What happened to
Nana? I think he stayed to fight for our country. I hope the war ends soon. Me
too. Tell me, what worries you about leaving Adama with us? I've seen how it
tastes to be colored in this country since I came here two years ago. And I want
it to be easier for Adama. And you think it would be easier for her if she was
fostered by a white family? Yes. If I impain them, they'll be able to protect
her. If she's with a white family, other white people will accept her. I'm not
sure that's true with the old man. And they won't be able to comfort her when
she experiences racialism. I know you only want the best for your daughter, and
you have to trust the people you leave her with. And you don't know us from our
hole in the ground, as the British say. So, ask us anything. Are you both from
the West Indies? No, just me. My mother was from Ghana, and my father was
Somali. And I was born right here in Cardiff. It's the only place I know. And I
know one other thing. This is my country. Even though some people might not want
me here, I'm British. And no one can take that away from me. And though I wasn't
born here, I've been here for over 20 years. And I think that my daughter and
yours will make good companions for each other. I don't know. What is it that
you don't know? How is she going to cope without her father? How am I going to
tell her he's not coming back to us? How will she cope without me? Maybe I
should just stop training. Find another job so I can be with her. Don't do that.
What my friend here means is, if you give up your training, you'll end up in a
job in a factory washing bottles or turning out parts for... I don't even know
what, or you could end up cleaning the hospital. You've come this far. And I
know that you, me and every woman who comes here from all over the world comes
to train so that we will be more than a cleaner, more than a cook, more than a
housekeeper. Who knows? You might be the next Black Matron. People have high
hopes for me. The highest. The highest. What do you say? Wow. That was really
good. Thank you. You look really sad. Are you all right? I miss my inner and my
bedroom. I wouldn't need to have this. But it's your peppy long stocking book.
Did you ring yours with you? No, I couldn't. Then why don't you borrow mine?
Thank you, but no. Please take it. I can ask my daddy, my Inna, to get me
another one. Go on. If you are sure. Thank you. Have you got any brothers or
sisters? No, but I've always wanted a sister. Me too. We could be like blood
sisters. I'd really like that. I can bring Adama to London to see you regularly.
Only if it's not too much trouble for you. I barely need an excuse to visit
Marley. Trevor, call the girls. You're going to regret this. You can have my
phone number and call whenever you like. Adama, come down here, please. Come in,
daddy. And what about something for you? Like what? The last Sunday of every
month I have a dinner for friends, no arrivals and people who don't know anyone
in London. And you are welcome to come. Oh, I would like that. Thank you. Serena
Hope, have you been a good host? Yes, Mummy. If you wish, Adama, you can stay
here with Serena Hope. Would you like that? True, true. True, true. Thank you.
It looks like I have my answer. I have to go now, but I will call you over the
weekend. Can't hurry, love. I know you just have to wait. They said love don't
come easy. It's a game of giving take. Hey, that reminds me. How do you fancy
singing for the Grace Know's anniversary? Well, that's Friday. I know. But we've
had a couple of bands cancel and we haven't got time to find anyone else. Oh, I
see. I am third choice. No, no, no, it's not like that. I know, baby. I know.
So, will you? Of course I will. Even if I am last choice. Last choice is better
than not being chosen at all, eh? Come here. Thank you. What for? Put in Isiyoma
Atiz. It was nothing. She seemed like a lovely woman in this world that changed
beyond recognition. And she didn't know what to do for the best. It must be hard
losing a husband and having your daughter come to find you in a country you
don't know. That must be going to the word, eh, Dave? And it was a good thing
Serena Hope likes a dammer too. To be fair, even if a dammer had two heads and
eight arms and legs, Serena Hope was always going to like her. It'll be the
making of her. So I have someone around who looks like her with the world of
good. Do you see their faces when they looked at each other? Like they're in
love. Do you think we've done the right thing? I do. Now, come here woman. The
grace note, Trevor speaking. How can I help you? Trevor, it's me. Hey, is
everything alright, Kariad? What's happened? I got a call from Mr. Culper
telling me to collect Serena Hope and the dammer and not bring them back until
Monday. Why? What have they done? I was so embarrassed. According to Mr. Culper,
she spent the day shouting and carrying on bad at her school friends, at Mrs.
Hughes and Mr. Culper. And she told you why? Not a single word. And the dammer?
She's no better than Serena Hope. You need to talk to your daughter. Okay, let's
get the anniversary done tomorrow. I'll have a word at the weekend. Tell you
what, set them some chores so they know we're not happy. We don't know! What the
hell is this? What is this? I don't know. Let's see if we can get inside. Get
off! Get off! Don't touch me! Excuse me, please. We don't want no rivers of
blood. Morgan! Is that you? Faith? What are you doing here? You don't know this
is mine and Trevor's club? Shouldn't be your club. Should belong to a white man.
When Trevor was your union rep getting better pay, I'm better hours for all of
you. You weren't telling him he should have been a white man then. Who do you
think you're talking to? She's talking to you. What are you going to do? You and
your friends going to manhandle two women? Your mate is looking for a slap,
Faith. You need to tell her. Hey, hey, hey, what's going on here? Back off. He's
only gone on board a dirty great cricket bat with him. What's he going to do
with that, Trevor? Come on now, boys. You've had your say. Why don't you all go
home? Who are you to tell us where we can be and at what time, eh? Morgan, what
are you doing? Can't you see his faith? I can see where it is. And if you don't
want any trouble, you take her and her big mouth friend, close this club and
take yourselves back to where you came from. I've come right here in Cardiff.
And you know that. I was born here, grew up here, gonna die here. And I'm not
going to let you stay back. Trevor! And I didn't get Faith and Murning inside.
You're going to pay for that? Just stay where you are and there'll be no
trouble. We're going to close you down. I'd like to see you try. Get in, Trevor!
How long have Morgan and them been pickets in the club? That just started this
week, after an article came out in the newspapers about the club's anniversary.
Why is this happening? We got Enoch Powell and his Rivers of Blood speech in
April and this month's speech at the Tory Party Conference of fact of this. A
speech caused all them people to stand outside. Our club, shot and abused at
people trying to get here. A speech? The man was saying what so many were
already thinking. Because he, a big time politician, said the things that are in
their minds, people who might have been hiding their real feelings, now know
they don't have to anymore. And then their numbers make them brave. I thought we
were over the worst of this. So did I. But what's been happening these past few
weeks makes me wonder if we ever will. Didn't Morgan used to come in? Yes. Half
of that lot used to come in at least once a week. How long will you be able to
keep the club going? Tonight is make or break. If we let them scare our audience
away, we're finished. Trevor, need you out front. Coming. What's going on? It's
got really round out there. A couple just came in and said they had to fight
they were in. Were they regulars? Yeah. They said they pushed they were in
because they weren't going to let a picket line stop them from supporting us.
Which means how many people have seen the crowd and decided they don't want any
trouble. That was my thought. I know how much this evening means to me. Right.
Here's hoping I don't make matters worse. I got to need the cricket bat. Here's
hoping I don't. What happened to live and let live? Hey Morgan. We're not going
to let you get the whip hand over us. What if I ever tried to get the whip hand
over you? Hey, all I try to do is help all of us. Brothers in the union. We can
look after us. We don't need you. Look if you don't like me that's fine. But all
I'm trying to do is make a living here. What skin is it off your nose? Who threw
that? Who's the coward that hasn't got the guts to face me? If you've got
something to say to me, step up like a man and... Jabba! Jabba! What? Dylan!
Call an ambulance! Ty! Ty! Your test results are back. I do have a few questions
for you though, Mr. Isaac. Do you mind if I ask them in front of your wife?
She's my wife. Whatever you got to say to me, she's going to have to deal with.
And just so you know, Doc, she was a nurse. Even better. So, Mr. Isaac, how are
you sleeping? Not so good. I work nights and we've got two children whose idea
of quiet is talking to each other at a thousand decibels. So, once they're
awake, that's the death of sleep. Do you find yourself feeling tired but unable
to sleep? Yeah. That happens quite a lot as it goes. Okay. How's your appetite?
It's okay. No, it isn't. He's not eating like he did. Ah, come on now, Faith.
You've been leaving more than half the dinner I put on your plate. Sir, Doctor,
his appetite is not good. Are you more irritable than usual? A bit, I think, but
I run a nightclub. And business is, you know, a bit tough at the moment. And I'm
trying not to bring it home, though. That's true. I haven't noticed. Have you
been getting headaches? Yeah. Can you tell me how you felt this last week? Any
pain or shortness of breath, anything like that? And, Mr Isaac, if we're to get
to the bottom of what caused your collapse tonight, you'll need to be honest.
Well, I have felt a bit out of sorts this weekend. I've been feeling pain in my
shoulders, neck and back and a kind of heaviness in my chest. And, you know,
general muscle pain. I mean, I thought I might be getting flu. Have you been
worried about anything? Yeah. Well, I have a bit. As I said, we own a nightclub.
And tonight was our one-year anniversary. And, what with everything, we needed
it to be a good night. Has he got heart disease, Doctor? There's no heart
disease at the moment. But your blood pressure is high, and you are anemic. And
with all the symptoms you've just spoken about, I'd say you were suffering from
chronic stress. And that puts you at an increased risk of chronic hypertension,
heart attack and stroke. Stress? Stress can do that. It sounds as if you've got
a lot on your plate right now, and it's causing you to be worried, which is
natural. But when you've been worried for more than a few weeks, the condition
becomes chronic. And all the symptoms you've been experiencing point to chronic
stress. How can we alleviate this condition? Well, we can give you something to
bring your blood pressure down and possibly a short course of sleeping tablets
so that you can get some rest. The reason for that is that a lack of sleep
amplifies all your other symptoms, especially the worry and anxiety. Do you have
any questions, Mr. Isaac? Thank you, Doctor. Can Trevor go home today? Yes. I'll
just go and organise the drugs for him. It shouldn't be long. Things are going
to have to change. I know, Cardiad. Starting with a cloak. I'm not giving it up.
You heard what the Doctor said. And neither can manage the club. But that's not
going to stop you worrying about it. I'm too old to go back to the docks. We've
got to have something bringing money in or worry about that too. I will go and
find a job. I don't want that. You don't have a choice. You heard what the
Doctor said. You have to rest. Not forever, Cardiad. And we're going to have to
get in touch with Isioma and tell her because of your health, we cannot manage
Adamo. Why not? I agreed with you when you told Isioma she could send what she
could afford, but everything has changed. Not everything. Adamo still needs a
home where she'll be safe. I mean, we can still give her that. Trevor... I can't
think. She's lost enough as it is. She's buried her grandmother. She doesn't
know what's happened to her father. And she's miles away from her mother with a
bunch of strangers. I mean, how do you think she'd feel if we chucked her out
and all? Well, Trevor, we have to make changes. Because you collapsed last
night, there was no anniversary. Which means we're probably going to have to
give people back their money. Didn't you say last night was the make-up break?
Yes, I did say that. But... I've had an idea how to make it work. For now, an
iron runs the club. And we get his friends to write an article that the club is
now under new management. You're going to give the club to an iron? No. We're
going to put it about that the club is under new management. White management.
That will turn the business around. But... We'll still own it. All right. I see.
You know, I was just thinking of you, right? No, Cariad. But she's just a little
girl. So... You agree? Yes, I agree. But let me make one thing clear. I am going
to get a job. Mmm, looks delicious. Adama, hurry up, please. Winston, stop
playing with the knuckle. Don't make me come out there. Serena Hope, keep your
eye on the suit, please. Don't let it dry out. Trevor! Trevor! Serena Hope is
your fetching carrier. Do not get up. Here you are, Cariad. Here I am, Antifit.
Good. Ooh, Serena's coat fits you. All right, let's go. Bring back sweeties for
me, please. Mm-hmm. That's better, that is. Look at the house all to ourselves.
Hey, what about some music, eh? Can we play Sit-A-Long Dog at the Bay? Ah, no,
that's a good idea, that is. Come on, yeah. Sit by me, eh? So... What's going on
between you and Adama? What did she say? She didn't say anything. I've just seen
how it is with the two of you. You both look so sad. You know you can talk to me
about anything, don't you, Cariad? Yes. So... Tell me what happened. Because I
know something happened. I don't know, Daddy, but she's been angry with me.
Since her first day of school. Tell me what happened. We were talking to my
friends, and Harad, and Caris, and a couple of other girls, and they were asking
lots of questions. What kind of questions? At first, just, how old are you, and
where'd you come from? Then, what did they ask? They asked her if she lived in a
tree, and pretended not to understand her when she was trying to tell them that
she didn't. What did you do, Cariad? I got frightened, I didn't say anything.
They never did like that before, Daddy. Then what happened? They asked if we had
tails. They asked you what? If we had tails. Then what happened? I shouted at
Harad, and told her I didn't have a tail, because I didn't come from Africa.
Then what happened? That's when Adama ran away. Ah, I see why Adama's angry with
you. But why? Well, she felt like you abandoned her. But she was the one that
ran away from me. And wouldn't talk to me. Because, you see, she thought that
you were saying that you weren't like her. Like you were ashamed of being the
same as her? An African? Were you ashamed? I mean, you know, just a little bit.
A little bit, yes. Well, I'm not sure. But, yes. Well, I got something to tell
you. You are African. My mum, my mame, is from Ghana. And my dad, my Abu, is
from Somalia. I'm Cardiff-born of African stock. And that means you are too.
Really? And I'm proud to be African and Welsh. Can I have some money? Nah. Nah?
What's that then? It's Ibo for daddy. Adama taught me. Mm-hmm. I like it. Now,
what do you need the money for, Gariad? I want to get Adama a present. Oh, is
that right? Hello, Adama. Hello. I got something for you. What is this? They're
called jacks. Why have you given them to me? To say sorry for what happened at
school, I should have defended you when Karis and Nahara had to be in all the
boat here. Why didn't you? I was scared. They've never been like I were me
before. But that doesn't matter. I shouldn't have let them get away with it.
Sorry. What is it that you do with them? Play a game. Can you show me? I come
bearing saltfish fritters and sorrow from Aunty Marley. What are saltfish
fritters? They're all subscribed. Taste one. This is delicious, Auntie Faith.
You have to show me how to make it. Oh, you can cook? Of course. Oh, wow. I was
cooking when I was your age too. Can I learn as well? And there. Shall we allow
it, Adama? Of course. Well, look at them, Nahara. Is what they're playing, Jax.
Mm-hmm. To tell you the truth, I never think we'd see them like this again.
What'd you say to Serena Hope Trevor? I just dealt her talk about what happened
and woke up what she needed to do next. You're going to have to show me how to
do that because my two girls may be big women now, but Lord have mercy when
they're ready to fuss and fight. Weeks can pass before they speak to each other.
Watching the two of them reminds me of me and Hope playing when we were their
age and auntie, Gah. Okay, we'll spread them out again. It's been too many years
since I lost so hope and five years since I found her daughter Joy, who I
thought I'd lost forever. She'd be an adult now, more able to understand what
happened, and it's time. What are you saying, Faith? I'm saying it's time for
Hope and Joy to know each other now. You sure you're ready for what that might
stir up? Eh? In Faith and Trevor by Carol Russell, Faith was played by Shiloh
Coke and Trevor by Gary Beadle. Marilyn was played by Sharon Duncan Brewster,
Isiyoma by Gail Ngozi, and Niren by Matthew Aubrey. Morgan and the newsreader by
David Hounslough and The Doctor by Roger Ringwells. Serena Hope was played by
Rosie Kenner and Adama by Ifooma Mache. Faith and Trevor was produced by Pat
Comper and directed by Anastasia Osei Kofoor. It was a BBC audio production for
Radio 4. Faith, Hope and Glory returns in the summer, but in the meantime you
can catch up with...