TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-04-18H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Wyatt. The government's former food czar has blamed Britain's weird supermarket
culture for food shortages. We'll take a look at which shelves remain empty and
ask the National Farmers Union for their take on what ales are aisles. Intense
fighting continues in the Ukrainian city of Bakhmud. The question is whether the
Ukrainians have had to dig deep into their reserves and the extent to which they
will be constrained from launching a successful counter-offensive. We'll speak
to Kiev's defence adviser about his hopes and fears for the city. UN members are
on the brink of signing a treaty to protect the high seas. I didn't realise that
this massive expansion that covers our blue planet is without law. But as a
result and because of greed we are killing the creatures that inhabit it. We'll
speak to a campaigner at the negotiations and... Hi, can I have a sausage and
egg McMuffin and a latte please? Is the concept of the drive-thru being
turbocharged as upmarket Gale's bakery apparently considers opening its own?
First with the BBC News, Charles Carroll. Intense fighting is said to be taking
place in the Ukrainian city of Bakhmud, which British military intelligence says
is under increasingly severe pressure from the Russian army and the Wagner
mercenary group. Local officials said the city was almost destroyed and
communications had been cut. Our diplomatic correspondent James Landale reports
from Kiev. For six months Russian forces have struggled to seize Bakhmud.
Thousands of their soldiers have died in the process. But now their commanders
seem growing in confidence. British military officials said Ukrainian defenders
were under increasingly severe pressure. They said Russian soldiers and Wagner
group mercenaries were making advances in the northern suburbs. There were
reports of Ukrainian troops destroying bridges and digging trenches in western
Bakhmud, ahead of what the Institute for the Study of War described as what
could be a controlled fighting withdrawal. Alexander Marchenko, the deputy
mayor, told the BBC that Ukrainian forces still had control of Bakhmud, but said
it was cut off with no communication and there was fighting in the streets. The
head of the UN's nuclear watchdog says he's had constructive talks with Iranian
officials as the organisation tries to persuade Tehran to improve cooperation
with its inspectors. Rafael Gorossi said that his team was working hard to reach
what he called good solutions. Recently inspectors detected uranium enriched to
near weapons-grade level in the country. It's emerged that the former health
secretary Matt Hancock claimed that the Treasury-funded Eat Out to Help Out
scheme during the Covid pandemic helped to spread the virus. WhatsApp messages
leaked to The Daily Telegraph quote him as saying that he'd kept it out of the
news but it was serious. Labour has accused the government of a cover-up. Here's
our political correspondent Charlotte Rose. In messages leaked to The Telegraph,
Mr Hancock dubs the scheme Eat Out to Help the Virus Get About. He expressed
concern to the cabinet secretary Simon Case that it was causing problems in
areas where the virus was prevalent and additional government restrictions were
in place. Mr Hancock now says the leaked communications give a partial, biased
account and don't show what was being discussed in official meetings. A
government source said many European countries experienced an uptick in
infections at the same time as the UK, including those without similar schemes.
The Ministry of Defence says RAF Typhoon Jets were authorised to fly at
supersonic speed after contact was lost with the pilot of an unidentified plane.
A loud boom was heard across Leicestershire, Northamptonshire and Oxfordshire at
the time, with people saying their houses shook. Essex Police said the plane
involved was flying from Iceland to Kenya and landed safely at Stansted airport.
Police in Australia say they've made what's thought to be the country's biggest
ever drugs bust. The amount of cocaine seized in the joint operation with the
United States is equivalent to half of Australia's annual consumption. Here's
Phil Mercer. Australian police say the drugs were intercepted by US authorities
off the coast of South America in November. The haul of 2.4 tonnes of cocaine
was bound for Western Australia. Authorities substituted the illicit cargo with
fake drugs. The packages were dropped into the Indian Ocean 40 nautical miles
west of Perth and monitored by drones and helicopters. It's alleged a criminal
syndicate with links to a Mexican cartel used two boats to try to retrieve the
shipment. Twelve people have been arrested. The architect Rafael Vignoli, who
designed more than 600 structures around the world, including the Walkie Talkie
building in London, has died. He was 78. His son called him a visionary who
would be missed by all those whose lives he'd touched through his work. Thanks,
Charles. The government's former food czar for England has blamed what he calls
the country's weird supermarket culture for the recent shortages of fresh
tomatoes and lettuce, calling it a market failure. Henry Dimbleby, the co-
founder of the restaurant chain Leon, has advised ministers on food strategy and
says Europe hasn't faced the same issues because other countries don't have the
same food culture. Mark Ashdown is the BBC's business correspondent. He's with
us now in the studio. Mark, first remind us which supermarkets are still
experiencing shortages. Ah, yes. Well, it varies from supermarket to
supermarket, really. For a few weeks now, there have been restrictions in some
of them on how many items of certain fruit and veg you can purchase in one
visit. So Tesco, for example, the UK's largest chain, shoppers can currently
purchase three each of tomatoes, peppers and cucumbers in one visit. In Aldi,
it's exactly the same. Asda has the same restrictions for those, but has gone
further, also putting limits on lettuce, salad bags, broccoli, cauliflower and
raspberries, also restricted to three each on a visit. In Morrison's, it's two
each of tomatoes, cucumbers, lettuce and peppers. And a few days ago, Lidl
joined in. They said because of increased demand, because of the shortages in
other supermarkets, they're now limiting it to three each for tomatoes, peppers
and cucumbers, too. Now the likes of Sainsbury's, Marks & Spencer, Kolb and
Waitrose have still not introduced any limits. And so far, they're telling us
they don't plan to. And the shortage in some supermarkets has been blamed
largely on the weather, by some on the added burden of bureaucracy for importers
after Brexit. Does the food czar, Henry Dimbleby, have a point about this being
a much broader issue in the way that the UK thinks of its food supply? Yeah,
well, as you say, lots of factors at play here. And this is an interesting
addition to this ongoing debate. Experts squarely blame the extreme weather in
Spain and North Africa, Morocco, for example. We had a very, very hot summer,
followed by a cold snap in January. That hit crops and supplies. Now Henry
Dimbleby, an interesting voice, as you say, the founder of Leon, the restaurant
chain, also an adviser to the government on food strategy. He points out what he
calls wider structural issues with the way supermarkets set pricing and
contracts. He calls it a weird supermarket culture. Now this is driven by us,
really, I'd say the consumers. We want price stability. We don't want to wander
into a supermarket one week and pay 50p for a cucumber and a few weeks later pay
Â£1.50. So they lock suppliers into longer term fixed price contracts. Mr
Dimbleby says this doesn't happen anywhere else in the world and needs
addressing. Because in instances like this, when there are sudden shocks and
shortages, suppliers have simply sold to European markets for higher prices
because they can. They can adapt the price and put it up, unlike here. So he
describes this as a structural issue which needs addressing. He also criticises
the government for only meeting supermarkets and not the suppliers last week to
discuss solutions. Lots of factors at play here. Then, interesting though, this
debate starting to shift from this particular problem now to sort of future food
policy. What do the supermarkets themselves say and how concerned should we be
about predictions we could see more of this type of shortage in the future?
Yeah, well, they have held the line over the past few weeks saying it should
only take a few weeks to sort out. There is anecdotal evidence. I'm sure
listeners will have seen supply starting to replenish now. And of course, the UK
farming season gets underway very soon. So that should ease things. Sainsbury's
told us, remember, they've had no restrictions. They believe in close
collaboration with farmers and in paying them fairly. They say as inflationary
pressures have started to rise, they've supported farmers and producers
financially and kept prices down for customers. Now, DEFRA, the government
department, has maintained throughout that the UK supply chains are resilient
and well equipped to deal with disruption. We understand in those talks on
Monday, some of these wider issues around contracts and sourcing were discussed.
And on that question of whether we'll see more of this, well, cast your mind
back to November. We had a shortage of eggs then, didn't we? So this isn't the
first food supply shock. Various experts I've spoken to have said that because
of climate change and geopolitics like the war in Ukraine, there's no guarantees
we won't see food supply chains again tested to their limits in the future. Mark
Ashdown, thank you. So is there a different way for us to think about our
national food strategy? Annette Batters is president of the National Farmers
Union. She's on the line now. Good afternoon. Good afternoon. Do you agree with
Henry Dimbleby that supermarket policies are partly to blame for the current
shortages? I agree with everything actually that Henry Dimbleby has said. But I
think at the heart of all of this is the way the market operates here. We are
completely unique in the way that we operate. And that primarily is due to the
rise of the discounters in this country. That's namely Aldi and Lidl. And they
have a completely different business structure to the others. So they are
privately owned. The others that you've mentioned are shareholder owned. And so
we used to have retail price wars that lasted perhaps three to six months. We
now live with one all the time. So the pressure on price point, the pressure to
maintain and achieve greater footfall has never been more challenging than it is
today. So the discounters by name are the discounters. They will always discount
on all the others on price and the others are trying to keep pace with them. So
you've got a cutthroat marketplace. It really is very, very tough for everybody
in that supply chain that's in it. And long term, is the current model
sustainable? I think we're seeing real cracks in the infrastructure now because
it's been a huge success story. This has been the most successful food market in
the world. We've had really high quality, affordable food distributed 24 sevens
and nobody ever has gone short. And now it's not standing up to the stress test
of Brexit, the global pandemic and now the war in Ukraine, which of course has
driven 50 percent of cost inflation for farm inputs. If that can't get passed
on, we're going to see contraction, which is what has happened. What about the
point he made about suppliers, he said, being locked into these fixed price
contracts with supermarkets? Is that a problem? Without doubt. You know, some
are on good contracts that can be renegotiated as time goes on and taking into
these these cost inflation challenges that have been faced and others don't
have. And we must have contractual relationships that are totally transparent,
that are legislated. I mean, that is going to be really important that everybody
in the supply chain can achieve a fair return. And ultimately, what we've seen
in the egg sector that played out last autumn and what we're seeing now with
fresh produce is the fact that these contracts in many cases are not fit for
purpose. And if you're not getting a fair return for what it's costing you,
you're going to contractual businesses. Why we're seeing many of the glasshouses
across the country mothballed now as they should be producing high quality food,
peppers, tomatoes, cucumbers for people to deal with this shortage, because
there are challenges in Morocco and Spain. But this was always going to be the
case. And this is what we've been warning for of for a very long time. You've
talked about some of those strategic shocks, things like pandemic, things like
the war in Ukraine affecting food supplies. If the era of globalization is
coming to an end, how quickly do we need to ensure that we start growing more
here in the UK, whether that's for food security reasons or for cutting down on
food mars? Well, I think that is absolutely paramount and actually, you know,
globalization, I think, is coming to an end. I think the war in Ukraine has
changed everything on energy security and food security. And we're seeing, you
know, India, China, you know, a lot of protectionism going on, making sure that,
you know, they have what they need effectively. And that is driving change and
change at pace. So we really do need to invest here in our own infrastructure.
Now I have been told time and time again by ministers, indeed by officials, that
food grown on our land is really not important at all. We're a wealthy nation
and we can afford to import it. I think that is now looking naive in the
extreme. We've got huge capability here to be producing more of our fruit and
vegetables, more of what we're good at. We're not going to be producing bananas
and citrus here, but we can be producing a lot more of what we're good at, which
is why we're just publishing our 10 point plan for growth in the horticultural
sector so that we don't see this problem again. But it needs government to act.
It needs the whole retail environment to be, I have to say, transformed. Minette
Batters, President of the National Farmers Union. Thank you. Ukrainian troops
are continuing to fight to maintain control of the eastern city of Bakhmut. The
Russian army and Wagner mercenaries have spent over six months battling to take
the city, which has so far managed to hold out. Yuriy Sak is advisor to
Ukraine's defence ministry in Kiev and he joins us on the line now. Good
afternoon. Good afternoon. Is the fighting continuing? Are Ukrainian troops
still managing to fight there or are they going to have to be to retreat? Like
you've said in your report, indeed, the fighting for Bakhmut in the east of
Ukraine is now, we're in the sixth months of this battle and it's very fierce
and Russians are throwing everything they have. They're throwing the new
immobilized soldiers. They're throwing the well-equipped and well-trained, one
group soldiers and we're still holding out. But the situation is very, very
difficult because Russians have not been able to achieve any military success
for a very long time. So they are literally desperately trying now to use
whatever military capabilities they have to continue their attacks on Bakhmut
and it's very, very intense. Is the city a key strategic target for Russia? I
mean, is it worth the cost in Ukrainian soldiers' lives? We have, our approach
has been and continues to be, and this was said by our president, by our
minister of defence, by the military command of our country, that we inflict
maximum losses on our enemy and the losses of the Russian army in and around
Bakhmut during the last even two months have been staggering. On some days
they're losing there more than 1,000 soldiers a day. So the maximum losses for
the enemy and minimum losses for our armed forces, which of course means that we
are able to continue to prepare our own counter offensive because we're fighting
for every inch of our land, but at the same time we are fighting a smart war.
And our president has said we will continue to fight for Bakhmut for as long as
we can, but we are not going to waste our soldiers just for some symbolic
meaning, which seems to be the case for the Russians. What has happened to the
civilian population? Have most families fled the fighting now? Well, the city of
Bakhmut before the war, it was a city that was populated by around 70,000
people. At the moment there are less than 5,000 left in the city. They're all
living in appalling, awful conditions in basements and trying to hide from the
continuous, relentless shelling of the city. The evacuation at this moment is
almost impossible, but of course they all had a, those who are now still in the
city, these are people who refused for different reasons to evacuate where they
had this choice. And now evacuations are very sporadic and they're very risky
because of the continuous shelling. Yuri Sakh at the Ukrainian Defense Ministry,
thank you for that update. The government here is about to announce where the
UK's first carbon capture power station will be built. Three projects in
Teesside and Lincolnshire are in contention, but with the plants costing more
than twice the amount of gas power stations, there are questions as to whether
it'll be money well spent and whether burning more fossil fuels can be part of
the solution to global warming. Jonah Fisher has been to one of the proposed
sites at Kedby near Scunthorpe to see a community that's become a microcosm of
the UK's energy transition. It doesn't bother me. I'm quite happy to have a
power station on my doorstep. The story of Kedby is the story of the UK's energy
past, present and future. I've come to see Andy Sharp. He used to work at
Kedby's coal power station, grinding the coal down for use in the furnaces. This
was Kedby in 1991, local school kids counting down to the demolition of the
three towers of the coal-fired power station. Coal was in the process of being
phased out and an era of cheap gas dawned. In Kedby, a gas-fired power station
was built and there's now a second one alongside, about to come on stream. We've
just walked into the turbine hall of Kedby 2 gas power station. It's just been
finished. It's going to be commissioned in the next month or so. Charlie Baker,
I'm the mechanical supervisor at the Kedby 2 project. So you've got a combined
cycle gas power station. So the first cycle is the gas cycle that generates
rotational forces. The gas expands and heats up and then the waste gas heat is
then recycled to generate steam and then that creates the second cycle, which is
the water steam cycle and generates electricity. So what we can say about this
is it is much more efficient than what's come before, but sadly it is still
emitting carbon dioxide. Yes, compared with a coal power station, which would be
at 40% efficiency because it only had the steam cycle, this is up to over 60%,
but there's still emissions from the combustion of gas. A third gas plant at
Kedby is being proposed by energy giant SSE, but the design is different.
Instead of releasing the carbon dioxide that warms our planet into the
atmosphere, it's going to be captured and then stored beneath the North Sea. I'm
Catherine Raw, MD of SSE Thermal. Why should we be putting our money into this
rather than proven technologies like offshore wind, which we know works and can
be done at scale? So the important thing, it's not either or, it's both. So the
country, we SSE, are investing in renewables technology. We're building, as we
speak, the biggest offshore wind farm in the world, but we cannot only have
renewable energy. If the wind isn't blowing like today, then you need flexible
power to back it up. How much more expensive is it to add carbon capture onto a
power station like the one you've just built and completed now? So we're looking
at probably double the cost of an unabated gas power station for the extra
carbon capture circuit at the end. And it's that cost that's stopped carbon
capture taking off in the past. Though many climate scientists have come to
accept there will have to be some capture if we're going to reach net zero
greenhouse gas emissions, others are deeply sceptical of anything that gives
fossil fuels a role in our greener future. My name is Dr. Dinesh Chalha and I'm
a lecturer at the University of Lancaster. I believe that we would be better off
spending our money on building up energy storage technologies that would support
renewable energy generation technologies. If you translate pound for pound or
kilowatt hour to kilowatt hour, which is the unit of energy, you will get a
better output from a power plant that functions based on renewables and is
supported by storage than a fossil fuel power plant that has a carbon capture
attached to it. There are currently three competing proposals, one for a plant
at Kidby and two on Teesside. Green pioneers or possibly white elephants? A
government decision is expected soon as to where the UK's first carbon capture
gas power station is going to be built. Jonah Fisher reporting. And staying with
the environment, for once some good news on climate change may be on the horizon
because it seems that UN member states gathered in New York this week might be
about to agree on a long-awaited treaty to help protect the oceans and high
seas. And why do they matter so much? My name is Anne Socrates and I'm a solo
circumnavigator. I've been around the world four times in total. What I've
noticed recently in my last nonstop around the world was the amount of fishing
that was taking place in the really, really remote parts of the Pacific Ocean.
Very, very noticeable. They caused me quite a lot of problems in fact just
sailing past them. The other point about the fishing, the albatrosses are
threatened with extinction some of them because they get caught up in some of
these long lines that the fishermen are putting up behind them, several miles
long. So it's an awful problem at the moment and the world's fish population are
really threatened by overfishing. Anne Socrates. Well, Minna Epps is from the
International Union for Conservation of Nature and has been at the UN working
through the night to reach an agreement. She joins us now on the line from
there, probably quite tired. Minna, can you hear us okay? Yes, I can hear you
fine, thank you. Good afternoon. Well, tell us what's at stake. How important is
this treaty and are we close? Yes, thank you. So what is being negotiated is
basically 193 member states are coming together to negotiate an internationally
legally binding treaty under the United Nations Convention of the Law of the
Sea. It's also known as the BB&J Treaty and it's to protect biodiversity and
secure sustainable use in the high seas, which is about two thirds of our ocean
and about 45% of our planet. And what are the sticking points? Why is this going
on late into the night on the final day? Yes, I mean, I think this treaty is
really overdue and we see all these accelerating pressures due to climate change
and we know the important role of the ocean in terms of climate change
mitigation and adaptation, but also the various services, species and ecosystem
services to benefit of humankind. So it's really important coming together to
agree on this treaty. One thing that we have agreed in December last year is
really to protect 30% of not only land and coastal areas, but the ocean as a
whole. So we really need to have this treaty in place because there's no
holistic, I mean, legal framework or any kind of mechanism to establish marine
protected areas in the high seas. So that is one part of the package deal. So
the other part of the package deal is also to make sure that in addition to
having area-based management tools is to be able to do environmental impact
assessment, as well as to ensure that there is capacity building of marine
technology transfer. And the final thing, part of the package deal is looking at
access and benefit sharing of marine genetic resources to make sure that they
are shared in an equitable way. And I think that has proven to be a major
sticking point holding up as well as the negotiation into the very long hours.
So they are currently kind of revising and trying to agree on various landing
points so that they can bring this treaty into conclusion. So this is already
the resumed final round of the negotiations. So we've been talking about this
for almost 20 years and the negotiation has been going on for five years. So we
are hoping that shortly the member states will convene and basically go through
a text that they can land on, which can be adopted at a later stage and
hopefully be brought into force relatively quickly so we can have those enabling
mechanisms to be able to not only establish the marine protected areas that we
need, but also to secure sustainable use and equitable benefit sharing. And I
think that has been one of the main sticking points is really the fair and
equitable deal that we want to see specifically coming from the global south.
And if a deal is struck quite shortly, very briefly, I mean, can countries be
made to then stick to it? Yes. So before it comes into force, first they have to
agree on how many states will actually have to ratify for it to come into force.
So that hasn't been agreed yet how many states that would have to be. Ones that
usually can take various lengths. But the idea is that we were trying to kind of
fast track this so that once you have agreed to this treaty, that would be
legally binding. Minna Epps, we must leave it there. Thank you, Minna Epps from
the International Union for Conservation of Nature over there at the UN. When
Mary Antoinette said let them eat brioche, she probably wasn't thinking of a
drive-thru offering cakes and croissants. But with the upmarket bakery chain
Gales apparently thinking about branching out into in-car dining, it seems that
drive-thrus have become a burgeoning market here in the wake of the pandemic.
Several brands have recently invested in them and not just the fast food chains
you might expect. There's no need to sit near anyone coughing or sneezing at
you. You can even play your own music as you eat. But is it really a good idea
or might it detract from the actual dining experience? Rosalind Erskine is a
food writer for the Scotsman newspaper, host of the podcast Scran. Good
afternoon. Good afternoon. It seems quite surprising that an upmarket chain like
Gales is thinking about opening drive-thrus. What's the appeal of the drive-
thru, both for the customers and for the food chains? Well, I think from a
customer point of view, obviously, it's convenient. So if you've got a busy life
and you're maybe busy with children or you're on a long drive or maybe you've
got mobility issues, it gives you an option to go and just pick something up.
It's quite convenient. It's obviously quite fast. From the business point of
view, you're going to maybe reach people that you wouldn't normally reach,
you're maybe going to go into areas that you've maybe not normally or
traditionally had a shop. So, yeah, there are sort of benefits on both sides
from the drive-thru. And are we, as a nation or as the UK, using them more
because they are convenient, because we had that period of coronavirus where
people were very worried about being too close to others and perhaps because
we're working longer hours? Yeah, yeah, exactly that. So there's just over 2,200
in the UK and it's a 41% increase between 2015 and 2020. And 12% of sales and
takeaways in the year to March 2021 was from drive-thrus. So they're becoming
increasingly popular. And that figure went up 50% from pre-COVID numbers. So
obviously, they were popular before, whether for convenience or late night, you
want a burger. But during COVID, it just became more sort of convenient and
people felt safer just being in their cars. So, yeah, they're definitely
becoming more popular, but not as popular as America, where they've got over
200,000. It feels a bit counterintuitive to be talking about opening more drive-
thrus when we're all talking about trying to use our cars, less trying to
counter rising levels of obesity. Yeah, exactly. So places in America and Canada
are looking at that and actually Glasgow, where I live, the council is going to
crack down on them because we're trying to introduce a low emission zone here.
And one of the things you'll find with drive-thrus, if you're sitting in your
car, you're going to be idling with your engine. So it's not as counterintuitive
to low emissions for the health of the planet and the health of the people in
the city. So in Glasgow, they're not going to open any new ones where there's
not already a retail park or places to park your car. And there's already about
39, 40 in Glasgow. So there's quite a lot. So, yeah, the impacts of the
environment aren't great. And also the food available isn't particularly
healthy. It should be seen as a treat. Rosalind Erskine, we must leave it there.
We're almost out of time. Thank you. And that's it from us at Saturday PM.
Studio direction by Jonny Baker, our producers Emma Penny and Josh Jenkins, our
PM editor, Charlotte Scar. Caroline, thanks very much. This is BBC Radio 4. Now
it's time for Political Thinking with Nick Robinson. His guest this week is the
Deputy Chairman of the Conservative Party, Lee Anderson. Hello and welcome to
Political Thinking, a conversation with, rather than a news interrogation of
someone who shapes our political thinking about what has shaped theirs. My guest
this week is an MP whose heroes have included Tony Benn, Arthur Scargill and
Boris Johnson. He's a man who, depending on your point of view, tells it like it
really is or relishes insulting those unable to fight back, whether it's telling
people who are struggling to make ends meet that they should learn to shop
cheaply and cook for themselves, nurses that have got no need to use a food bank
or refugee charities, that they're just as bad as people smugglers. He is Lee
Anderson, former NUM member, minor Labour councillor, now proud MP for his
hometown of Ashfield in Nottinghamshire and Deputy Chairman of the Conservative
Party. It's been quite a journey. Lee Anderson, welcome to Political Thinking.
You have not created a controversy for a few weeks now. Have you been neutered?
Have they caged you in this new job? Well no, two weeks ago when I got the job I
was on a Home Affairs Select Committee visit to Uruguay on the legalisation of
drugs and then I think the week after we were on recess. So this is my first
full week back. Not been any controversies I don't think this week, but I keep
looking at my phone for updates to see what I've said, see what I've upset.
Joking apart though, do you relish the controversies, do you plan them or do you
just, as I said in the introduction, say what you think? Nothing is planned
Nick. I mean what I say is not controversial. I don't think it is. It may be
controversial to the BBC, it may be controversial to the mainstream media, it
may be controversial to people in Parliament. I mean I'm saying what I believe
most people in my constituency think and when I get home on a Thursday people
will come out to me as I walk up home from the train station and say Lee, you're
saying what we're thinking, keep doing it. Now the reason I joke that you have
been caged or neutered is you found it something you chaired the blue collar
Conservatives, it's all about demanding, as I understand it, tax cuts about
demanding control of immigration for voters like the ones you represent in what
we now call the Red Wall. But you're backing a man who doesn't believe as far as
we can tell in those two things, certainly hasn't delivered them yet. So that's
why I suggested to you maybe you've been caged or neutered. No no, absolutely
not. I left the blue collar as chair obviously because I've got this new role
within the party, that's a great privilege. Rishi is a low tax, he was a low tax
politician, he's told me that to his face but he's inherited a rum deal. We've
gone through two years of Covid, a war in Ukraine, got lots of debt, over Â£500
billion spent on you know for taxpayers money, we've got the balance to books.
So for those people in the work you'll know plenty of Tories who actually said
he's a socialist Rishi Sunak, I've interviewed Tories who say that and you were
a Boris Johnson backer, you were a Liz Trust backer, you now think it's not that
you've been neutered, it's that those people got Rishi Sunak wrong. No, I think
there's that much talent within the Labour Party then, within the Conservative
Party that you know, we've got some really good people that can run this
country. Old habits, old habits die hard. Yeah well that's true. Look, Rishi is
a smart man, he's a smart man. Let's talk more about politics in a second, I
want to talk about where those old habits came from, why you were a Labour man
and went on to be a Tory. Now you talk about being a proud Ashfield man, born,
brought up, all your family there, for people who don't know it, what do you
mean by that, what sort of place is it, what are you proud of? Ashfield is a
coal mining constituency, it's built on coal and textiles. And your dad was a
miner? Yes, all my family were coal miners, all the male members should I say,
there weren't many females working down the pit, well there weren't any, but I
followed my dad into the pits when I left school and I was incredibly proud to
do that job. And your dad, traditional working class, hard working I imagine,
demanding? Labour man through and through, trade unionist, been on strike 72, 74
and 84, he's got the badge, he did all that because he thought it was right what
he was doing to protect his job, to protect his community and then 40 odd years
later he finds himself voting for me at a general election. So in your house
then, I don't imagine there was a lot of debate about politics, presumably
politics meant Labour and the union? It did, I mean growing up in the 70s, and I
tell this story very often, it was Scargill, Skinner, Tony Benn, that was our
political diet, that's what we listened to on the wireless, that's what we
watched on the TV if they ever came on, and just a few miles away, Chesterfield
Town Hall, sometimes on a Friday night, I would go and watch Tony Benn speak, I
can remember going to one event, I think it was Tony Benn, Scargill and Skinner,
all on the same bill. As a 16 year old, listening to those three people speak,
you come out of that building feeling 20 feet tall, it doesn't matter what they
said, it's just the delivery, they were absolutely superb. Well it must have
mattered what they said to a certain extent, what was it that appealed then? Was
it a sense that they were fighting for your class? Was it the community? Was it
just at that stage a visceral dislike of the Tories? Well there was the contrick
I think, they were pretending they were fighting for our class I think, that's
what they were trying to do. But what did you believe at the time? I believed
it, because in a Caulfield community, in the constituents where most men worked
down the pit, we saw the nasty Tories as taking away our pits and our
livelihood. You're a Tory hater, you hate Maggie, and you want to start the
revolution. And did you hate Maggie? Yeah, with a passion, our community did. I
mean if I'd been in your house, you would have said some potentially
unrepeatable things. Yes we did, we were conditioned to, you know, it's a coal
mining community, things are being taken away from you, who do you blame? You
blame the nasty Tories. And Maggie was leading the Tories and that just follows,
that was most households. Has it taken you a long time to forgive the Tories?
Because you have been critical, still being critical of what you think Margaret
Thatcher did to the Tories. I remember, and I look back now, and I will repeat
this story every week, this country needed Margaret Thatcher in the 70s and 80s.
The country was being held to ransom, the unions were running amok. Yeah, we
thought it was unfair because we suffered, we got the blunt of it, but you
cannot have a situation where the trade unions are going on strike every five
minutes, holding the country to ransom and making everybody miserable. And
that's what was happening. Sure, but I want to remind people, you didn't convert
to the Tories until 2018. I mean it wasn't that you thought they'd seen the
Blair period, you didn't get the Brown period, you didn't get the Ed Miliband
period. You're working for a Labour MP against people who tried to become the
Tory prime minister. And that's when the penny dropped, when I started working
for a Labour MP. Well, let's talk about that in a second. First of all though,
what else about Ashfield? Your dad was a miner, Paul. Your mum, Jennifer, was a
factory worker. Two wages and yet you describe, when you talk about this, a very
poor house. How come? Well, I think that was typical of households in Ashfield
at the time. The men worked down the pits, some did seven days a week. My mother
worked at the factory. We had one holiday a year, which was a caravan in
Skegness. We had a garden full of vegetables, chickens at the bottom of the
garden for the eggs. And that was our food bank. I mean, we didn't think we was
in poverty. I didn't think we were impoverished or in poverty or dirt poor. I
didn't think that. Perhaps if people, some people today could go back in a time
machine and see how we lived, they'd probably think we were very, very poor. But
I didn't see that at the time. Is there a bit of you that is nostalgic for that?
Yes, absolutely. I mean, I look at my dad getting up in the morning to go to
work at half past four to a coal mine. Remember, every morning is alarm clock
going off. That woke me up. And that sort of conditioned me to thinking that,
you know, when I leave school, that's what I'll be doing. I'll be having my own
alarm clock. But just a few years later, I was getting up with my dad and going
to the pits and, you know, going to work together and doing a shift underground.
Now, what's interesting is you then leave the mines because your relationship
breaks up and you've got two boys to bring up. You've got Charlie and Harry to
bring up and you bring them up as a single parent. And again, these are tough
times. Yeah, it's difficult when you go from going to work and providing for a
family to, you know, all of a sudden find that you're on your own and looking
after children. I got great support from my family, obviously. I spent a little
bit of time out of work, but I was volunteering at the same time at a local
charity. Citizens Advice. Citizens Advice Bureau, which was very good to me. I
learned some new skills. It kept me in the workplace. It kept my brain ticking
over. And eventually, I got a job with Citizens Advice Bureau. And I did that
for several years. And that sort of drifted then into politics. And that's where
I met Gloria when I was working at the CAB. Gloria Gepiero was the Labour MP for
Ashfield, now a telepresenter and who you work for. What's interesting, though,
when I read your background, background in poverty, but people who don't know
you think, isn't this the guy who's very unsympathetic to people who are
struggling to make ends meet now? Doesn't he remember how it was? Doesn't he
empathise? Doesn't he remember the people he used to help in Citizens Advice?
You worked at a hostel for the homeless as well, didn't you? Yes, I did. I did.
I went to several hostels for the homeless people as well. So what's happened?
I'll tell you what it was, Nick. When I first started working at CAB, we were
seeing families that were coming in with all sorts of social problems. It was
debt. It was housing problems. It was relationship problems. It was benefit
problems. And we used to help these people. And this is 20 years ago, I think it
probably is. And I would see these families and we'd patch them up and move them
on and think, you know, I've done a really good job there. And then fast forward
10 years, when I'm working for a Labour MP, I'm seeing the sons and daughters of
these same families who've got the same issues. And I think to myself, my
goodness, we've not solved anything here. All we've done is allowed a new
generation of young people to come along and have the same problems that the mum
and dad had. And that got me thinking that we was wrong in our approach. Totally
wrong. That's interesting. So the experience of working with people who are
struggling, you might not like this word, but hardened you. Yeah. I mean, made
you think, hold on, we're getting this wrong. Yeah. I went from, come on in,
let's sort you out, you know, blah, blah, blah. We need to help you. To
thinking, my goodness, you know, in 10 years later, I was seeing the children of
these families and thinking, we've not actually helped you. We've made it worse
for you. But you see, when you say, as you did, no nurse needs to use a food
bank. I didn't say that. I said nobody on 35 grand needs to use a food bank.
Slightly different. But you were talking about nurses. Oh, anybody, any public
sector worker on 35 grand should not be using a food bank. And I did challenge a
reporter to provide any public sector worker in Ashfield to come and see me who
uses a food bank. I'm still waiting. There may be a reason for that. Well, I
know the reason. It doesn't exist. No, sure. But that may be because Ashfield, I
hesitate to say this to a proud Ashfield man, Ashfield isn't the world. In other
words, there may be people. It's my world, isn't it? Sure. But there may be
people in other parts of the world who do struggle on a salary which would make
you relatively rich. In Ashfield, let's just take off the top of my head an
example like Barking in Essex, at Dagenham. To buy a house in your constituency,
we checked this out before going on air, on average is 214,000. To buy a house
in Barking and Dagenham is 403,000. I suspect, I haven't got the figures, rent's
a lot higher. So isn't it a bit glib to say, because I don't know a nurse who
needs to use a food bank, there aren't any nurses who need to use a food bank.
Well, where are they? Well. Have you got any? Well, I've got them here, but the
Royal College of Nursing can provide you with them. Yeah, well, they will do.
United Union can, Unison can. I can get them on air. The unions have all got an
agenda, you know that. They will provide these case studies. But those people
don't exist. Well, it doesn't. You've got an agenda, they've got an agenda. My
inbox is full of, when I make these comments, these so-called controversial
comments, which by the way are not controversial, my inbox floods from people,
not just from Ashfield, from places like Barking, from all over the UK saying,
you know what Lee, thank goodness somebody's speaking out, we actually agree
with you. I get pensioners contacting me from southern constituencies, who's on
peanuts, you know, they're on less than 20 grand a year. They're not using food
banks. But look, if somebody's suffered domestic abuse, lost their job, become
ill, suddenly got a disability, had a major trauma in their life, the state, I
think the state should be there to, you know, to wrap the arms around them and
help them in a difficult time. It should not be a way of life. You know, I was
brought up differently and I'm a product of where I was born and I was brought
up. Just before we move on, because of what you saw as a volunteer and then
working for a Labour MP doing no doubt a lot of casework with people with
problems in the constituency, you're very critical of the benefits system,
Universal Credit. Do you think it keeps people poor? Yeah, it keeps generation
after generation poor and it stifles aspiration and it ruins children's
outcomes, educational outcomes, expectations. I saw a family when I was working
for Gloria, it was a man and a woman, they never worked, they had five children.
I think three of the children was on disability living allowance for ADHD,
behavioural problems. They was getting Â£53,000 a year net. Now to get that sort
of wage you've got to be earning over 70k, we know that. But the worst thing for
me with that was not the actual amount of money they was getting, it was their
children were labelled as disabled. So when they left school they were going to
be having the same problems as the parents and we're not breaking the poverty
cycle, it's cruel because we're ruining people's lives. But are you telling your
party? Yes, of course I am. So they're listening? And they are listening to me.
You worried me then because you became all diplomatic and gave me a party line
and I thought the whole point of the interview was don't give me a party line.
No, I've spoken to the party many, many times, but now I've got a bit more of a
voice. Now you started to say, and I interrupted you, that you left the Labour
Party because of what you saw when you were working for the party, working for
the local Labour MP, Gloria de Piero. I was in a Labour group meeting in
February 2018 I think it was, when one of the Momentum members said to me, have
you ever read the works of Karl Marx? And I said no, I've not. He said well why
don't you off then and join the Tory party. I said you know what mate, that's
not a bad idea. So I did and then within 18 months I was his MP. So the Labour
Party give great career advice. Before you got given a job by Rishi Sunak, when
it comes to the issue of the small boats crossings with migrants, you said it's
like the band on the Titanic playing the same tune and ignoring the obvious.
What was like the small band on the Titanic? I just thought the whole of
Parliament was like that, not just my own party. I thought the whole of
Parliament was just not taking it seriously. As it is, it comes up all the time
on the doorstep. Our inboxes are full of it. We've now got leafy suburbs where
the hotels are full of illegal migrants. I went to Calais the other week and
witnessed first hand the nonsense that's going off there. It scares me, it
frightens me. When you said though ignoring the obvious, what did you mean? The
obvious is a big problem. That's the obvious. It's going to create big social
problems in this country. We've got undocumented tens of thousands of young men
coming in from all over the world. We don't know who they are, where they've
been. Someone is just blatantly lying when they go for the process. There are
protests now outside exactly the asylum hotels you described, which are
sometimes in leafy suburbs. They're quite often actually in the poorest parts of
the country. Do you have some sympathy with the protesters? Of course I do. When
I hear that protesters are protesting, and these aren't far right extremists,
they're just normal family people from some of these towns and villages that are
upset that overnight two or three hundred young men have arrived and they're
saying things to young girls and I know there's been a few attacks and some
horrible incidents. Of course people are going to be concerned. That's just
human nature. At the end of the day, when you live in a community, you expect to
be safe and you don't like sudden change. That's how humans behave. What's
frightening about having a hostel or a hotel full of young asylum seekers who
frankly just want a better life, in the way my grandparents wanted a better life
when they fled the Nazis? You hit the nail on the head. They've come here for a
better life. They're not asylum seekers. They're abusing the asylum system. We
know that. I spoke to the young men in the camp in Calais. None of them were
fleeing violence or persecution. They came, they were coming to the UK and the
words they kept saying was El Dorado, El Dorado. All they're doing at this Care
for Calais camp, they're walking them through the asylum process. They meet them
when they get to the hotels in the UK, walk them through the asylum process
again. They're being coached and they're abusing the system. You've sort of made
a generalisation again. Now, there may be people who would agree with you about
Albanians, for example, who you made the point in the past. Yeah, Syrians,
Iranians, Afghans, Somalis, all people coming from war-torn countries. You said
they're not really. There's lots of people staying in those war-torn countries,
Nick, isn't there? What people don't like is the optics of tens of thousands of
young men. We're not seeing very often it's women and children and vulnerable
people. If we saw that, then maybe people, the general public, and especially in
places like Ashfield, they'd be more sympathetic. But they have to have a way of
getting it then, don't they, Mr Anderson? How would they get here? Well, there
are schemes, you know that, Nick. You know there are schemes available for
people to come here legally. But the thing is... There are not schemes for lots
of countries. But why are young men coming to this country and leaving their
women and children behind? That's not the sort of young men that's going to have
sympathy in this country. Because they're earning money and they're sending it
to their families and they hope their families are full of them. In 1941, when
the Nazis were poised, my granddad left a coal mine in Nottinghamshire and he
went to fight the Nazis. He didn't get on a boat and escape to America and then
send for his family. He could put a uniform on, got a gun, and went to fight for
this great country of ours. Just before we move on, you know you've got a bit of
criticism for mixing with people who have extreme views. The so-called Skigby
Scooter Club, people you praised as top lads who make me proud of Ashford. Do
you understand why, when people have looked into the political views of those
people, that they find them completely unacceptable? Well yeah, listen, I mean
the Skigby Scooter Club, it's got about 200 members I think it has, male and
female. They do lots of charity work throughout the community. They have nights,
they have charity nights, they're always booked up. And you know, for me to be
photographed with a couple of people who might have had far right leanings many,
many years ago at a charity do, where they'd raise a lot of money for local good
causes. I mean, they didn't show all the other photos that I'd taken that night
with other people. Yeah, but there were a few shirts saying, No Remorse White
Prize. No, no there wasn't. Flute Dudley. No, there wasn't. And he has an Odin's
Cross, a white power symbol tattooed on his leg. Let me stop you there. There
was nobody wearing that T-shirt at the event I was at. Do you not think you
should check out people you mix with? Well, everybody, hundreds. I have hundreds
of photos taken every week. Do you think I should check everybody I have a photo
taken with? So now you wouldn't meet those people? Well, they're part of a
scooter club. They're part of a scooter club. They've actually publicly
announced what they did 25 years ago, the Flute Dudley one. He said it's
something he did 25 years ago. He's not part of it anymore. And crudely, the
question is whether you condemn the people who behave that way. Well, you know,
it's like when you become an MP and you get a bit of a profile, lots of people
want photos with you. It's as simple as that. I don't fill a format and say,
Have you ever been a part of this group, that group? No, I just have a photo. In
good faith. Now you once described, I think Boris Johnson's a friend, said he'd
do well in the Ashfield Workingmen's Club in a way that Corbyn wouldn't. Could
he be Prime Minister again? That's a good question. I've been asked this a few
times. I don't think age is on his side, to be honest with you. I think he's
coming up to 60. But there's nothing in his behaviour, because you were critical
of him at the time. There's nothing in his behaviour that means, look, you know,
he shouldn't be Prime Minister again on ethical grounds. I don't think. I think
everybody's got a right to put the hat, you know, chuck the hat in the ring at
some stage. I don't think he will do. I think his day is gone. His day is gone.
Rishi Sunak, for the moment, is your man. For those who, again, I'm sure say to
you, he's never going to do these things you believe in. You've been had. You've
been captured. He's done what he wanted, which say, How do I shut Lee Anderson
up? I know, I'll give him a big job. And then it'll be all diplomatic, like he's
been to Nick Robinson on the radio and the telly now. So why are they wrong?
Well, the brief I got when I accepted the job was keep on saying what you're
saying and keep on doing what you're doing. That's why we love you. That's why
we're giving you the job. So you're saying if he doesn't deal with the small
boats, he's in trouble. Well, what I will say to that, and this is not a
politician's answer. I don't change my opinion on anything just because I've had
a promotion. What I said six weeks ago, I stand by it. Anything, including small
boats, including the economy. So you're still on the Titanic fiddling. We're all
on the Titanic, political parties, especially if you're in government, are all
on the Titanic at some stage, aren't you? We've got to get the course right,
steady the ship and deliver on our promises. If we do that, we'll be fine. Now
you've described quite a journey. I imagine at times a painful journey for
anybody changing their politics because people don't like it. Your son in
particular, Harry, wasn't massively impressed, was he, when you'd said you were
going to be a Tory? No, no. Harry, bless him. He went to university in
Sheffield. He'd only been there six months and came back a different man. He'd
got his beard and he was a vegetarian and obviously changed for the worse, I
think, actually. First vegetarian ever in our family. But he was a Labour Party
member and the idealistic, a nice young man. And a Corbynite. And a Corbynite,
yeah. I believed in all that. And when I joined the Tory party, he was very,
very upset. When he rung me, he was deeply upset, but we're still best of
friends. Upset sadly or upset angry? He was sad that I'd left the Labour Party.
He'd probably be a little bit angry with me as well because I'm his dad.
Probably angry that I didn't tell him because everything was such a whirlwind at
the time. And I suppose he felt a little bit let down by me as well. But that's
what happens in families. Sometimes you feel like you've let your family, your
loved ones down and he hadn't. I thought I did it for the right reasons. But no,
he's totally over it. So when he sees those headlines, does he call you up or
message you and say, what have you said now? No, when he sees the other
headlines, when people are attacking me, he'll ring and say, Daddy, you OK? He
looks after you? Yeah, he looks after me, yeah. Lee Anderson, thank you very
much for joining me on Political Thinking. Thank you. Mr Anderson is, if you
like, the red wool made flesh. Bit of a cliche, that phrase red wool, isn't it,
because it covers so many areas and so many people. But he knows what it means.
It means speaking up for the people he thinks don't get a hearing. It means the
Tories reaching parts of the country that they struggle to reach without him.
The question is, having him on side, giving him a big job, is that enough? Or is
he starts to sound more and more like another politician? And if Rishi Sunak
fails to deliver the things he used to say were vital just a few weeks ago, will
it be anything like enough? Thanks for listening. There are now dozens of
interviews that I've done on Political Thinking. You can catch up with them on
BBC Sounds. Political Thinking with Nick Robinson was produced by Jack Fenwick.
This is BBC Radio 4. Now here's the shipping forecast issued by the Met Office
on behalf of the Maritime and Coast Guard Agency at 1725 on Saturday, 4 March.
There are warnings of gales in South Utsira, Fisher and South East Iceland. The
general synopsis at midday. High Rockhall 1034 dissipating by midday tomorrow. A
new low expected Faroes 1015 by the same time. The area forecasts for the next
24 hours. Viking North Utsira, northerly 5 to 7, decreasing 3 to 5, squally snow
showers, good occasionally very poor. South Utsira, northwesterly 6 to gale 8,
decreasing 4 to 6, squally snow showers, good occasionally very poor. Forties
North 4 to 6, showers, wintry later, good occasionally poor later. Cromarty 4th
Tyne, north 3 to 5, becoming variable 4 later, showers, good. Dogger, north-west
3 to 5, occasionally 6 at first, showers, good. Fisher, north-west 6 to gale 8,
decreasing 4 to 6 later, wintry showers, good occasionally poor. German Bight,
north-west 4 to 6, occasionally 7 at first, wintry showers, good occasionally
poor. Humber Thames, north 3 to 5, showers, good. Dover, White, Portland,
Plymouth, north-east backing north-west later 2 to 4, occasionally 5 in Dover
and Plymouth, showers, good. Biscay, north-east 2 to 4, showers, good. Fitzroy,
east 4 to 6, showers, good occasionally poor. Soule, east 3 to 5, showers, good.
Lundy Farsnet, east backing north 3 or 4, showers, good. Irish Sea, north or
north-west 2 to 4, showers, good. Shannon, east becoming variable later 2 to 4,
showers, good. Rockhall Mallee and Hebrides, variable 2 to 4, becoming north-
westerly 3 to 5, occasionally 6 later in Hebrides, showers, good occasionally
poor. Bailey, north-westerly 2 to 4, veering north-easterly 5 to 7 later in
north, showers, good occasionally poor. Fair Isle, northerly or north-westerly 4
to 6, becoming variable 2 to 4, then cyclonic 4 to 6 later, showers,
occasionally snow showers in east, good occasionally poor or very poor in east.
Fair Ose, cyclonic 3 to 5, becoming north 5 to 7 later, perhaps gale 8 later,
showers, becoming snow showers later, good occasionally poor, then very poor
later. Finally, south-east Iceland, variable 4, becoming north-easterly 6 to
gale 8 later, showers, becoming snow showers later, good occasionally poor, then
very poor later. And that completes the shipping forecast. Now with the general
weather, here's Matt Taylor. Hello Matt. Hello Vijay. Very good evening to you
all. Some weather changes on the horizon for next week through Monday into
Tuesday. We're all going to get plunged into cold Arctic air, a substantial wind
chill as well, and there will be some snow around on Monday, mainly to the north
and east of Scotland, but increasingly across some other areas into Tuesday. Ice
could be a big issue on Tuesday morning more widely across England and Wales. So
that's all ahead, but for Sunday, well it's more of the same really. We've had a
great day today. Where you have got some clear skies and a bit of sunshine at
the moment, there could be a touch of frost around through the night into
tomorrow morning, but most will see temperatures just a couple of degrees above
freezing as we start Sunday. For England and Wales, a grey start once again. The
cloud will be dominant through much of the day, but tomorrow there's a greater
chance of one or two showers drifting your way at times. Later on, northern
England and north Wales could start to see the cloud break up and maybe a little
bit of late sunshine to finish. For Northern Ireland, we will start with a fair
bit of cloud, but there could be some sunshine developing for a time through the
morning, but showers develop more widely as we go into the afternoon. As for
Scotland, we'll begin the day with again plenty of clouds. Showers most
prevalent in the far north to begin with. One or two showers dotted around
elsewhere, but through the day we should see a few more sunny breaks develop,
especially across central and southern parts of Scotland with some heavier
showers in the north of the mainland. Temperatures tomorrow for most around six
to eight degrees once again, but in Shetland three Celsius will be the high, the
sign of cold things to come and in Shetland through Sunday night some extensive
snowfall. VG. Matt, thanks very much. Now before the news, a look ahead to
tomorrow morning. My cast away this week is the comedian and writer Robert Webb.
Well, you don't always want to be cheered up. Sometimes I think on my island I
might be feeling a bit glum and I might want to just sit with my glumness and
almost enjoy feeling glum. And that's why God invented Radiohead. And I adore
this band. And I think there'll be times on the island when having Tom York
saying, I'm not here, this isn't happening. Well, I could really get behind that
sentiment. Robert Webb is my cast away on Desert Island Discs tomorrow morning
at 1115. Cheers.