TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-04H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Stay with us. iClick is next. This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio
station. Coming up on Outlook. When Cecile found Simon on Tinder, he seemed like
a great catch. His pictures, they were flashy, he had a nice car, he had a
picture of himself in a private jet, and then I swiped right and we matched and
I went into his Instagram and I checked that out. On their first date, Simon was
magnetic. It was just flowing so well. That's when he said like, we're going to
Sofia Bulgaria for a business meeting. Do you want to join? That's quite a thing
to say to someone on their first date. Yeah. It was fast and romantic and they
were in love. So when Simon told her his life was in danger, and he needed to
use her credit card for safety, she didn't hesitate to help. It was such a small
request, compared to what I felt he had done for me and the experience he had
given me and the love he had given me. And I was like, am I the one who to turn
my back on him? It wasn't money that was the issue, it was his security. But her
money would never come back. Falling in love with the Tinder swindler after the
news. BBC News. Hello, I'm Gareth Barlow. The US Justice Department has told a
federal appeals court that the former President Donald Trump should not be
immune from prosecution over civil lawsuits relating to the attack on the US
Capitol two years ago. David Willis reports. The US Justice Department has
determined that whilst an American president might enjoy considerable latitude
when it comes to making remarks that some might deem controversial, such a
loophole does not extend to the incitement of violence. Two police officers and
nearly a dozen democratic lawmakers have been seeking to make Mr Trump
personally liable for injuries, physical and psychological, suffered on the day
of the insurrection. A spokesman for Mr Trump urged the courts to rule in short
order and dismiss what he called frivolous lawsuits. Clashes between protesters
and the security forces outside an oil field in southern Colombia have led to
the deaths of a policeman and a civilian. After the incident, community leaders
took more than 80 police officers and oil field workers as hostage, Leonardo
Rocha reports. The violence happened after days of protests by residents who'd
blocked access to the oil field in Caquet√° province in Colombia's Amazon
rainforest region. The protesters have been demanding that a company exploring
for oil there carry out work to improve conditions on a local road. The
situation remains tense in an area where dissident members of the FARC rebel
group are known to operate. President Gustavo Petro has sent a team to negotiate
with community leaders. He has also ordered the deployment of the armed forces
in the province. The US Secretary of State has told Russia's foreign minister
that Washington is prepared to support Ukraine to defend itself for as long as
necessary. Antony Blinken and Sergey Lavrov met briefly on the sidelines of the
G20 summit in India, which ended without a final statement due to disagreements
over Russia's invasion. Mr Blinken's spokesman, Ned Price, told the BBC that he
had conveyed to Russia that Washington supported Ukraine's proposals for a just
and durable peace. The number of people confirmed dead in Tuesday's train crash
in Greece has risen to 57. Coroners have been using DNA samples to identify the
victims. Rail workers across Greece held a one-day strike, insisting they'd
repeatedly warned about lax standards. The newly appointed transport minister,
Yorgos Yeropetritis, told reporters that the inquiry would be comprehensive. The
investigation into the cause will take place in a way that will be transparent
and it will be absolutely thorough. This is the order of the prime minister. For
this reason, today an ad hoc committee of experts will be set up to study the
systemic causes that led to the tragedy we're living through and lack of action
that existed over time, if any. World News from the BBC. A prominent lawyer in
the United States has been found guilty of killing his wife and son at their
mansion. Alex Murdoch was convicted of shooting the pair in South Carolina in
June 2021. Prosecutors said he wanted to distract attention from his theft of
millions of dollars from clients, which he'd used to fund an expensive drug
habit. Murdoch showed little emotion as the jury's verdict was read out. Mr
Murdoch, you now having been found guilty of two counts of murder involving your
wife and your son, two counts of possession of a weapon during the commission of
a violent crime. Of course, the minimum sentence for murder is 30 years. The
maximum sentence is life imprisonment. The Cambodian opposition leader, Kham
Sokha, once considered the main challenger to the long-term prime minister, Hun
Sen, has been sentenced to 27 years in prison for treason. Kham Sokha was
accused of colluding with foreign governments and arrested in 2017. His CNRP
party was then banned. Hun Sen once again swept a victory in Cambodia in polls
the following year. His supporters say the prosecution is designed to bar him
from politics. The Tunisian authorities have banned a protest that was due to
take place on Sunday because they say leaders of the opposition coalition that
called it are suspected of crimes against the state. The National Salvation
Front said it planned to go ahead with the demonstration regardless. Some of its
leaders are among more than a dozen opponents of President Kai Saad who've been
arrested over the past month. And the Scottish government has become the first
in the world to ban an anaesthetic gas from hospitals because of its
contribution to global warming. Deslorayn has been widely used for more than a
decade but there's growing recognition that it can be harmful to the
environment. The Scottish ban is estimated to save emissions equivalent to
powering 1,700 homes a year. More stories on our website. Head to bbc.com slash
news. Hello and welcome to Outlook. I'm India Rackerson. Last month, Cecile Fell
Hoy came by our studios at the very start of a very busy day. I was up for a
romance fraud webinar for a charity that we're collaborating with. Valentine's
is coming up so everyone wants to talk about romance frauds. So I was up at
7.45, talked. So we're just a panel on Zoom that they're going to put out. Now
I'm here. And then we have the broadcast awards later tonight. So me, Pernilla,
Felicity and Bernie. Felicity was the director and Bernie was the producer of
the Tinder Swindler. So we're nominated for an award. With Valentine's Day on
the horizon, Cecile was in demand because she's become internationally famous
for falling in love on the dating app Tinder. Obviously, that in itself is not
anything surprising. Loads of people end up in great relationships that begin
online all the time. I've even been to loads of weddings for couples who first
met on dating apps. And Cecile is a big fan. I still love them. I downloaded my
Tinder stats. It was over 350,000 swipes. Well, what is it like? Yes and no? Or?
Yeah, I think it's just in total. I love using them when I'm on vacation to get
to know people there. Not like that is what I mean. I use them both for my
serious dating, like I want to find someone. But if you're just on vacation, get
some locals advice, you know, where's good to go out, you know, I love the
opportunity of getting to know people that you normally wouldn't. They are a
whole world of connection and of hope. It's the great unknown behind every click
and match. I was fairly new to you know, the dating game. I think I had been in
a very long term relationship when it first came that you could like go on the
mobile and for me it was just like, oh, this is amazing. It's a lot of handsome,
like nice men here like to go out and go out and date. And all you have to do is
swipe. But one day in January 2018, Cecile was unlucky enough to swipe and get a
match with someone she definitely wouldn't normally meet. She was 30 and had
recently moved from Norway to London. She decided to download Tinder on a bit of
a whim to just see if she could meet some people, get to know London and
Londoners a bit better. And it wasn't long before the face of a very eligible
looking bachelor called Simon Leviov popped up. An eligible bachelor who wasn't
what he seemed. A man who would step by step pull Cecile into a carefully
constructed and manipulative world and then turn her life on its head. And it
all begins in one moment with one little swipe. She takes a look at his profile.
His lifestyle is clearly extravagant, luxurious and adventurous. Exactly at the
time when I swiped right on Simon, he was just one of many. And his pictures,
they were flashy, in a nice car. He had a picture of himself in a private jet.
And then he had a link to his Instagram. He is my type and he was dressing
nicely. And I like love a man who dresses nicely. And then I swiped right and we
matched and I went into his Instagram and I checked that out. And at the point,
I mean, he had many followers and he seemed like he was just just sitting
around. So I was the one reaching out to him first because I was super bored. I
was just at home. I was finishing a master thesis. It was a Saturday evening and
I was bored. So he looked like he was really wealthy. Yeah. He was your type.
Yeah. There was a match. Yeah, a match. And then I reached out to him first. So
it's not that he hunted for me. I was like, oh, it doesn't seem like you're here
in London that often because I could see he's traveling in line. He's like, no,
I'm not. I'm going actually tomorrow. I was like, oh, too bad, you know, well,
we can have a coffee. So I met him quite early on that Sunday morning. So we
matched up in the evening and met him the day after. Yeah. So next day, he said
he sends you a link to the Four Seasons Hotel where he's staying in London.
Yeah. And he's like, come meet me for a coffee. Well, he took me in and we had
the coffee and he sat down and that's when he truly just opened up, you know, he
was very clever, like not too overwhelming, but that you felt, oh, you're this
grand person who have all these businesses. And because I asked what he did for
his job. What did he tell you? He was the CEO of this LLD Diamonds and that his
dad was the owner and that he had made him the CEO and that he has been doing
quite well. Yeah. He travels around, he courts clients. So that's what he said
he did. How did you feel about him at this point when he was telling you he was
a fascinating person? He just has this magnetism about him. He's really, really
good and kind of like giving you something, but not giving you it all that you
want more kind of. And then you get it back from him, like kind of like after an
hour, like, well, I really want to spend more time with you, but I have to
travel today. So it's kind of like laying it off, like, like, you know, I want
to spend more time with you. And you're like, oh, you like me. Like, yeah, he's
magnetic and he he likes you. Yeah. I really appreciated the deepness to the
conversation a lot of the time. It was just flowing so well. That's when he
said, like, we were going to Sofia, Bulgaria for a business meeting. Do you want
to join? Do you want to come a flight to Bulgaria with me? Yeah. That's quite a
thing to say to someone on the first date. Yeah. Yeah. That is maybe my biggest
thing. Why couldn't I have a normal nine to five job at the time? So I had to
say no, you know, because I didn't have work the next day. So I could actually
go. So I've always been the kind of person and I am still I'm better to regret
something you did do than didn't do. I said, yes, let's go. And then said, well,
I have a driver. He can take you back to your apartment, can get your passport,
pack something, you know. OK, let's see this. And that's when he takes me back
to see this entire crew of people kind of just waiting for him and like driver.
Entourage, security. Yeah, three drivers, Peter, the bodyguard and then his
business partner and then his personal assistant, which was a woman. So his
driver, he drove me back home. And you do get on the plane, you fly to Bulgaria.
And what is that first day, that first night? What are they like? The reason was
just to spend more time with him. But you're never so much alone with him.
That's the thing. We were never like actually alone. But he started like quite
soon to behave kind of coupley, kind of like sitting right next to me because he
was sitting kind of across me on the plane. And I was like and then he came to
sit right next to me. And I remember I really liked like it's like, oh, OK, the
small stuff, you know, like, oh, you're coming closer to me. And he really was
good at like showing you attention. But I think you needed to find people who
like that things went a bit fast. You know, some will be thinking it's too much,
but I'm like that overwhelming love, you know, like, oh, this is just I found
it, you know. So when we went to Bulgaria, like the time difference, everything
wasn't there before 11 p.m. or something was so late. So we just went straight
to bed. Yeah, almost straight to bed. And that's when he was like showing me
because then I saw him without his shirt on and stuff. And that's when he told
me more about his past. He just said that he had been to prison in South Africa.
You're in bed and he takes his he's taken his shirt off and you can see just
some marks on his. Yeah, there's some marks on his back. And I was wondering,
you know, what are those? And then he just said that he'd been to prison. He got
them in when he was in prison. I was like prison, like what is this? And then
he'd been in weapon export. And, you know, that business as well is the most
friendliest. And he said he had been set up and that's when he was showing me
pictures of his then girlfriend that then didn't want anything to do with him.
All the others like abandoned him. And I think that is part of his setup as
well. It's like, yeah, no one is there for me, you know, to help me out when I
when I need help. So he's sort of laying down this, that he has enemies, that
people come after him because of the type of work he does. Yeah. And the thing
that he really needs is loyalty. Yeah, loyalty and love. I just felt that he was
such a lonely guy. I wanted just to be the two of us and have quality time
together. Like I said, you should come to my place and I can make you tacos
because I felt that's what he needed, like wanting to save him, you know, which,
you know, it's not the best way to start a relationship. And you did start a
relationship. How quickly did that all unfold? At the time I wanted to go with
them because they were traveling from country to country. And then suddenly he
just came to me in the morning and said, I'm sorry. So he just booked me a
ticket home. And I thought it was just kind of funny that he bought me, you
know, like they were like driving private jets, but I got like an economy ticket
back. I was thinking he's not going to reach out. He's super busy, but he did,
you know, he spent time like we FaceTimed so much, like calls every single day.
And then I had my birthday coming up. He sent me like a hundred red roses for my
birthday, where the card was like, was very, very kind, you know. Did you feel
like it was really clear how he felt about you? Yeah, God, it wasn't even like
he had never felt this way before. Like, oh, I don't. No. So at the time, I
really, like, really liked him because he was really attentive. And it was just
so nice to have someone that you knew was so busy, but really took his time to
get to know you and wanting to see you and put plans in place and like fall
quickly because I know how happy I was, you know, it was kind of like I made him
the Valentine present and I found the reasons. It was like 10 wonderful things
about you. You got it on your phone. Yeah. So reason one, you give me
butterflies. Reason two, you've given me experiences I've never had before.
Reason three, you're ambitious and driven. Reason four, you care about me.
Reason five, because you always make me happy. Reason six, you make me smile
each and every day. Reason seven, because you like me for who I am and believe
in us. Reason eight, because of the way you look at me with those beautiful
eyes. Reason nine, no matter how hard life gets, you give it your all. Reason
10, I love your kisses and cuddles. Well, he sounds like a great guy from that
list. Perfect. So it's like, I'm so sorry. Don't be sorry. I don't like why I
always start crying when I talk about when I am. Yeah. I'm not surprised. I just
know that when he got that, I think they knew that we have her kind of. Knowing
that didn't mean anything to him. It's much more heartbreaking than losing the
money. Because I think that's very evil to make someone fall in love with you.
And then I think it's one of the worst like when you think of an emotional crime
and not like physical, not putting it up with other stuff. But I think doing
that to someone's mind, that is really cruel. Do you think that was the moment?
Yeah, I know the requests kind of like, because I knew he was in trouble. He had
Peter. So he had explained to me, but he always said like, Peter's his security
guard. Yeah. But things will be better. You know how it is. Things will always
be better. And then you just stick to what he's saying. But things weren't
getting better. So you're in this relationship with him. It feels very romantic.
You've opened up your heart. There's love on the table. And then in the
background, he starts to talk about the fact that he gets threats. He gets
threats for his security, threats for his life because of his work in the
diamond industry. And I didn't know anything. And I think he'd done so well
recently and won many contracts and his competitors were kind of trying to stop
him from doing his job. Did he ever meet any of your friends or your family? No,
he didn't. He was gonna. Yeah. And I think like when you look back and when
you're going to warn people about red flags and those type of things, that is
like, it's a clear thing. Like he couldn't come to London anymore because of the
threats, you know, it was a brilliant way for him to say, well, my security
saying that I'm not safe in London anymore, so I can't come. So one night in the
dead of night, you get a message and it's a picture of Peter, the security guard
and his blood all over his head. And he sent me a voice message as well, where
you can hear them ruckusing in the background. Did he? Yeah, it came from him.
Then. Thank you, baby. I told you we are in a war. I told you it's a series. I
told you it's nothing. They're not playing the games. I told you this, I told
you we are in a war. We need to be strong. I told you I'm not playing games.
This is serious. And I don't Peter, Peter in the hospital. I told you, I told
you, I love you. Everything will be right. Don't worry. You must have been
really scared. This is your boyfriend. You love him. His bodyguard's covered in
blood. He's been attacked. His T-shirt's covered in blood. Yeah. You must have
been really scared. It just cemented that everything was true. Several of these
type of things, which are getting closer and closer to yourself as well. We had
a house in Tel Aviv and he was showing me on an app on his phone, like CCTV
footage of a broken door. And he said they tried to break into, you know, like
these kind of people, they're getting closer to me, like showing me these type
of things. We were a team. We were a team against everyone. And it came to a
point where he said, he just sent me voice messages that I can't use my car. I
don't know what to do. As she's talking to me, I can see in her body language,
the fear and the worry that Cecile clearly felt at the time. But her face is a
mixture of pure disbelief and anger. She'd only been with Simon for a short
time, but the relationship had moved fast. He'd asked her to move in with him.
And Cecile spent time viewing opulent London apartments for them to rent,
thinking about where they would set up their life together. It was exciting, but
she was really scared. She loved him, wanted to be with him, and it looked like
his life was in danger. So when suddenly her boyfriend couldn't use his card, it
made sense to her that she would help him and get a credit card in her own name
that he could use temporarily. He said that they could see where he was going
around the world and could track where he was by him using his card under Simon
Leviv. And they needed a way of... Travelling incognito. And I asked, why can't
you use some of your friends? Well, they know that you're my friends, but you're
kind of a blank sheet. They don't know that you're my girlfriend. So, and I was
like, okay. And like, just with what I had experienced, I didn't question the
validity of it, because I've never heard about that type of scam before. Like,
what is this? So I believe what he said. So I was like, and for me, it was such
a small request compared to what I felt he had done for me and the experience he
had given me and the love he had given me. And I was like, am I the one to turn
my back on him now that he needs help? And at that point in time, it wasn't a
request of money. And I think that is so important. To preface, it wasn't, hi
babe, I need 10k. He had enough money. It wasn't money that was the issue. It
was his security. And this is a guy who's in contact with you all the time. You
know, you're in this like loving relationship. He's renting a flat for you. He's
like, you're looking for a flat together, so you can move in together. Like,
things are great. Yeah, I know. And he just needs help. At that point in time,
when I got the card, I was like, this is going to be fixed in a week. You know,
that is how it was told to me, you know. What did he ask you today? He asked if
I had a credit card. And I had a Norwegian one, but he asked if I had an Amex.
And I said no. And then he asked if I could get an American Express card. And I
was like, I'm not going to get that. And a platinum one. And he told me, do this
and it will happen. And it did. I got a platinum Express card in the mail. I got
the card, traveled to Amsterdam to give it to him. And that's when I did the
grave mistake where I said, because, you know, I didn't have credit here in the
UK. They said they will block the car, but we, he used the word we, we need to
work together. And he brought me into kind of the fight that he was in, you
know. Things are unfolding quite fast. And from that first, you know, American
Express card, he needs a lot of cards, a lot of money. We spent so much money.
Like you're, if you're not in Simon Leviv's world, you don't understand the
spend. It's horrendous. The amount of pressure that was put on me every single
day to either keep the card open or to have enough, like to just, because that
meant safety for him. And I was like, I'm not going to spend that much money.
I'm not going to spend that much money. I'm going to spend it to keep the car
open. And that meant safety for him. So it keeps, the cards keep getting
blocked. You have to call Amex and lie to say, oh, for example, one of the, oh,
the cards is, is blocked and we're in, we're in Cape Town, you know, but I'm
calling from London because I had to pretend that I was there. So I would love
to have a card that I seem very confused and stressed. I hate lying. Like that
was, I think that was almost the worst thing he did to me because I said, I hate
lying. Like I am not the one traveling. And I had to say, hi, I'm now in Cape
Town and hi, I'm now here and hi, I'm now here. I managed to get 68,000 pounds
before they blocked it and say, we know you're not using the card. 68,000 pounds
in less than a month. He spent 68,000 pounds in less than a month. The thing
that was, it was just only temporary and was supposed to just be spent. And it
was like, he had the money to pay me back. Like it wasn't in my mind that this,
these money were actually my debt, if you know what I mean? It was just like, it
was just, it was a crisis that we needed to get through. And then unfortunately
I had my Norwegian MasterCard. So I gave him that and continued to take up high
consumer debt loans that I filled up the MasterCard with. So when all was said
and done, it had been over 200,000 pounds. It's just atrocious amount of money
in 54 days. 200,000 pounds in 54 days. So it was so much already that had
already gone out because I tried to pay down the Amex with 45k and like, it was
just such a mess. When I read the messages, it is, the card is blocked. I love
it, it's blocked. I love you. I miss you. How much is left on the card? It's
blocked. Help, help, you know, like, and I love you. I love you. And you know
that his life at that point is dependent on that. And then you have that
pressure. And then I have a hundred percent, I was working full time as well.
Was there any point where you thought, hang on, am I actually going to get this
back? If when you're in the rat wheel to get out of that, it's either you have
to admit to yourself what is going on and your life is over, or you keep holding
on to the lot. Like, I think deep down inside, you know, but you admit it. And
then in mid April, by which time the couple had been together for around four
months, Simon did start making payments back to Cecile so she could begin to
clear the debt. But the amounts he was trying to give her were so big that the
transactions just wouldn't clear. I tried to do one transfer directly to my Amex
card. Of course, I bounced. He knows it will bounce. You know, 20k would have
been enough for me to just make a down payment, you know? No, he tries to set
500k, $500,000. And that means if I have an account in Hong Kong and try to send
500,000 pounds to a private person, that will be stopped in Hong Kong. So he
knows, he knows how to play the system. So he's trying to make all these
transfers. They bounce. They bounce again and again. And then he's like, do you
know what? Come and get a check from me. Yeah. And I was like, very about that
check, you know, like, what is this? I'm shaking. You know, I'm so done with
this. Couldn't deal with this anymore. That's when I realised that I feel like
we both know that, you know, just the relationship as a whole. I didn't even
want the relationship. I said, I don't want this. You know, my mental health was
just so bad. Yeah, he didn't care anymore. I think he knew he had gotten all the
money out of me that he could almost, you know, so I was just... wasn't the
same. But yes, with the check, I'm going back to the UK. I have so much debt, so
much dependent on this check. I think it was a call where they say we can't cash
this check. And my stomach drops. But then I called Simon and I said, and he
goes off on a tangent, you know. What you called him to tell him about the
check. Yeah, like I was like, they said they can't cash it. Oh, why? Why? They
can call LLD Diamonds. They haven't called the company. They haven't called the
company. They haven't checked anything. And I was like, I'm so sorry. This is
not my fault, you know. And then I call. I'm on the line waiting for 30 minutes
and I'm shaking. I was like, what are they going to say? You know what, when I
finally get to speak to someone, and we can cash it because the amount is too
high. We don't cash in those amounts into private accounts like, you know, like,
so there's nothing wrong with the check. No, the check is fine. So what you
think now? So I get so happy. Yeah. Okay. You're holding on. A bank is saying
that the check is fine. The check is fine. There's no problem with the check. So
you're holding on to those small, positive stuff. Okay. The check is real. He
bought a bit more time with that, that I was like, okay, maybe, maybe I'm just
the stress of everything. So the check is good. And more good news, a huge
important business deal that Simon had been telling her about was just about to
be secured. Perhaps Cecile thought things were fine, and he would give her back
her money. Maybe this was all just a blip, a bad dream. Stay with us. We'll be
back after the news. This is the BBC World Service, where Misha Glenny is
telling the story of Russia. The country's history goes some way to explaining
the way it behaves today. You could accept the culture, how wonderful the ballet
is, the literature, and how charming individual Russians are. But yet you can
still see it as a potential threat. In episode three of the series, Catherine
the Great, the German who became Empress of Russia when her husband was
murdered. She was very involved in the coup, but not necessarily overtly. For
one thing, she was pregnant at the time by another man. It was her military
successes that earned her the great title. She took Crimea, Western Ukraine, and
a big chunk of Poland. There was something about the 18th century that does from
this distance look like a kind of golden age that didn't stick. The invention of
Russia at bbcworldservice.com. In part two of Outlook, Cecile's debt is mounting
and the stress is unbearable. She's hoping her boyfriend Simon is going to start
paying back the thousands of pounds she's lent him, and soon. But then, bad
news. He had told me that he lost the deal. And I just knew, one person doesn't
have that much bad luck, you know, it just like it didn't make sense anymore.
And I wish that I had would have pried a bit more because I started asking more
of the tougher questions. Cecile's journey to unpick the truth after the news.
BBC News with Gareth Barlow. The US Justice Department says the former President
Donald Trump should not be immune from prosecution over civil lawsuits relating
to the attack on the US Capitol two years ago. It argued that he'd exceeded his
presidential duties by inciting people to violence. A prominent opposition
leader in Cambodia has been barred from politics and sentenced to 27 years in
detention for treason. Khamsokha was once considered the main challenger to
Prime Minister Hun Sen, Asia's longest serving leader. Clashes between
protesters and the security forces outside an oil field in southern Colombia
have led to the deaths of a policeman and a civilian. Residents in the province
want a company that's exploring for oil in the area to build a new road. The US
Secretary of State has told Russia's foreign minister that Washington is
prepared to support Ukraine for as long as necessary. Antony Blinken and Sergey
Lavrov met briefly on the sidelines of the G20 summit in India. A high-profile
lawyer in the United States has been found guilty of killing his wife and son.
Prosecutors said Alex Murdoch wanted to distract attention from the theft of
millions of dollars from clients. 57 people are now known to have died in
Tuesday's train crash in Greece. Rail workers in Greece held a strike on
Thursday, insisting that they'd repeatedly warned about lax standards. The
Tunisian authorities have banned an opposition rally that was due to take place
on Sunday. Members of the opposition coalition that called it are suspected of
crimes against the state. A new study says fires in the boreal forests of North
America and Eurasia are a ticking time bomb, with greenhouse gas emissions
increasing over the last 20 years. It says that in 2021, emissions from fires in
high-latitude forests were equivalent to double the carbon from the global
aviation industry. It says there's a vicious cycle as fires stop the forests
recovering. BBC News. You're back with Outlook. I'm India Rakesh and today we're
hearing from Cecile Felhoi. When Cecile met Simon Leviev on the dating app
Tinder in 2018, it was instantly apparent that he was her type in looks and
charisma. He also seemed to be extremely wealthy. He told her he was the CEO of
a company called LLD Diamonds. But there was a problem. Working in the diamond
industry was risky and his life was constantly in danger. On the run from
enemies, he needed to travel incognito with credit cards that were not in his
name. Credit cards from someone he could trust, like Cecile. And they were in
love, so of course she helped. Within two months of meeting him, Cecile had lent
him ¬£200,000 and not a penny had been repaid. Transfers hadn't worked, checks
didn't clear. But he kept reassuring her, saying he was waiting for one very big
deal to land. And then I just get a message in the morning on the 1st of May. He
had told me that he lost the deal. And I just knew, I realised I'd been
defrauded. One person doesn't have that much bad luck, you know, it just like it
didn't make sense anymore. And I wish that I had would have pried a bit more
because I started asking more of the tougher questions. To Simon? Yeah, to
Simon, yeah, for example. LLD Diamonds have an entity here in the UK. They have
a store here in the UK. So I said, but why can't LLD Diamonds transfer money to
me? You know, we don't have a bank account here. And I have to laugh, you know,
I'm just like, you're a UK company, but you say you don't have a UK bank
account. You know, like I was so tired. Yeah. And that's when he turned
completely. He was so upset that I was still asking for money. He had lost ¬£72
million. I had only lost ¬£200,000, which was much more sad for him. On the
phone, he was cussing me, yelling at me, called me an imbecile, how stupid I
was. Did you feel afraid? No, never felt afraid. It was more angry. I could see
him for the real person, but it was way too late. Unfortunately. That's when I
reached out to Amex. I had to send that email and said, I think I know now what
has happened to me. And they came in two hours, like what are the odds on a
Friday in London? So a couple of people from American Express come to your work.
What happens? They asked me to sit down or they want to show my badge because he
said, I bet that you don't trust people anymore. They just took my statement,
asked what had happened, show me some names that you had written down. If any of
them was I knew of and I said, no, never seen them before. And then they also
see a picture, shown as a picture. They just look at each other and they nod.
Oh, instantly. It's him. Yeah, it's him. It's him. Did they say it's him? Yeah,
it's him. What went through your mind? The curtain went down. I remember so
clearly I had like a scarf around me that I just like took over while they were
talking. And they said they had a long investigation on him. That's when I
realized the amount of problems I put myself in. Because at that time, I was
most scared that I had sent in false documents to American Express. And I was
super scared of what I had done to myself. Like have I put myself in the risk of
getting prosecuted? Will Amex go after me? But they said, we're not after you,
we're after him. He's the criminal. And they were so kind to me. And I think
that has maybe made it that I'm so strong, because to have that support when you
felt the lowest. And I just fell further and further over the weekend. And
that's when my family said, come back to Norway. So I went back then to build
myself up. When did you understand the full scale of the fraud of who he was?
When did you learn his real name? That was one of the agents from Amex as well.
He was really nice because he knew I wanted answers. And they had the answers.
He just couldn't tell me. And then he called me and he said his Google, Shimon
Hoyut. And then that will answer some of your questions. And then I came into a
Finnish article. And that's when I saw that he had been jailed in Finland back
in 2015. So he'd already been to prison. The mask was crumbling away. And Cecile
was starting to get the true picture of the millionaire she'd fallen in love
with. And it wasn't pretty. This man, formerly Shimon Hoyut, had legally changed
his name to Simon Leviev, the same surname as a real life billionaire and
diamond mogul, Lev Leviev. Although Simon subsequently denied ever posing as his
son. It turned out he was never CEO of LLD Diamonds. In fact, he'd never had any
links with the company at all. And in 2015, he was sentenced to two years in
prison for defrauding women in Finland. He was released in 2017, and then went
on to meet Cecile in the January of 2018. As well as contacting the banks and
credit card companies, Cecile reported Shimon or Simon to the police in the UK
and Norway. But she knew him. She knew how he worked. And she felt that any
investigations just wouldn't be fast enough. Every day Simon could be working on
squeezing money from someone else. She needed to sound the alarm. So she took
her story to Norway's largest newspaper, Verdensgang, or VG. I just knew that
with the time this was taken, it was too slow for me. I was like, he's still out
there. If I would have had anyone to warn me, I could have been saved. So I was
like, well, I need to be that for others. Luckily, we have the media. I have to
say thank God for the press, that you have one last outlet to get justice. And
they did a really big investigation, didn't they? They flew all over the world,
tracing him down. What did they find? God, that he has done this since he was a
child. He's talked to his friends, that he always wanted to be someone big. He
escaped from Israel. And that's when he started in Cyprus. And that's when he
started his aliases in Finland and got three, four women there at once. And that
was his big mistake there, that he picked so many from one country over a short
period of time. So he was jailed there and got out. Then he has cooked up the
plan of Simon Levi and he became even bigger. The VG investigation is published
late in 2018. Cecile's story was right at the heart of it, along with the story
of another victim, Penilla Solholm from Sweden. Simon had told Penilla the same
story of risky diamond deals and enemies on his heels. She'd even been sent
exactly the same pictures of Peter the bodyguard with blood all over his face.
She'd been terrified for her friend and had offered to help him. Penilla and
Cecile's stories go viral. The response was just so great. It's like a double-
edged sword though. Amazing because there's so many fraud victims that thanks us
for putting a face to this and speak out on it. And then you get a lot of
backlash as well. Back then, you know, he was still out there. So it was like,
it was a manhunt. People were really like trying to find him, you know, and I
think it shows the power of what media and what it can do. Pretty quickly, the
story is shared so much and becomes so big that it's global. It even reached the
phone of Simon's girlfriend at the time, Eileen Charlotte. Incredibly, she read
it just before her plane departed to go and meet Simon, and she quickly realised
the trouble she was in. The story is picked up by Netflix and filming starts on
the documentary, The Tinder Swindler, which came out in February 2022. Along
with Penilla and Cecile, Eileen Charlotte also took part in this film, and she
was able to offer some first-hand insight into how Simon's life was affected by
the spread of the original VG article. He wrote to her like, my face is
everywhere. I can't even go out. I don't have any money. He needed to get a
beard, you know, like he didn't know what to do. He even tried to get plastic
surgery, didn't he? And the surgeon said, I'm going to do this because this is
the sort of surgery that criminals want. Yeah, knowing that is a bit of a small
victory, kind of, at least for half a year, he had a bit of struggle. And by
lots of people piecing together like who he was, where he was, what he was
doing, the police eventually catch up with him in Athens. Yes. And I think it
was such a bittersweet moment when I knew he was caught. You know, he had been
reported in many countries in Europe. It's like it had, please, please let it be
that. But when he was caught by police in 2019, it was not for any crimes
against any of these women. It was for historical crimes he'd committed in his
home country, Israel, some years earlier. He was sentenced to 15 months in
prison for fraud and ordered to pay a fine of over $40,000. He was released
after five months. It remains that Simon Leviev has never been charged with any
offences against Aileen, Penilla or Cecile, and he denies their allegations. By
April last year, the Tinder swindler had become the most streamed show on
Netflix. So while Simon is living as a free man, he's also become globally
infamous. And the people who now are using the Tinder swindler as a cautionary
tale nowadays, sending me messages to this day, you know, and say, my mom
started talking to someone online, but we had seen the Tinder swindler. So I
asked her to be careful. And what a kind of a legacy you can give forever, kind
of that's out there to help people. I'm sorry, I'm getting emotional because I'm
like, so, so proud of myself that you put your pride aside, that you knew that
you would be judged so harshly. But the reception from most people have just
been so much love, and so much support. The judgment is from the media and
society on him now. And I'm so grateful. And he is just still living quite a
good life. It looks like. Yeah. I was in Tel Aviv. I met him there. You met him?
Yeah. I was in Tel Aviv for a conference for Fraud Conference. And then they
were doing a new documentary on him in this Israeli documentary. The part of the
documentary is that they like to ambush these bad people. Again, same old
Cecilia would rather regret something she did do than didn't do. Yeah, I decided
to ambush him. And he says, hi, nice to meet you in a very like, you know, like,
you said that, he said that. I said, hi, nice to meet you. Very sarcastic. And
then how is it to be a fraudster? I said, fraudster? He said, you're a liar. And
then I was like, then I just started laughing at him. My issue there is that he
has so much protection. He drives, he has bodyguards, he has big SUVs, he can go
into beach clubs there, no issue. And he's still going under the name Simon
Levi. He says that that's his name, you know. So this is why when I met him, I
said Shimon Hayut because he hates his real name. It's really clear that
focusing on helping others has helped Cecile. But she's still dealing with the
pressure and the stress of a huge amount of debt. She was also investigated by
the UK police for fraud, but no charges were ever brought against her. I felt
that I was re-traumatised from first the fraud. And then you get traumatised
again from the treatment that you got afterwards. Because I was taken to court
in Norway by four banks. And I lost both of those trials. And my anxiety was at
a high. And now it's been hell. It's been really, really difficult. It's been
some hell years. Some really horrible years. So what has happened to you
financially from this? I had to file for bankruptcy in the end. This has risen
to over ¬£300,000 now. So I made myself bankrupt here, which is to give you a new
start and it's not to punish you. We can all make mistakes. I took the
responsibility because I've heard that from some people that I've taken no
responsibility and just blaming everyone else. I took that on me, made myself
bankrupt. For the rest of my life, that is on me. I'm safe here. UK has become
like a second home for me and where I will stay because I felt much more taken
care of here and people are wanting to listen and look at it as something
positive that I want to bring in. And you are bringing in something positive
from your experience, aren't you? How has what's happened to you shaped your
work now? It's amazing. I'm so excited for 2023. I partnered up with an amazing
woman called Anna Rove. So we're co-founding an organisation called Love Said.
Love made us do things. So Love Said, we can go into romance right now with this
organisation and actually provide both practical support, helping people
understand their rights and what they need to do when. And for me, a very
important factor for me is the mental health support and the peer support
because the kind of support I've gotten from Pernilla specifically and Eileen
and other fraud victims, really only ones that understand how it actually has
been, is much better than therapy sometimes. But we really want to create a
strong community. And then it's like the training and education for police and
the banks on how we can take care of fraud victims and think of it more than
just the money. Because when I talk about that relationship now, when I go back
in time, it screams red flag, which is almost embarrassing talking about. Like
when you ask me, you know, how many times did you see him? But the thing is that
I've just learned that what happened happened. If I'm going to go back and slam
myself over, oh, you should have seen this. And why didn't you do that? And I
was like, I'm not the same person today as I was five years ago. And you're not
in the same situation. And love is an extremely powerful thing. And I have to
say, this is why it's so important to talk about this. And thank you for having
me. Like, people need to understand that they are out there. I'm really sort of
taken with what you're saying about it's the other victims who really get you.
Because with fraud and when people are victims of fraud, I think just from
people I've spoken to, there's a real feeling of shame. But it sounds like what
you're doing, the work you're doing, building that community is like a much
needed space and a much needed type of conversation for people to feel like they
have somewhere safe to reach out to where they would be understood. And what we
really want, we know that there's several organizations, but I really want to
change things. I really think that that has helped me tremendously knowing that
I can help others. I was going to say you're smiling your face off right now.
Yes, I am. I'm really excited. What's this work giving you? Oh, God. So much.
It's just like, we just receive messages, you know, just from a woman who was on
our website. And she just wrote, it has happened to her and she wants to talk to
me just to have someone that understands. But she was like, I really want to
help as well. All the banks who wants to collaborate with us, you know, the
police were collaborating. It's just so incredibly nice to see people being
open. I'm not on the attack. I'm not like saying blame it all on you. Romance
fraud is super difficult. But I feel we can do more and we can go more into the
processes. And we want to be part of that. Because I feel we're a resource.
Victims are a resource. Before it was like, no, stupid people, you know, no,
we're not stupid. We're the ones who see the new trends first. If you could go
back, what's the point where you would like time travel back and intercept? I
don't know if I would have. It's just so much experiences and friendships that
I've gotten out of this, you know, meeting Pranilla and Eileen, like we said, me
and Pranilla, we've been joking, you know, you can't put a price on friendship.
But here we actually can. I think, of course, I wouldn't want to have the abuse
from him. But I think I had to think it happened for a reason. And that you
found a new trajectory in your life and something that you're really passionate
about. But of course, what I wish I did at the time was to reach out more to my
friends and say, I matched up with this guy and be much more truthful with what
I actually went through. So my friends in Norway, even on the phone, could
intercept a bit more. I wish I could have been more open and honest what I was
going through, because I was very lonely. But I don't want to think like that.
It happened. Yeah. That was Cecile Felhoj. My thanks to her. And of course,
thank you for listening. I'm India Rackison and the producer today was Katie
Takatsuki. That's all for now. And we'll see you soon. It's 1954 and five-year-
old Jan Cheek and her family are moving to South Georgia, an island on the icy
southern edge of the Atlantic Ocean, just above the Antarctic Circle. It's one
of the world's largest whaling centres. But to say it's remote is an
understatement. It's one of the most isolated places on Earth. It was a three
and a half day boat ride from the Falkland Islands on a tiny steamer with
scientists and sheep. The sea journey was horrendous. Seas are very rough. We're
in a very small cabin. And apart from my mother, who was an amazing sailor, the
rest of us were dreadfully seasick all the way. Once we got there, it was
exciting. Again, one of our first impressions was of a young elephant seal
falling out of the tussock as we walked up the path. Tussock is a very long,
strong grass, which gave us something of a fright. And then we were kept awake
that night by the adults sort of grunting outside our bedroom window. Even to a
child's eyes, I could see how beautiful it was, the clear water. But then when
we looked across at the whaling station, it was very industrial. And on days
when they were flensing, that is cutting up whales on the wooden platform that
they did that work on, the sea would be brick red with whale blood for about a
quarter of a mile out from the station. So an amazing contrast to the sort of
snow-capped mountains and glaciers all around us. But the whaling industry's
days were numbered. And by 1965, the last station on South Georgia had closed
down. Nearly 30 years later, in 1991, Jan's friend, zoologist Nigel Bonner, was
involved in the clean-up operation. Large stores of diesel were leaking and
contaminating the soil and attracting elephant seals. During that time, he
decided that there was a danger of a lot of history being lost. Because
unfortunately, in the time since the whaling stations had been abandoned, a lot
of looting and vandalism had taken place, free for all. So there was a danger
that a great many artefacts would be lost, and he thought it would be great to
gather them all up. Nigel started to store all the artefacts in the derelict
station manager's villa in Gritvicken. And he then had a brainwave. There was
enough to create a museum. And in 1992, the South Georgia Whaling Museum was
opened to visitors. And surprisingly, given its location, more than 2,000
kilometres from Argentina, Nigel wasn't worried about business. Well, at that
time, there were a few pioneering expedition cruise vessels going to South
Georgia, so it became a particular attraction for them. Three years later, in
1995, Jan was asked to be a trustee. Jan's family had moved to South Georgia
when her dad got offered a job there as the island's policeman. Because the
whaling stations were meant to be dry, that is no alcohol, because it was such a
dangerous industry, he used to have to search visiting ships and make sure they
didn't have any contraband. And if he found it, he had to break the bottles on
the side of the ship and throw them overboard. He said he felt like the most
unpopular man on the island when he was doing that. Occasionally, people used to
have illicit stills and brew their own alcohol. And sometimes, someone would
become dangerously out of control on probably near-poisonous alcohol, and he
would have to go and restrain them and maybe lock them up for a night. So was
there somewhere to lock them up? Yes, there was a little jail next door to us,
and when there was a prisoner, my mother used to cook and take a meal around to
them. In the 1950s, Jan and her two siblings were the only children on the
island. It was fun. We had no formal school. Our mother used to just let us run
free most of the time, which we greatly appreciated, enjoyed, and quickly
learned to set our own boundaries. We'd go so far up a mountain, and if rocks
started falling, we'd come back down again. My mother, who was a very stoical
character, managed to keep us fed and clothed in spite of there not being a shop
within 800 miles. And why have anyone ever needed medical attention? There were
doctors on the island. Fortunately, we rarely needed their services, although my
younger brother did break a leg when he built himself a ski jump. But luckily
there was a good doctor in post at the time. Given South Georgia's proximity to
the Antarctic, it has a polar climate, with highs of minus two degrees Celsius
in summer and lows of minus 15 in winter, complete with winds strong enough to
tip over helicopters. We used to see icebergs, quite a lot of glaciers. In
winter, we would get a lot of snow. So to get around, you either had skis,
otherwise you needed snowshoes, because drifts around the house would sometimes
be eight feet deep. So quite a cool climate, but on sunny days, when it was calm
and beautiful, we used to be out in our shorts and sandals and used to be very
amused when the Falkland Islands Dependency Survey arrived, trying out all their
Antarctic kit and saw these children playing in t-shirts and shorts. They would
slink back to their cabins and get rid of the parkas and things. Residents on
the island mainly ate tinned and dried food, but they could get certain fresh
fruits and vegetables, like cabbages, potatoes and apples, from the whaling
stations, where they'd have cold stores. And of course, there was plenty of
whale meat. It wasn't the meat of choice, but what would happen, a very large
cube would be hung on a meat hook outdoors and a lot of the oil would go to the
outside, forming a sort of black coating, which would then be cut off. And then
it used to be sort of casseroled and it was rather coarse grained. Sounds
delicious. Although the museum started out with a focus on whaling, it now
features exhibitions on all aspects of island life, including living conditions,
natural history and the Irish explorer Sir Ernest Shackleton, whose grave is on
the island. There are even photos of Jan's family. It's rather nice because it
shows what hardy little children we were. We're actually standing in Gull Lake
with our feet in icy water and wearing summer dresses and seeming quite
unbothered by it. So yes, it's amusing to see. Today, there are no permanent
residents on South Georgia, just 20 or so workers, from scientists to
maintenance staff. The founder of the museum, Nigel Bonner, died in 1994. It's
now run by the South Georgia Heritage Trust, which is based in Scotland, and
it's free to visit. If you fancy going, you should know the island is only
accessible by sea and it takes at least five days from South America. There's no
visitor accommodation ashore either, so best to go by cruise ship or yacht. And
be careful, because there's no medical facilities or emergency services. But
Jan, who now lives in the Falklands, still thinks it's worth a visit. And so
does Sir David Attenborough, who narrates a visitor's guide to South Georgia on
the government's website. I first came here to film for the BBC in 1981, and
I've returned again and again. Landing on South Georgia is always exciting, as I
know well. Doing so for the first time can be almost surreal. It's impossible
not to appreciate the beauty and wonder. So do take the time to just enjoy the
view. So do take the time to just watch, and you will see unforgettable things.
Jan Cheek was speaking to me, Rachel Naylor, for that episode of Witness
History. This is the BBC World Service, and on this week's assignment...
Powerful criminal gangs have killed and kidnapped thousands of people across
northern Nigeria. The country's new leaders-in-waiting have promised to restore
security. Will they succeed? Join me, Alex Last, for Nigeria's battle against
the bandits. Assignment at bbcworldservice.com slash assignment. In 30 minutes,
heart and soul. Two rabbis are at odds over how Jewish Israel should be. Both
live in Jerusalem, but theologically and politically, they're miles apart. Join
me, Jolande Nell, as I try and persuade them to meet and discuss their
differences. The newsroom is...