TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-00H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at 11 o'clock. The Prime Minister Rishi Sunak has said that his deal
on post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland is a breakthrough. The
UK and the European Union announced changes to the Northern Ireland Protocol
which Mr Sunak said would allow for smooth flowing trade within the United
Kingdom. The Labour MP Hilary Benn, who's the former chair of Parliament's
Brexit Select Committee, said that the EU had made some concessions in the
negotiations. The EU has moved a long way. I've been talking to European
colleagues over the last two years and urging on them the need to move because
when the protocol came in the EU I think looked at the border in the Irish Sea
and said right this is like any other border we have with a third country so
there'll be the full application of the rules and that was never going to work
with the special case and it is a special case of Northern Ireland. The Farming
Minister Mark Spencer has met representatives from the UK supermarkets to hear
their plans to deal with shortages of fruit and vegetables. Mr Spencer said he
asked the retailers to look at how they buy fresh produce to prepare for
unexpected supply issues. Police investigating the shooting of a detective in
County Tyrone last week say Â£20,000 is being offered for information that helps
to bring the attackers to justice. Six people are being questioned about the
attack on Jordan Caldwell. The budget airline Wizz Air is to suspend all flights
to the capital of Moldova, Chisinau, because of safety concerns. Russian
missiles aimed at Ukraine have entered Moldovan airspace this month. The Met
Office has said that areas of the UK could see the Northern Lights again
tonight. Last night people as far south as Kent and Cornwall saw the night sky
lit up. The spectacle happens when charged particles from solar storms travel
towards Earth and react with atmospheric gases. Lionel Messi has been named
FIFA's best men's footballer for 2022 on the back of his maiden World Cup title
with Argentina in December in Qatar. He scored two goals in the final which
Argentina won on penalties against France. BBC News. On BBC iPlayer. Step right
in. Perfect timing. The East End is ever-changing. What is this? Scooter! The
order has entered the 1960s. Barely eight years late. But the midwives of
Nonata's house are forever constant. You've a home here now and purpose and
people who love you. Call the midwife. We will be with you every step of the
way. Watch on BBC iPlayer. On BBC Radio 4 here's Michael Rosen with word of
mouth and a special guest. Hello. I once found myself in an oral examination. I
was being asked a question about 17th century poetry and the rather intimidating
chief of examiners leaned towards me with a very loud booming voice said, do you
know what a paradox is Mr Rosen? I muttered something about how it would be a
paradox if I did well in this oral exam after such a grilling. No, said the
chief of examiners. That would be an irony, Mr Rosen, not paradox. Many years
later, I was in a television studio as a competitor in a game show. The word
paradox floated towards me because the point of the game show is to know what
other people don't know. The more you know about what other people don't know,
the further you go in the game. Ah, a paradox, surely, I thought. Then I found
out quite quickly that I didn't know what other people don't know and went home.
Was that a paradox, an irony or a failure? Well, it wasn't totally humiliating
because the hosts of the show were very kind to me and one of them is with me
today. I won't say that the tables are turned because I'm not a game show host
and I'm not trying to find out how good my guest is at spotting pointless
things. Are you with me? Yes, my guest is Richard Osman. Welcome to the
programme, Richard. Hello, Michael. It's an absolute pleasure. I would say it
wasn't a paradox, it was an irony, it was just great TV. Oh, that's very kind of
you, as always. Now, I've done a bit of homework and I see that list coming up.
Tom Blakeson, Simon Craig, David Flynn, Nick Mather, Sean Parry and Richard
Osman, producers at Endermol, devised the game Pointless in 2009. Now, word of
mouth, as you know, it's a programme about language. Can you give us some idea
how this team of six people, is it? Six people talked when you devised
Pointless? Well, here's an interesting thing and actually it speaks to language
immediately. There's six names on that list. I wouldn't put myself on that list.
It's a big team of people and we would just play games the whole time. We would
pitch television shows, that's our job. You pitch quiz shows, that's our job.
And you've got big teams of people sitting around tables throwing ideas around
and most of them go nowhere. Occasionally, like Pointless, they go somewhere and
then that's why six people claim credit for it. All of those people, by the way,
deserve credit for it. The fascinating thing about Pointless is it was an old
mechanic, this thing of asking a question to 100 people. We had it on a show
called Beat the Nation previously and that show had only gone for a couple of
series and we loved that mechanic still. And so we were sort of mucking about
with it. Why do you call it a mechanic? A mechanic, it's sort of like a
MacGuffin in a film or a book, which is what's the engine that's driving this
thing? You know, listen, we'll go from eight players to seven to six to five to
four. That's a normal way of a quiz, but you need, what's the thing? What's the
hook? Be the hook in a song would be the mechanic in a quiz show. And this
mechanic, of course, is do you know the things that other people don't know? We
had the show, sort of kind of worked. It was quite nice. We were thinking of
pitching it and we didn't have that expression of pointless answer. And someone
said that and someone else said, we should call this show pointless. And the
second that happened, every time we had to book a meeting room, we'd say, oh,
let's have a pointless meeting. We're going to go for a pointless picture. And
we thought this is really good. So that becomes a peg. It becomes a symbol for
the whole thing. Exactly that. You know, when you're playing through a quiz show
like that for the BBC, there's a lot going on. You know, I mean, some people
don't get pointless even now. And for the first time you ever see it. I didn't
when I was on it. Listen, I didn't like to say there is a lot going on. And to
have that single lightning rod, I was called pointless. That's funny, you know.
And and that I think was incredibly helpful in selling the show. It's incredibly
helpful when people start watching the show because they go pointless,
pointless, is it? So people can make their own jokes about it. And it's a kind
of anti hero title, isn't it? Exactly. You know, it does down the show while at
the same time building it up. Very clever. And yeah, as soon as as soon as you
do a celebrity version, you know, it's pointless celebrities and it pointless is
a word that keeps on giving in TV terms. But I suspect maybe we wouldn't have
sold that show if we hadn't called it pointless. Yes. Now, your role in the show
is to be a kind of Mr. Clever, Mr. No. That's not a criticism. And you sit in
the corner and you've got all the answers. Yeah. And you give the ratings for
each of the possible correct. Well, they sorry, the the panel gives the the
ratings and you pointed out. But then you've got all sorts of other answers. And
I'll tell you what the pointless answers were, you know, just just because
people playing along at home, which is which to me is the point of quizzes is
the people playing along at home. So, yeah, I give the extra information because
so I know someone sitting at home, you know, has said Somalia and they're
delighted when I read it out. And then do you think you've fulfilled really sort
of people's idea of what a clever, know all person, anorak nerd, whatever you
want to call it, the person who has all the facts in front of them. Do you think
you fulfill a role like that? Yes. I think culturally we like to think that
people who have lots of facts at their fingertips are clever. I think that's
that's what we see as intelligence sometimes. And, you know, and and I don't
think it is particularly. So I think that that's my role. But, you know, I think
the show works because actually, Alexander Armstrong and I chat and joke and
muck about and talk to the contestants and make puns and, you know, use
language, you know, so the answers are all there. But what people are really
buying into is a club, I think. I think they they they buy into a world that
doesn't really exist on any other television program. But there's also something
in your way of delivery. You've got quite a deadpan style, if I might say. And
it's quite hard sometimes to distinguish between when you're telling a joke and
when you're not, which is part of the fun because we have to decode you. Yeah.
So you'll do a little throwaway line and we don't know whether you're telling us
something absolutely crucially important about Somalia or whether there's some
other hidden meaning there. So did you develop that as a persona or is that you?
No, that's me. I mean, I was an accidental television presenter. I was a
producer for many, many years of comedy shows and quiz shows. And that's where I
was. How long were you behind the camera? Twenty years before before my first
ever on screen performance. So yeah, my first ever job was in TV. And it wasn't
till I was 40 that I went on camera. And the one thing I didn't want to go on
camera and the one thing I learned very quickly and I knew anyway from working
with lots of presenters is you just have to be yourself. There is nothing else
you can do. You know, you can't you can't fake it. And if you're yourself and
people want to it, great. And if yourself and people don't want to it, go back
behind the desk, you know, go back and sit in the gallery and produce the show.
But it's so different. I mean, no nerves, no worries. This person sitting here
shuffling bits of paper coming up with jokey ideas and then suddenly, bam, I
mean, it's not exactly live, but it's as live. So you've got to keep delivering
or the program will die. But this is what you know, people seem to think that
being a presenter is some special skill and it's not. I was a producer for years
and a producer. What they're doing is driving the show and they're making you
know, they're making sure that the contestants are happy. They're making sure
that there's enough humor. They're making sure there's enough gravitas. And I
just was able to cut out the middleman by sitting at that desk. Normally I'd be
in a presenter's ear saying, why not do this? Have you got an earpiece when
you're on? I do, but I never use it. I use it just for company. You know, so I
sort of am able to produce the show on the floor. Obviously we've got brilliant
producers in the gallery, but you know, I can instantly see if something's gone
wrong. I can instantly see if something is flagging. I can instantly work out
that there hasn't been a joke for a little bit. I can instantly work out that
someone looks a bit upset they got a wrong answer and do something about that on
the floor and on the fly. And that's what I love doing. It is. It's literally
the way I experience it is as cutting out the middleman. Suddenly, you know, I'm
the voice in my own ear. Ah, so it's exactly what I was going to say. There's
like a monitor inside your head that you collected over all those years of being
a producer and you've you've got that in your head. So that's that's quite a
skill because quite often people have come through straight from drama school or
something like that and they haven't got that producer correcting voice to
what's coming out of your mouth. Well, yeah, I mean, television is very
collegiate always has been. It's a team and my the only thing I've ever been
good at is knowing what to say at any given time, you know, knowing sort of
working out the direction of travel of a show and working out the tiny
adjustment in course we might need to take to to put us back where we want to
be. And I think in all in all my careers, just that thing of knowing the right
thing to say at any given time, knowing the thing that will entertain or make
people happier or, you know, make make make a give a show a little bit more
depth. I sort of know the thing to say. And that's the same as writing. It's the
same as presenting. It's the same as producing. It's the same as selling, which
was a very large part of my former career as a producer. So can we have a little
look at how you became you? Yes. I mean, what were your earliest memories, let's
say, of talking and reading and being immersed in language? Yeah, I think it's
it's such an I've always, always, always loved language of loved words. I was
really thinking back because it's very hard to get inside your head when you
were six. But I'll give you a for example, which is I really remember there used
to be a program used to show on Saturday mornings on the BBC called Champion the
Wonder Horse. Champion the Wonder Horse. Exactly that. And six years old, maybe
seven years old. Somebody mentioned the town. I've never heard of it before.
Western Super Mayor. And I went, Western Super Mayor. That's Champion the Wonder
Horse. Oh, nice. Because it's a super it's a wonder horse. It's a super mayor.
And it's in a it's in a Western. Very good. How old were you? Six. Get away. And
so I've always connections like that. I've always made you know, I used to love
writing poems and things at school. I was never I've never sort of I can't do
grammar. Okay, I don't have no You're doing it now by talking. Of course I am.
But I have no I have no intellectual understanding of how language is put
together. Like if you say to me verb, I have to go, Oh, that's a that's a doing
word. I can verb adjective noun. Sometimes. That's as far as I get. They didn't
teach I don't think in comprehensives in the 80s. Perhaps they did. And I wasn't
paying attention. But I don't think they did. And I've never been able to. Like
I can't speak other languages and things like that. I can't work out how
language is put together. You know, when people start talking about adverbs and
things, I'm just out. I'm out my I've tried a million times, that connection,
whatever connection is made in the brain that allows people to love grammar. And
I wish I did, because I see the joy people take in taking sentences apart and
putting them back together again. And all I have is I hear I hear something and
I say something back that sounds good to me. You're working to the imitate
invent principle. What you're doing is hearing or reading or seeing and then
you're imitating it, but you're twisting it and inventing your own version of
it. I mean, it's a great, great principle for learning. I don't know anything
from dance to cookery. You know, I think so. I do think so. But, you know, it's
the temptation is to go actually on Freer because I don't know the rules
actually gives me freedom. My experience has been the more rules, you know, the
freer you are, you know, because you can still break rules, but actually knowing
them gives you other ways to break them. And so I do feel I'm slightly at sea
where it comes to the business of language. And I wish that I wasn't. But I try
and make the most of what I've got. You do. And do you remember reading? I mean,
it was was that a big thing for you reading books? Yeah, I wasn't a huge reader.
I have to say, I used to read Famous Five and things like that. I'm very, very
visually impaired. So it's very difficult for me to pick up a book or something.
Certainly when I was a kid and read it, so I never really got into it. But yeah,
I would love adventure stories and things like that. It was only in my early
20s, really, where I started properly picking up books. And I thought, where
have these been? Where have these worlds been? They've been, you know, denied to
me. So yeah, I'd read Famous Five when I was very young, and maybe read about
two books during my teenage years. I remember there's a brilliant Alan Bleasdale
book called Scully, which I read about 15 times. I grew up loving music and
sport and television. You know, those are the things I love. So I would watch a
lot of TV, I would watch a lot of sport, I would listen to a lot of music. But
books were not something that came until a little bit later. And, you know, I've
sort of now sort of, I'm a voracious reader, because I wasn't, I think. Yes. And
while you were, say, a teenager, say, listening to music, was it the words that
grabbed you? I mean, I know, obviously, you know, the great thing about music is
you can dance to it and sing to it and woo to it. But were you fastening on to
uses of language in any way at all? 100%. I listen to music via the lyrics
first. My brother is a musician. And he listens to music via the suede. So he
listens to me, he's listening to the riffs, he's listening to the instruments. I
couldn't tell you what instruments are being played. I'm listening to the words.
That's the thing I love. And, you know, bands with great lyricists is what I
love. You know, what takes on like, take some, I tell you, who's the most
unfairly overlooked lyricist of his generation for various reasons is Paddy
McAloon. Do you know Paddy McAloon? I don't. So you've shown me up straight
away. So his so well, I tell you, I tell you, the reason he's not as fate as he
should be is he called his band Prefab Sprout. Ah, yes. We did band names on the
show a couple of weeks ago. Yeah. And it's and it's, it's a bad name for a band.
But throughout his entire career, his lyrics, he was once he was once challenged
by, no, he challenged his band. He said, I'm trying to write a song. What's the
least rock and roll word I can start a song with? One of his bandmates said,
Antiques. Right, so Paddy goes away and he writes a song called Farron Young.
And the first bit of Farron Young is Antiques. Every other sentiments and
antique as obsolete as warships in the Baltic. And you think, come on, that's,
you know, that's tasty. And then you've mentioned writing poems at school,
coming into adulthood. What do you think was the first thing you wrote for
yourself? When I was 15, 16, I used to read. The Enemy was my favourite. I used
to read all the musical express, new musical express. Yeah, there's new musical
express and melody maker. And you know, I'd read it and I was 15 and I sent off
a review of a band playing in Brighton. And they got in touch immediately said,
we love it. Would you like to do some more? So I started journalism. Yeah,
teenager, super, super young. And I was doing a there was like a local radio
show called Turn It Up where you could just you could literally turn up and be
on air, you know, like an open access thing. And so I was doing that as well and
writing for the enemy and loving that. And then I started weirdly I started
writing for Golf Monthly because I love sport as well. And I had an idea for a
column. And so again, I just wrote off back in the day we could just I just
found the head of his name. Yeah, I know. After the second, come on, and golf.
That's brilliant. I know. Golf golf was always more me. But but rock music was
cooler. And so yeah, I would I would always I was a very I was a self starter in
that regard. So I love to write things. I love to make people laugh. I'd like
you know, and but I've always I'm not one of those people who will sit and write
for fun and just go, Oh, do you know what, I just need to get my thoughts down
on paper. I'm interested if someone's going to print it, and if someone's going
to read it, and if someone's going to laugh, and if someone's going to laugh,
yeah, why is that? Why do you think you're somebody who wants to make people
laugh? Because I think once you do make anyone laugh, that you don't ever want
to do anything else. You know, it's it's it's, as you will know, it's the most
joyful thing you can imagine, because it's like, it's like magic. It's like
witchcraft, suddenly that something didn't exist. And now it exists, a joy
exists that didn't used to exist just because you put eight different words
together. And I think if, if you have the capacity to do it, the capability to
do it. It's extraordinary. They say that children laugh 30 times a day, and
adults laugh about four times a day. And I'm delighted to say, I think I've kept
my at least 30 times a day up, even to the age of 52. Because I surround myself
with funny people. My wife is very funny. My kids are very funny. And it's, it
is just incredibly important to me to always have jokes and to always find the
find find jokes in unusual places to be very unfunny about being funny. Some
people say it's one of the ways we keep tragedy at bay or even death at bay that
we push it out the door every time we laugh. Death retreats back out of the
door. For sure. And but you know, people say that like it's a bad thing
sometimes. And the truth is, occasionally you need a broom to sort of keep death
out of the room. Don't you? You know, it's, it's all very well saying you got to
stare these things in the face. And you know what, occasionally we do have to we
do. But most of the time, I think we're allowed to kind of go Do you know what,
just give me five minutes death. I've just got his. Here's a joke. Now talking
of death. You've written one or two books. Yeah. And the first one was the
Thursday Murder Club came out in 2020. Absolutely fantastic success you've had
with these books. We've got three of them. So what made you turn to writing
crime novels? Again, you know, it's I've always made television that I watch.
And I'm just a huge lover of crime novels and always have been I love who you
love. Yeah. Oh, gosh. Well, I mean, you know, Agatha Christie from way back when
I'm reading lots of Josephine Tay at the moment, who's who's who's wonderful.
But you know, Ian Rankin, Mark Billingham, a lot of Patricia Highsmith. Whenever
I mentioned Patricia Highsmith name, because he's one of my absolutely favourite
authors, I always think I'm going to say Patricia Routledge. There's something
about those two. There's something about those names. Highsmith Routledge. Yeah.
Whenever I say, Hello, my name is Highsmith Routledge. Nice. But yeah, whenever
I say a name, I think if I got that right, if I got that right. So you know,
that's, that's what I love. And I've always wanted to write a novel because you
know, I do love to write. And again, people read novels. So that's of interest
to me that it's a form that people are actually going to read. You're thinking
of the audience again. Yeah, exactly. I'm always I think I'm always thinking of
the audience. And a few years ago, I sort of had the time. And then I had the
idea, which this Thursday Murder Club set in a retirement community. And you did
it in secret. I read it. How did you do that? It's very hard for adults to be
secret. Yes, isn't it just well, because no one wants to know you're writing a
novel, do they? Your friends are not great. Michael's writing a novel, we're
gonna have to read the first chapter. He's gonna, he's gonna foist it on us. But
also, there's a lovely thing. I forget the name of it. But Abba speak about it a
lot. This this Swedish, this Swedish idea of success, that you just don't talk
about it, just get on and do the work. You know, just do that. And then success
will come. Don't tell people you're doing something. Don't tell people how well
something's done. Just just get on and do it. And you know, I've always been
like that. Even now. It's lovely having these three books, but I'm in the middle
of the fourth one. You know, I don't want it. I was writing this morning did
1000 words head down. Just do it. Get it done. Do the work, do the work. Sorry
to interrupt. No, it's lovely. Come on the program. It's so lovely. Because
again, when you're writing, you need different stimulus, you need you need to
speak to different people. And it's been such a joy. Thinking, thinking about
language. But yeah, so I just thought I this is something I would like to test
myself. It's like a marathon for people who love language, isn't it? Can I do
it? Can I get it done? I mean, listen, of course, there are you put yourself
away in a corner. And did your wife know? Did the children know? Yes. Yeah.
Yeah. But I didn't I didn't show anything to anyone. Because that's you know, I
just wanted and because I'm on TV. I didn't want you know, the temptation to go
to a publisher say I'm writing a book and you know, they're going to say oh,
yeah, publish sex is what there's no risk. They'll set a few. And I didn't want
to do that. I wanted to present them with a fait accompli. And I took it to
someone who I trust a great deal, an agent. And I just said, Look, is this a
book? Yeah. I mean, is this a thing? And she just said, if this was a anonymous
submission, I would you'd be in my office now with me saying, I want to publish
this. So now I'm the agent. Yeah, I see it. And you come to me and I say to you,
what's the setting for it, Richard? And you say, well, it's a kind of it's a
retirement village. And then I say, I because I'm not very good agent. I then
hand it back to you and go, okay, no, no, you what these are what old people
moving around village, thinking they can solve crimes, which we've done it
Midsomer murders. Is that what it is? No, thanks very much, Richard. So how did
you arrive at this very incongruous setting? Because we're so used to crime
being kind of hard bitten a bit? Well, you know, it's, it's, it's really
interesting, because because I was my mum lives in a retirement community. Yeah,
it really does. And that's where and, you know, two things really, and as
always, I always think of creativity as bubbles in your head, and two of them,
you know, pop together, and suddenly you've got an idea that hasn't been had
before. So I would, I would sit there, and it's very beautiful, very bucolic.
And I would and I remember saying to her once, this would be an amazing place
for murder, wouldn't it? I think it's very Agatha Christie esque down there. So
that was in my head. And then chatting to the people who live there, all of him
are in their 70s and above. But as is the way of people had done extraordinary
things in their lives, had done really interesting things, people who've done
very unusual jobs, had great stories. And it's kind of invisible, isn't it?
Invisible because people are walking about quietly, having breakfast and having
a little afternoon drink or something hidden away while we're full of ourselves.
And what we've got to do that day sort of walking, why are you walking so
slowly? And it's like you just walked past a spy who once, you know, saved
Britain. And so talking to them, I just I thought, well, gosh, if there was a
murder here, then I bet you'd solve it. And it's just one of those things that
instantly I went, yeah, that's it. I could see I saw the whole thing, I saw the
whole thing. And there was a notice board that had, you know, Tuesday, Natter,
Nitter, Nitter, Natter, Tuesday, Nitter, Natter, and I thought Thursday Murder
Club, which will talk about titles in a minute, because I think they're very
interesting. But I just had it, I knew it. And I knew, listen, it was two years
of incredibly hard work. But with my TV producers head on and my audience head
on, I thought, if you get this right, people are going to love these people are
going to love these characters. And it's a great setting for a crime novel. And
that was like a like a video flash in your in your mind. Yeah, 100%. It's just,
you know, it's Yeah, the two things come together. And you know, I'm so ideas
have been my whole career. And so I'm used to an idea that sounds brilliant. And
then the next morning sounds awful. I'm used to an idea that sounds brilliant.
And a week later is awful. It's pointless. No, that was a good one. That was a
good one. But very occasionally, an idea comes along, you just think it's, you
can't you just I can put my weight on it, I can jump up and down on this idea.
And it's not going to give I knew that straight away with that idea. I thought,
listen, this is worth spending two years of your time on because there is no
give in this you're standing on solid ground. And so yeah, just I started work
straight away. Now in the in the books, as well as having a conventional
impersonal narration, whose kind of you as it were, that impersonal narrator,
you've got the personalised narrator with Joyce. Yeah. So how did you take on
the voice of a woman narrator? Because I've noticed you're you're not a woman. I
know I'm not a 78 year old woman. Yeah, it's it's it's what two interesting
things. Firstly, I couldn't quite work out how to write a book at all when I sat
down because and lots of people who've started writing will have this. What am I
going to do? Someone's walking down the street? What and we're gonna say what
color the sky is or what color coat they're wearing? I mean, what business is
that of mine to say what the sky looks like? And so I was really genuinely
struggling with that. I was saying, Well, how do you I mean, the bottom I'm
going to say that there's some trees I don't know. And the moment I thought,
hold on, I have a first person narrator, who's not very good at describing what
the sky is like. And she can write the story for me. And so I immediately went
into the the voice of Joyce. And she was able to do that she was able to think
out loud, she was able to she's quite stream of consciousness, Joyce. And that
for me, really, really unlocked how to write and then I worked out how to do all
the other stuff. But weirdly, weirdly, I'd started writing something years ago.
And it was about a guy, an older guy. And he was taking a bottle of wine to a
party. So he says he's taking this bottle of wine brackets 599 to give you an
idea, right was the thing that I'd written. And that phrase had stuck in my
head, because it's sort of the sort of thing my mom would say, certainly the
sort of thing I've heard people say. And, and it's an aside, isn't it? It's an
aside insight into how that person thinks the fact they can price it. So even in
that, that sentence, I hear a character. Exactly that. And also the the
complicity of knowing that you'll know what she means, you know, to give you an
idea. And I thought, well, who's that character? And that character was Joyce. I
mean, 100%. You know, that complicity thing you talk about, that's what you
embed in your prose style that that joy speaks with that. Here's a little bit I
noticed. Ron had all but invited himself, which won't surprise you. I mean, you
what do you mean? Yeah, you know, me the reader, but I don't question you.
Because as I'm reading it, I go, Oh, right. Well, it's surprised me. I mean,
it's a it's a wonderful thing to talk directly to the reader. What is it? It's
lovely. And also, but also it gives you information about two different
characters in one very short sentence. You know, it gives you information about
Ron, and it gives you information about Joyce. And she's got a lot of deadpan
irony. And I don't know whether it's her irony or whether it's yours. Here's
another one for you that you'll know. I'm very much enjoyed. I once went to
Whitstable just for the day, but I couldn't really see what the fuss was all
about. Once you've done the oysters, there's no real shopping to speak of. Now I
laughed out loud at that one. Now. I mean, it's is it your irony? Is it Joyce's
irony? Well, listen, I have to accept a course somewhere deep down. It's mine.
But having four characters, all of whom are very different and occupy different
bits of my brain is incredibly useful, because I do constantly feel like I'm
taken by surprise. And I try and make it that none of the lines of dialogue
could be said by any of the other characters. That's what I that's sort of
that's an unconscious rule. It's very important, though, isn't it? Yeah, because
distinction in prose as well in novels in particular is very important. And I
mean, people have talked about novels being multi vocal. And that's actually the
power of them. They have many different voices. And then we feel we're part of a
world. And then if you're putting all this detail in, you make us feel we're
there. I think so. But also the specificity of character through dialogue, you
know, that you and I would say the same thing in a slightly different way would
actually tell other people an awful lot about us, which is fascinating. So we're
not just giving the information that we're giving in the sentence. We're also
telling you something about who we are as human beings by the way we choose our
words. And you know, that to me gives such depth to character. Richard Osman,
thanks very much for coming on the programme. Such a pleasure. Thank you,
Michael. And if you want to hear a longer version of this conversation, download
the word of mouth podcast on BBC sounds. Word of Mouth was presented by Michael
Rosen and produced in Bristol by Beth O'Dee. That was the last episode of this
series. But of course, you can listen back to previous editions covering all
manner of topics from collective nouns to the exclamation mark, a vast back
catalogue, all available on BBC sounds. Now someone else who has a way with
words. The master of satire, David Sedaris is back with his unique blend of wit
and wisdom. I know that people are now taking pictures of themselves at funerals
because when I looked up selfies at funerals was the third option. The humorous
laughs at life and himself. I've been studying Japanese and I'll say something
to Hugh. I'll say, oh, did you know that this is how you say? And he says, we're
only going for four days. A new series of meet David Sedaris, your Thursday
evening comedy at 630 on Radio 4 and BBC sounds. Now on Radio 4 to Westminster,
where a protocol is replaced by a framework. Today in Parliament. Order. Order.
Good evening. This is Sean Curran at Westminster, where Rishi Sunak says he's
agreed a new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland. After weeks of negotiations
today, we have made a decisive breakthrough. The Labour leader, Sakir Starmer,
backs the agreement and says his party won't snipe or play political games. And
when the prime minister puts this deal forward for a vote, Labour will support
it and vote for it. Also on the programme, an MP is heckled for criticising some
schools for encouraging children to transition. Leading them down a potentially
irreversible path towards sterility and exploitation. This is the safeguarding
scandal of our generation. And tributes following the death of the first and so
far the only female speaker. Betty certainly brought the grass ceiling with
panache. But first, just before half past six this evening, Rishi Sunak arrived
in the Commons to make a statement about the new Brexit trade deal for Northern
Ireland. Conservatives cheered and waved their order papers as the prime
minister took his place. After weeks of negotiations today, we have made a
decisive breakthrough. The Windsor Framework delivers free-flowing trade within
the whole United Kingdom. It protects Northern Ireland's place in our union and
it safeguards sovereignty for the people of Northern Ireland. Just a few hours
earlier, the prime minister appeared with the European Commission president,
Ursula von der Leyen, at a news conference in Windsor. I pay tribute to our
European friends for recognising the need for change, particularly President von
der Leyen. My predecessors for laying the groundwork for today's agreement. That
laughter came from opposition MPs. Boris Johnson, who agreed the Northern
Ireland Protocol as part of his Brexit deal with the European Union, wasn't in
the Commons. Under the Windsor Framework, goods being sent from Britain to
Northern Ireland will go through a so-called green lane, with fewer cheques and
less paperwork. Goods for the EU will go through a red lane. The commitment to
establish the green lane is achieved by a legally binding amendment to the text
of the treaty itself. This is fundamental, far-reaching change and it
permanently removes the border in the Irish Sea. The prime minister said three
quarters of the food in Northern Ireland's supermarkets came from the rest of
the UK. He told MPs that if the Northern Ireland Protocol was implemented in
full, supermarkets would need hundreds of certificates for each individual item
and some products, like sausages, could be banned altogether. Under the
protocol, retail food products made to UK standards could not be sold in
Northern Ireland. Today's agreement completely changes that. This means the ban
on British products like sausages entering Northern Ireland has now been
scrapped. If it's available on supermarket shelves in Great Britain, then it
will be available in supermarket shelves in Northern Ireland. Mr Sunak said the
new agreement would reduce the proportion of EU rules applied to Northern
Ireland and give the Northern Ireland Assembly the right to object to new rules
as part of a procedure called the Stormont Break. He urged MPs to support the
deal. Let us seize the opportunity of this moment. The certainty of an agreement
that fixes the problems we face, commands broad support and consensus, and
offers us at last the freedom to move forward together. That is what the people
of Northern Ireland deserve. That is what the Windsor framework delivers. As a
Conservative, a Brexiteer and a Unionist, I believe passionately, with my head
and my heart, that this is the right way forward. Right for Northern Ireland,
right for our United Kingdom, and I commend it to this House. Rishi Sunak said
MPs would get the chance to vote on the new deal, but he didn't say when. The
Labour leader, Sakir Starmer, said the agreement wasn't perfect, but his party
would vote for the Windsor framework. I have been clear for some time that if
the Prime Minister were to get an agreement with the EU, and if that agreement
is in the interests of this country and Northern Ireland, then Labour would
support it. And we will stick to our word. We will not snipe, we will not seek
to play political games, and when the Prime Minister puts this deal forward for
a vote, Labour will support it and vote for it. The Conservative former Prime
Minister, Theresa May, congratulated Rishi Sunak and said the new deal would
make a huge difference. The best move now is for everybody across this House to
support this settlement, because that is what is in the best interests of all
the people of Northern Ireland. The leader of the SNP at Westminster, Stephen
Flynn, called Brexit an unmitigated disaster, but said, broadly speaking, he was
fully supportive of the new agreement. It means that businesses in Northern
Ireland have access to the single market, whereas businesses in Scotland do not.
I do not begrudge that to the people and businesses of Northern Ireland, but I
do regret that Scotland does not have those same opportunities. Labour's
decision to back the deal removes the prospect of a Commons defeat for the Prime
Minister, but the Government will be keen to gauge the reaction of Eurosceptic
Conservative MPs, and to see if the DUP will end its boycott of power-sharing in
Northern Ireland. The DUP leader, Sir Geoffrey Donaldson, acknowledged that
there had been significant progress, but he said there were still areas of
concern. My party will want to study the detail of what has been published
today, as well as examining the legal text, the political declaration, and the
Government's command paper. Where necessary, we stand ready to engage with the
Government in order to seek further clarification, reworking or change as
required. The Conservative former Brexit Secretary, David Davis, was more
enthusiastic, congratulating the Prime Minister on what he called a spectacular
negotiating success. We're above all, has introduced the extraordinary mechanism
of the Stormont break. I'm unaware of any mechanism in any international
agreement like the Stormont break. It seems to me a brilliant piece of
negotiating insight and imagination. Rishi Sunak thanked Mr Davis for his warm
words. As a Brexiteer of long-standing credentials and as someone who has done
the job, he knows how difficult these things are and to have his support means a
lot to me and the Government and I thank him for it. The leader of the SDLP,
Colm Eastwood, said there'd been a lot of talk about the concerns of the DUP and
the unionist community. It is important to remember that the majority of people
in Northern Ireland oppose Brexit and do want to see the benefits of dual market
access properly utilised. Will the Prime Minister agree with me that it's
important now that his Government support that and promote that to international
investors? Stephen Farrier of the Alliance Party feared the new mechanisms could
lead to more uncertainty about the regulations which operated in Northern
Ireland. For us, the key test is the preservation of Northern Ireland's dual
market access. In that regard, my party has massive concerns around this
potential Stormont break. So does the Prime Minister understand that there are
real dangers that this process could add more instability into the Assembly?
Rishi Sunak said he believed the Windsor Framework got the balance right. Now
MPs have called on the Government to bring forward new guidelines on how schools
in England should deal with gender issues and transphobic bullying. But the
Education Secretary, Gillian Keegan, gave a warning that there was a need for
detailed work and extensive consultation. Here's Mark Darcy. The Education
Secretary has said the Government's working hard to bring in new guidelines to
protect trans children at school. Gillian Keegan told MPs she and the Equalities
Minister, Kemi Badenoch, were drawing up new rules on how schools in England
should approach gender issues and transphobic bullying. The tragic death of
Brianna Jai will be at the forefront of all of our minds. An investigation is
ongoing and we should not assume the facts of the case. However, I did want to
take this opportunity to express my deepest sympathy to her family and friends.
Schools should be safe, supportive and calm places where children are taught to
respect each other and staff. The Government is clear that bullying is
absolutely unacceptable. The death of 16-year-old Brianna in Warrington is still
being investigated by police. Labour's Kim Johnson said transphobic bullying was
a widespread problem. According to research from Stonewall, students identifying
as transgender are more likely to report having a bad experience at school or
college as a result of bullying. So can the Minister commit to ensuring that
schools and colleges are obligated to record incidents of transphobic bullying
and provide guidance on how to support students to report such incidents?
Gillian Keegan said guidelines were being prepared but it was a sensitive task.
All schools are required to have a behaviour policy which will include anti-
bullying and Ofsted hold them to account on that. But we also recognise that
issues relating to sex and gender can be complex and sensitive for schools to
navigate. I'm currently working with my right honourable friend the Equalities
Minister to develop guidance to support schools in relation to transgender
pupils. It is important that we are able to consider a wide range of views in
order to get the guidance right. But a Labour former minister, Dame Angela
Eagle, said schools urgently needed support. Research shows that LGBT plus young
people are twice as likely to be bullied as their peers in school and for trans
pupils this can be even worse. The Secretary of State's predecessor promised to
issue guidance, draft guidance, on supporting trans pupils last September. It
still hasn't appeared. So could the Secretary of State tell us when this
guidance is going to appear as pupils need it and teachers are crying out for
it? The Education Secretary agreed but she said careful work and extensive
consultation were needed. A Conservative, Miriam Cates, was forthright in her
views. Vulnerable children, especially those who are autistic, have been abused
or are in care, are significantly over-represented among children who report
gender distress. But instead of safeguarding these children, many schools
continue, possibly unlawfully, to encourage or affirm these children's
transition, leading them down a potentially irreversible path towards sterility
and exploitation. This is the safeguarding scandal of our generation and yet the
Department still has not produced this guidance for schools, despite the reports
of Dr Hilary Cass. What are the delays to this safeguarding guidance being
produced? Gillian Keegan repeated that she was working to get the guidelines
right. It's very important that we do protect those who are victims of bullying
and hate-related bullying, such as those also with special educational needs. As
we know, there is a lot of crossover between those that are different for
different ways, for different reasons, but get increased amount of bullying and
we must do everything to stop this. Education Ministers were also tackled about
fears that rising numbers of school buildings were in a dangerous state and even
at risk of collapse. This was Labour's Olivia Blake. Last month, Carla, a parent
in my constituency, suffered a serious head injury after a large piece of
cladding flew off the school building, striking her on the head. Thankfully,
Carla's injuries aren't life-threatening, but we need to ensure no other parent,
staff member or child is put at risk in this way. According to leaked government
reports, school buildings in England are in such bad disrepair, they are a risk
to life. The Schools Minister, Nick Gibbs, said that problems had been
identified by surveys commissioned by the government and extra money was being
allocated. The ratings that she refers to reflect increased numbers of
structural issues identified through our continuing monitoring and surveying the
school's estate and the age of that estate and we can and do improve the life
expectancy of school buildings by careful maintenance and upgrades over time and
that's why we have a 10-year rebuilding programme. And he said wherever the
Education Department became aware of dangerous school buildings, immediate
action was taken. Mark Darcy, you're listening to Today in Parliament with me,
Sean Curran. Still to come, could the Scottish Government's bottle deposit plan
turn into a get-rich-quick scheme? If I were to fill a lorry with all the empty
bottles scattered around the lanes of Leicestershire, I could go up to Scotland
and make a great deal of money. But first, the former head of the British Army,
General Lord Dannet, has called for the Ukrainian forces to be given the
offensive capability to break the backbone of the Russian army. He spoke out
during a session with the Prime Minister's National Security Advisor, Sir Tim
Barrow. Christina Cooper reports. The UK announced last month that it would be
providing further military aid to Ukraine, including 14 battle tanks and around
30 large self-propelled guns. But there's pressure from senior MPs for the
government to provide more support. The chair of the Defence Committee, the
Conservative, Tobias Elwood, was worried that the war in Ukraine could become a
frozen conflict in which President Putin would claim some sort of victory. The
bully moves a couple of steps forward, pushes one step back, able to control a
bit of Ukraine. Everything calms down and he does it again in a couple of years'
time. To avoid that, Ukraine needs to gain terrain. It's through the Russian
defences. That's why it asked for main battle tanks. He said what Ukraine needed
to support the battle tanks was air power. To show the West that terrain is
being gained, progress continues and the West will continue collectively backing
Ukraine. Anything less than that, it stalls, more calls for a deal to be done,
Putin then continues to build a claim of victory. Is there any of that you
disagree with? A question for Sir Tim Barrow, who became National Security
Advisor to the Prime Minister last year. He's also served as the UK's ambassador
to Russia and Ukraine. Tim Barrow, who is giving evidence via video link, said
Ukraine needed to succeed on the battlefield as a prelude to a negotiated end to
the conflict. We would obviously like to see the conflict end as soon as
possible. Obviously, Moscow could choose to do that, but I don't see signs at
present. So what that means is that we have taken the view that we need to
accelerate the assistance which Ukraine needs. That was why, he said, the UK had
taken the lead in providing tanks, anti-aircraft guns, armoured vehicles and
training for Ukrainian pilots. But Tobias Elwood wanted to know what the next
step would be. We seem to be too timid, risk averse for fear of escalating this.
So I put it to you that we have the ability to offer the air power, which
symbolically could nudge other countries to move forward as well. So I don't
feel we've been timid, your forgiveness. No, collectively, not Britain. Let me
make it very clear. We've done brilliantly, but NATO still is sitting on its
hands. It's formally not involved. And it's taken us a year to provide main
battle tanks. Britain has done brilliantly, absolutely. We've pushed the
envelope. Collectively, though, a year on, this is in danger of reaching a
frozen conflict. Tim Barrow insisted that the UK wanted to help Ukraine succeed
on the battlefield. So that we do not fall into the sort of long, drawn out,
static, you know, I mean, you say frozen conflict, but those conflicts are
already frozen. We don't think that's in our interest. So we have a very
comprehensive offer to the Ukrainians with regard to weaponry and armaments, and
we'll continue to engage with them. Lord Dannett, the former head of the British
Army, said Ukraine had to be given the means to win on the battlefield. There's
going to be no short term meaningful dialogue that's going to bring the two
sides together. The denouement is going to be on the battlefield, and it must be
there this year. So the language of defence is wrong. This must now be the
language of giving them the offensive capability to break the morale of the
Russian soldier and break the backbone of the Russian army. I think if done
well, it can be done this year. Tim Barrow said he wasn't suggesting that
Ukraine should just hold the line. I agree with you that they need to prosper
and win on the battlefield. I mean, you know, I would like to see a speedy end
and I'd like to see an end to the conflict. But when I say defend, I'm not
suggesting that we should be asking Ukrainians to sit where they are and be a
target of aggression. Last Friday, the international community marked the first
anniversary of the Russian invasion. The chair of the Foreign Affairs Committee,
the Conservative, Alicia Cairns, said she found the tenor of the narrative
around the anniversary quite offensive. Because it was a celebration. This is
not why our prime minister, but the narrative that we should somehow be grateful
that Ukraine is still standing, that we support them as we have. It should have
been, we're sorry that you're still here. We're sorry that we didn't listen to
the UK and the US in the first place. And we're sorry that Ukrainians are still
dying today. Tim Barrow said the international community needed to accelerate
its support for Ukraine. And he recalled his time as ambassador in the capital
city, Kyiv. I found it extremely difficult being in Kyiv just before the
invasion, seeing a city which I know extremely well and the horrors which
awaited. And he thought the anniversary had provided a moment to reflect on the
extraordinary heroism, courage and ingenuity of the Ukrainians. Christina
Cooper. An education minister has denied that nutritional standards in school
meals are suffering because of a rise in the cost of ingredients. The issue was
raised by a Liberal Democrat, Lady Wormsley, who said food price inflation was
running at almost 17%. It is a fact that this has caused a reduction in portion
size and nutritional value of school meals. And this affects poorer children the
most and contributes to health inequalities. And some schools are only providing
cold meals because of the price of energy. But the minister, Lady Barron,
disputed that. The picture we're getting is, of course, that there are pressures
on food inflation, but actually there are clear standards on nutritional value
which continue to be met. There's a real focus on reducing waste. And in some
cases, that does mean reducing the number of options available to pupils, but
not the quality. A Conservative, Lady McIntosh, suggested one thing she thought
would make food more nutritious. Will my noble friend and the government
endeavour to ensure that there is more locally sourced meat, fruit and
vegetables available for schools and other public sector organisations such as
prisons and military garrisons? Lady Barron agreed with the spirit of her
remarks, but said it was up to organisations to decide on sourcing. Labour's
Lady Lister said nutritious food could help children's development and their
ability to learn. At a time when low-income parents are struggling more than
ever, will the government use the forthcoming budget to ensure their children
have access to nutritious food from school dinners and breakfasts? The minister
said the government had made huge strides in extending free school meals in
England. An Environment Minister has said it's entirely ridiculous for the
Scottish government to introduce a deposit return scheme on drinks bottles.
David Cornock explains. It sounds straightforward enough. Pay a 20p deposit when
you buy a drink in a single-use container. Get the money back when you return
the bottle or can. Scotland's deposit return scheme is due to be introduced in
August, but needs an exemption from a law introduced after Brexit to ensure
trade flows smoothly within the UK. A Conservative former Cabinet Minister, Lord
Forsyth, thought the plan was completely ill-thought-out. It means a death
sentence for small producers of beverages. It means price increases for Scottish
consumers and it drives a coach and horses through the UK internal market. Now
it requires an opt-out from the Internal Markets Act to proceed. Will my noble
friend throw a lifeline to those businesses and consumers? The Environment
Minister, Lord Bennion, said the UK government had yet to receive an official
ministerial request from Edinburgh for that exemption. And he said Lord
Forsyth's concerns were shared by hundreds of businesses who'd written to the
Scottish government pointing out the failings. And these include a risk of
fraud, major losses in consumer spend, loss of investment in the Scottish
economy, financial and environmental implications for local authorities. Lord
Bennion condemned ministers at Holyrood. What the Scottish government has sought
to do is to appear to be more virtuous, to rush this and have failed the
Scottish people, have failed businesses and are going to result in huge costs
and even the risk of booze cruises so people can go south of the border to get a
drink at 50% less cost. And this is entirely ridiculous. Labour's Lord Fowkes
said companies had to sign up before Tuesday night, but the Scottish government
was considering delaying it for a year amid what he said was total chaos. If it
goes ahead, manufacturers, including small manufacturers, will have to produce
separate bottles, separate cans for Scotland and for England. That would be
enormously expensive. And if they don't do that, can you imagine the trade that
might take place at Carlisle or at Gretna with people gathering the bottles that
are worth 10p and going over from England into Scotland and making hundreds and
thousands of pounds? One of the candidates for the SNP leadership, the finance
secretary, Kate Forbes, has said the deposit return scheme should be put on hold
amid concern about job losses. But at Holyrood the SNP share power with the
Greens, who support the scheme. One of their former leaders, Lady Bennett, said
it had already created 500 jobs. If the government steps in at this very late
stage, if Westminster stops Scotland delivering what it has a right to do under
devolved law, that will be a collapse in business confidence and we will never
see a bottle disposal scheme across these islands after Westminster steps in in
this business. Lord Bennion said the problem wasn't the principle but the way
the Scottish government was implementing its plans. For Labour, Lady Heyman
thought a UK-wide deposit return scheme could work. While we shouldn't clearly
impose a system on Scotland, this does open a window of opportunity for the
constituent parts of the UK to agree a joint approach. Lord Bennion agreed and
said talks were continuing with devolved governments. The former head of the
Navy, Admiral Lord West, who's a Labour peer, raised a practical issue. What
will happen on Her Majesty's warships in terms of beverages? Will this apply or
won't it apply? Not that we have many warships, so it's not too big a problem,
but will it apply or won't it apply? The minister, Lord Bennion, suggested
navigation might decide things. If it lands at Forsyth, at Rossyth, not Forsyth,
Rossyth, or lands at Portsmouth, will there be a different scheme? I think we
can only say it's a mystery wrapped in an enigma inside a riddle. But unless
Scottish ministers persuade their counterparts at Westminster to allow an opt-
out from internal market laws, the scheme can't be launched. David Cornock.
Betty Boothroyd, the first and so far the only female Commons Speaker, has died.
She was 93. The Prime Minister said she was a remarkable woman who commanded
huge admiration and respect. She was as firm as she was fair and she presided
over many historic moments in this House, among them the debates on the Belfast
Good Friday Agreement. Her passion, wit and immeasurable contribution to our
democracy will never be forgotten. Before being elected Speaker, Betty Boothroyd
was a Labour MP for nearly 20 years. The party leader, Zakir Starmer, considered
her a pioneer. As Speaker of this House, she was at the forefront of a
generation that smashed the glass ceiling for female politicians. She was an
inspirational woman, a dedicated and devoted public servant who will be clearly
missed by all who knew her. The current Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, paid his
tribute at the start of the parliamentary day. Being the first woman Speaker was
truly a groundbreaking and Betty certainly broke the glass ceiling with panache.
The sad part, she was from Yorkshire and I, being from Lancashire, so there was
always friendly rivalry between us. Sir Lindsay said it was heartening to hear a
Northern voice speaking from the chair. She was one of a kind, a sharp, witty,
formidable woman and I will miss her. I know the Members will wish to pay
tribute to her and there will be an opportunity to do so tomorrow. In the
meantime, I invite all Members to join me in a minute's silence to remember,
with respect and affection, a great servant of this House, Betty Boothroyd.
Members stood with their heads bowed. Betty Boothroyd stood down from the
Commons when she retired as Speaker and became a Member of the Lords in 2001.
The Lord Speaker, Lord McFall, paid this tribute. She was an integral part of
our parliamentary community and will be sadly missed. On behalf of the House, I
extend our condolences to the noble Baronesses, family and friends. Lord McFall
and MPs will pay their own tributes on Tuesday. And that brings us to the
closing headline from Westminster. The Prime Minister presented his new Brexit
deal for Northern Ireland to the Commons, calling it a decisive breakthrough.
The Labour leader, Sakir Starmer, backed the agreement and said it would improve
the UK's standing abroad. The DUP said it represented significant progress but
the party still had concerns. I'm Sean Curran. The studio manager was Barry
Byrne. The editor was Mandy Baker. And that was Today in Parliament.