TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-04-19H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at 6 o'clock. This is Charles Carroll. Good evening. Ukrainian
officials say there's fighting in the streets of the eastern city of Bakhmut,
which Russian forces have spent six months trying to capture. After more than a
decade of talks, countries meeting at the UN in New York are inching towards
agreement on a treaty to protect the world's oceans. RAF fighter jets have been
scrambled to escort a plane to Stansted airport after it lost contact with air
traffic controllers. And in sport, the Premier League leaders Arsenal have
staged a dramatic comeback from 2-0 down against Bournemouth to keep their hopes
of the title alive. Russian forces are putting strong pressure on Ukraine's
troops to withdraw from the shattered eastern city of Bakhmut following months
of intense fighting. The latest analysis by British military intelligence says
the city's defenders are fortifying their positions by digging trenches and
bringing in elite units. The city's deputy mayor has said the remaining few
thousand civilians are in shelters without gas, electricity or water. Our
diplomatic correspondent James Landale is following developments from Kiev. For
six months, Russian forces have struggled to seize Bakhmut. Thousands of their
soldiers have died in the process. But now their commanders seem growing in
confidence. British military officials said Ukrainian defenders were under
increasingly severe pressure. They said Russian soldiers and Wagner Group
mercenaries were making advances in the northern suburbs. There were reports of
Ukrainian troops destroying bridges and digging trenches in western Bakhmut. The
US-based think tank, the Institute for the Study of War, said conditions were
seemingly being set for what it called a controlled fighting withdrawal from
parts of the city. Oleksandr Marchenko, the deputy mayor, told the BBC that
Ukrainian forces still had control of Bakhmut, but said it was cut off with no
communication and there was fighting in the streets. It is very unsafe in the
city and the entire population that is staying there right now is living in the
shelters. There is no water or gas or electricity and we have given heaters to
everybody who stays in the city so that we can support the local population.
Russia said its defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, made a flying visit to eastern
Ukraine to inspect troops at what it called a forward command post. Seizing
Bakhmut would be a rare victory for him and the Kremlin. Western analysts, such
as Dr Patrick Berry, senior lecturer in security at Bath University, suggested
the city had little strategic value. It doesn't really matter in the grand
scheme of things. Even in the battle in the east, it's really been about sucking
in resources on the Russian side and giving the Ukrainians the best chance of
destroying those resources in a set-piece battle. The risk for Ukrainian forces
is that in the process they become encircled and suffer even more losses. But
for now it seems that is a risk they are prepared to take for the greater prize
of killing as many Russian soldiers as they can. The latest round of talks
towards an historic agreement to protect the world's oceans have overrun their
two-week deadline. Members of the United Nations are still trying to nail down a
deal after more than ten years of negotiations and discussions throughout last
night. The High Seas Treaty aims to safeguard marine life in 30% of areas that
don't belong to any country. But there have been several delays because of
disagreements on funding and on fishing rights. The actress Jane Fonda has been
at the talks in New York. She gave the UN a petition signed by more than five
million people, pleading with the delegates to come to an agreement. I think
that this treaty is so important. We have to save these creatures who basically
are fighting to save us. They are our strongest allies in the fight against the
climate crisis. The ocean is one of our strongest allies. Ocean provides us with
50% of the oxygen that we breathe. We cannot live without a healthy ocean. In
the past few minutes, the United Nations and Iran have reached an agreement that
would allow UN officials to carry out further inspections of Tehran's nuclear
programme. The announcement was made at the end of a two-day visit to the
capital by the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Rafael Grossi.
His trip followed the discovery of traces of uranium enriched to near weapons-
grade level at an underground nuclear plant in Iran. The country's president,
Ebrahim Raisi, told Mr Grossi that he expected the IAEA not to be influenced by
Western powers. The Ministry of Defence says RAF Typhoon jets were authorised to
fly at supersonic speed after contact was lost with the pilot of a civilian
plane. The flight from Iceland to Kenya via Southend was escorted to Stansted
Airport. As Sean Dilley reports, the RAF jets caused a sonic boom which was
heard across large parts of the East Midlands. It was heard across
Leicestershire, Northamptonshire and in parts of Oxfordshire at around midday.
This woman from Daventry was calling her dogs to come back inside the house when
she heard the loud bang. Ivy, Tilly, come on. Tilly, Ivy, quick. What the hell
was that? Nothing to worry about, said Leicestershire Police. The force posted
on its Twitter account to say it had received numerous calls in relation to the
loud explosive sound. The Ministry of Defence said it scrambled Typhoon aircraft
from RAF Conningsby to escort a civilian plane heading towards London after
communications with the pilot were lost. Essex Police said the aircraft landed
safely at Stansted Airport just before 1pm. They said officers were talking to
the pilot and enquiries were continuing. The government is expected to announce
new legislation next week to crack down on small boat crossings in the Channel.
The Prime Minister has been under considerable pressure from his own MPs to
tackle the issue. Our political correspondent, Helen Catt, has more. Rishi Sunak
has made stopping small boat crossings one of his five priorities for
government. He's already promised new legislation to crack down on the issue.
He's expected to announce it with the Home Secretary, Suella Braverman, next
week. Newspaper reports first printed in The Times suggest it will include
making asylum claims inadmissible from those who travel to the UK on small boats
and placing a duty on the Home Secretary to remove anyone who arrives that way
as soon as reasonably practicable to Rwanda or a safe third country. It's
reported that arrivals will be prevented from claiming asylum while in the UK
and that there are plans to ban them from returning. Some organisations have
raised concerns about whether this would be compatible with human rights laws.
Others have pointed to practical difficulties. Attempts to remove asylum seekers
to Rwanda have so far stalled after legal challenges. Downing Street has said
that the legislation will come in due course. Leaked messages obtained by The
Daily Telegraph suggest that the former Health Secretary, Matt Hancock,
criticised Rishi Sunak's Eat Out to Help Out scheme during the Covid pandemic
for spreading the virus. In the messages, Mr Hancock says he'd kept the
development out of the news but it was serious. Labour's Jonathan Ashworth, who
was Shadow Health Secretary at the time, has accused the government of a cover-
up. Our political correspondent Charlotte Rose reports. The Eat Out to Help Out
scheme, which was launched in August 2020, aimed to support food businesses by
giving diners 50 per cent off their meal from Monday to Wednesday. The Treasury
paid Â£840m to fund the programme to help firms bounce back after the first Covid
lockdown. In messages leaked to The Telegraph, Mr Hancock dubs the scheme Eat
Out to Help the Virus Get About. He expressed concern to the Cabinet Secretary,
Simon Case, that it was causing problems in areas where the virus was prevalent
and additional government restrictions were in place. Mr Hancock now says the
leaked communications give a partial, biased account and don't show what was
being discussed in official meetings. A government source said many European
countries experienced an uptick in infections at the same time as the UK,
including those without similar schemes. Police in Australia say they've made
what's thought to be the country's biggest ever drugs bust. The amount of
cocaine seized in a joint operation with the United States is equivalent to half
of Australia's annual consumption. From Sydney, here's Phil Mercer. Australian
police say the drugs were intercepted by US authorities off the coast of South
America in November. The haul of 2.4 tonnes of cocaine was bound for Western
Australia. Investigators substituted the illicit cargo with fake drugs. The
packages were dropped into the Indian Ocean 40 nautical miles west of Perth and
monitored by drones and helicopters. It's alleged a criminal syndicate with
links to a Mexican cartel used two boats to try to retrieve the shipment. Twelve
people have been arrested. Prince Harry has said fear was a controlling force in
his life and that from the age of 12 when his mother died, he was in a constant
state of fight or flight. He was speaking to the author Dr Gabor Marte at a
virtual event in California organised by the publishers of his memoir, Spare.
Harry described feelings of panic and anxiety but insisted he never felt like a
victim. He said he was grateful to be able to move away from the royal family as
he had always felt he didn't quite belong. Throughout my life, throughout my
younger years, I always felt slightly different to the rest of my family. I felt
strange being in this container. And I know that my mum felt the same. So it
makes sense to me. It didn't make sense at the time. I felt as though my body
was in there but my head was out and then sometimes it was vice versa. The
Glasgow-based bakery Morton's Rolls is understood to have ceased trading after
missing a deadline to file accounts. Famed for its well-fired baps, Morton's
employs around 250 people. They were told in a letter yesterday they were being
laid off with immediate effect. The directors said they were looking to carry on
the business in some form with a reduced workforce. And a court in the United
States, in the state of Virginia, has ruled that Gruyere cheese is not an
exclusively Swiss product. The appeals court upheld an earlier ruling against a
group of cheesemakers from Western Switzerland who had asked for their product
to be protected by a trademark. According to the American regulators, for cheese
to be called Gruyere, it only has to have small holes and to have been aged for
at least 90 days. When our sport in the Premier League, Arsenal produced a
remarkable comeback to maintain their five-point lead at the top of the table.
In athletics, it was a record-breaking day for Britain's Laura Muir at the
European Championships. With more on those stories and a round-up of the rest of
the day's sport, here's Shabnam Younis-Jule. Yes, there were jubilant scenes at
the Emirates Stadium where Premier League leaders Arsenal pulled off what could
be a crucial 3-2 win in their charge for the title. Bournemouth incredibly took
the lead after nine seconds through Philip Billing and doubled their lead in the
second half. But Mikel Arteta's side fought back with two goals in eight minutes
before the dramatic 97th-minute winner from Rhys Nelson. When the ball came out
the edge of the box, I was thinking before it happened, I was thinking, just
please, just give me one chance, you know, and the ball dropped in the right
area and I just put my foot through it, you know, and happy about it and the
back of the net. More than happy, I should think. I'm buzzing, I'm buzzing,
really, I'm buzzing, yeah, very happy. Well, Arsenal are five points clear of
title rivals Manchester City, who beat Newcastle 2-0 earlier. Brighton kept
their European dreams alive with a big 4-0 win over West Ham. Chelsea eased the
pressure on manager Graham Potter with a 1-0 win over Leeds. Wolves beat fourth-
placed Tottenham 1-0. Aston Villa also 1-0 winners over Crystal Palace. In the
evening game right now, it's Southampton 1-0, Leicester 0-0, Carlos Alcaraz with
that goal and it's just coming up to half-time in that match. In the Scottish
Premiership, Rangers beat Kilmarnock 3-1 to cut Celtic's lead at the top to six
points. Fourth-placed Tibernian came from behind to beat Tenman Livingstone 4-1.
There were wins also for Hearts and Motherwell. Aston's Laura Muir took gold in
the women's 1500m at the European Indoor Athletics Championships in Istanbul.
It's her record fifth indoor gold, more than any other British athlete. To be
honest, going into this championship, I wasn't the best I've ever been. I
started as a lot fitter in 2017-2019 with the double gold, so I was quite
nervous coming into this chance because I thought I don't think I'm at my
absolute best, but I just hope that grit and determination, I would still be
able to come here and win. Formula One world champion Max Verstappen will start
the season opening Bahrain Grand Prix on pole. Teammate Sergio Perez was second
to make a Red Bull 1-2. The Mercedes of Britain's George Russell and Lewis
Hamilton will start sixth and seventh on the grid. The opening game of cricket's
inaugural Women's Premier League has seen Mumbai Indians, who featured England's
Nat Siverbrunt and Izzy Wong, thrash Gujarat giants by 143 runs in Mumbai. And
Tom Pidcock has become the first Briton to win cycling's one-day Strad Bianche
in Italy. Shabnam Yunus Joel. The architect of the walkie-talkie Skyscraper in
London, which is broader at the top than at the bottom, has died. Rafael Vignoli
was 78. Adam Porter looks back at his life. Rafael Vignoli was born in Uruguay
and his practice was based in New York. He was responsible for more than 600
buildings around the world, including office and residential blocks, concert
halls, stadiums and airports. His son called him a visionary who left a legacy
of distinctive and iconic structures, while Manchester City, for whom he
designed the City Football Academy, called him a cherished friend. But not all
of Vignoli's projects escaped criticism. Some of the multi-millionaire residents
of an 85-storey block in Manhattan sued over vibrations and creaks from the
building. And in 2013 it was found that sunlight reflecting off the walkie-
talkie building's curved side had melted parts of a car parked nearby. The
headlines again. British military intelligence says Russian forces are pressing
into the besieged Ukrainian city of Bakhmut, which Moscow and Wagner mercenaries
have spent months battling to capture. The United Nations is inching towards
agreement on a new treaty governing the high seas, after negotiations spanning
ten years. And RAF jets were scrambled to escort a plane to Stansted airport
after it lost communications, causing a sonic boom. BBC News. And the news is
read by Charles Carroll. In a moment here on Radio 4, the King of Rom-Coms,
Richard Curtis, discusses his work this year with comic relief. And the
feathered heroes that shaped and changed our world, all on loose ends. Before
that, Paddy O'Connell is here looking ahead to Broadcasting House. Good evening.
From Dover, we hear rival voices on small boats as the PM plans a new crackdown
next week. Again. We'll brace for more WhatsApp revelations from Matt Hancock in
the Sundays, when we launch our own WhatsApp number. For BH listeners, our
headliners will be Jane Moore, Seb Payne and Catherine Nicholson of France Van
Catch. Snow and ice are predicted next week for Scotland, and new hosepipe bans
for England by the summer. Can you believe it? We're on Weatherwatch. We'll talk
fashion and pop subcultures, and we lay back for the joy of sax. Please join BH
tomorrow morning at nine, if you can bear it, here on BBC Radio 4. Now it's time
for Loose Ends with Clive Anderson. Yes, thank you. Hello and welcome to Loose
Ends and a big week for news. So what's up, apart from WhatsApp? This week,
Brexit finally got done again. Well, certainly something or somebody got done.
Elsewhere, official policy may well be changed because of the publication of
thousands of Matt Hancock's WhatsApp messages in the Daily Telegraph. Matt, I'm
a celebrity, get me out of government. Hancock gave all of this material to the
investigative and famously indiscreet journalist, Isabel Oakeshott. Policy
changes likely brought in are to stop giving confidential information to
investigative and famously indiscreet journalists. In particular, have nothing
more to do with Isabel Oakeshott, and quite definitely nothing more to do with
Matt Hancock. This week on Loose Ends, we have plenty to do with the king of
British rom-com, Richard Curtis. King Richard is here to tell us about this
year's comic relief, including his own appearance at the Just for Laughs comedy
festival in London this weekend. For a more brutal style of humorist, we turn to
the historian Alice Loxton, whose new book, Uproar, details the work of the
savage satirists, artists and scandal mongers who tore into the great and good,
the bad and the ugly in Georgian Britain a couple of centuries ago. Should
Gilray, Cruikshank and Rowlands be better known? But does satire ever change
anything? Do birds come to that? Well, the naturalist and broadcaster Stephen
Moss's latest book is called Ten Birds That Changed the World. Which birds? What
do they do? Who's a pretty boy then? Stephen will be telling us all about it in
due course when he puts the cat amongst the pigeons and the finches for us. We
have music from Anna B. Savage and Joseph, and Andrew O'Neill is with me today.
Who've you got for us, Andrew? I'm talking to Ben Bailey-Smith, also known as
Doc Brown, about his new podcast. In Shrink the Box, he and psychotherapist
Sasha Bates psychoanalyse some of TV's most iconic characters, like Walter White
from Breaking Bad and Fleabag from whatever that show's called. Excellent. I
look forward to that. We're going to start with Richard Curtis CBE, whose
impressive career in comedy includes writing, directing or producing classic TV
sitcoms and blockbuster movies featuring stars such as Rowan Atkinson, Dawn
French, Hugh Grant and many others. That's from the Vicar of Blackadder to Four
Weddings and Love, actually. And Richard is also one of the creators, of course,
and prime movers behind Comic Relief, which has been combining comedy and
charity, good works and good gags since 1985. And Red Nose Day is back again
this year on March 17th. So who's hosting the telethon this year? Do you know,
for the first time, Not Lenny. Yeah. He's doing a one-man play. Oh no, we've got
to blow to him. Not Zoe Ball, Paddy McGinnis, AJ Adubdo, David Tennant. It's a
good line up. The usual array of stars you've managed to bring out. Do you ever
feel you want to present it yourself? No, it's quite a safe job now, but in the
early days, it was utter chaos and the worst job in the world. And we always
overran by about an hour and a half. So no, I'm very glad not to be in front of
the public. Well, no, I've had nothing to do with it. It's always been a
shambles and I don't think it's gone wrong. We did this thing where Clive was
meant to step from Channel 4 onto BBC One. Now, Lenny was to break through the
wall behind me and we'd filmed it and everything. And then we just overran. I
was the one who had to go and see sweet little Clive was sitting there in his
suit and say, it's all over. It hasn't happened. And you look like a fool
because you've stepped out of Channel 4 saying I'm off to BBC One. And then
there was a moving film from Hull. Nevermind. I was able to sit and chat to
Prince Edward for the rest of the evening, who was also wondering why he was
there. But there it is. Now that's going back in time. So Red Nose Day this
year, you've got a new nose. We've got an amazing new nose. So it's a kind of
miracle. Sir Johnny Ive, who probably is the world's greatest designer, designed
the iPhone and the iMac and everything like that, got it into his head that he
wanted to do a red nose. I've got one here. I know it's radio. And so they
actually had to invent a new hinge and everything like that because it had to be
sustainable. And it's this kind of gorgeous plastic thing, except it's not
plastic. It looks like a Christmas decoration. It opens like a Christmas
decoration and then clips onto your nose. And genuinely, I would suggest, I
think it's a collector's item. I think there are... and go to Amazon. You can
buy them on Amazon everywhere. So go to Amazon and order one and you know, it'll
buy 10 vaccines and change your lives. But the point about those noses, they're
not plastic anymore. They're made out of cellulose or something. Exactly. Well,
tell us about the money then. Where does it go? Who are you raising for? Because
I think people associate, certainly I do, with sort of money being raised for
Africa. Yeah, that sort of perspective is changing because I do think that
people are becoming increasingly aware of how hard people's lives are here. So,
you know, in the UK, we're doing an enormous amount about cost of living crisis,
about food poverty, about mental health issues that have sprung from that. I
mean, my take on comic relief is you read the papers, you think I can't do
anything about all of this. And actually, when you read about mental health,
when you read about Ukraine, when you read about Turkey, when you read about
food poverty, if you buy that nose, watch that show, give some money, comic
relief has got, you know, 20 years experience. Depressing, there's no shortage
of places to spend the money. Cheeringly, exactly. There is no shortage of
people who really care and help. And it's a brilliant thing, like Doc over
there, who did one of our best things ever. Yeah, I mean, you know, I met you in
the studio when Ricky Gervais and I were recording Equality Street. It made us
laugh while we were recording it. I couldn't wait to get it out there in comic
relief. But even before that, you know, from 2001 to 2008, I ran a youth club in
South Kilburn and my position was funded by comic relief for seven years. So it
gives you an idea of it wasn't just Africa. Now what about Just for Laughs? So
you are appearing in that, you are going to be on stage. Are you chairing a
discussion or presenting? I'm chairing a chaotic discussion. It's called comic
relief, the whole truth and anything but the truth, I think. And I've got three
of the sort of greatest victims of the chaos of comic relief. Jonathan Ross, who
He presented for many years. Very, very poor presenting. Poor Joe Brand, who at
various times has dressed as a cheeky girl and Britney Spears. And then Miranda
Hart, who used to do these amazing things where she'd go out every day. And she
once organised a wedding in a day for comic relief. And actually, her first job
was at comic relief. It's going to be, I hope, a really fun thing lots of clips.
I suggest, you know, as an alternative possibly to church, Clive, for your
listeners, go to the O2 on Sunday. You'll have a non-religious experience. Well
your life is obviously dominated by but you're involved in lots of philanthropic
work, comic relief and other things. I don't think you've got religious beliefs.
What motivates you to be trying to do good in the world, if I may put it like
that? You know, I did go to Ethiopia during the famine in 1986. And the things I
saw were so terrible. And it kind of locked into my brain the simultaneity of
suffering that every day when we're having a good time, other people are
fighting for their lives. And then it's just kind of the efficacy of it. That's
the thing. You know, the first time we did comic relief, we made 15 million
pounds for a few comedians doing a bit of work one night. Because look, every
day you see such massive injustice and you realize that people have the power to
change it. So I'm obsessed by pensions because the pension companies can make
sure they're investing in wonderful sustainable things instead of oil and
pornography and arms, you know. And the UN has a brilliant sustainable
development goals and they're probably better than the party manifesto. So go
for it. And we did, do you remember we did Live Aid and Make Poverty History and
we got 43 billion as a result of, you know, Chris Martin singing Fix You. That's
not all of it. Can I interrupt myself by the way and say just very quickly in
terms of funny, this year's Red Nose Day show is panning out absolutely
brilliantly. Of course you can. I would be shocked if you come on set and say
it's a bit feeble this year. Honestly, we've got, you know, we've got a Love
Island sketch actually shot in Love Island. We're doing the most brilliant
Traitors parody with, you know, lots of famous people in hoods. I've revived
Tony Robinson now in his early 90s to do a bedtime story as Baldrick. Yeah, more
blackout. What about your film career? Have you made your last film? Actually,
we're just about to start another film. We're doing one with Melissa McCarthy in
New York in a couple of weeks, but I'm not, I was a very poor director. Well
don't direct it then. That's the decision. So somebody else is directing.
Somebody talented who knows more than the word Zoom is directing. I just want to
go right back to that, my original starting point. You used to perform years and
years ago with Rowan Atkinson on stage, but you've been a writer of gags for
other people to deliver, gags and other material. What is it that makes it
satisfying to you to write the stuff, direct occasionally, but you don't want to
be out there performing it yourself? No, I turned out to be bland as a
performer. David Bowie once came to see me and Rowan in a show. There were only
two of us and he came backstage at the end and was introduced to me and had no
idea who I was. He'd been looking at me, at my face for an hour. So no, I'm very
happy sitting in my room. You get much more talented people than you to actually
bring them to life. Anyway, so Richard Curtis, good to see you again. Red Nose
Day is on Friday the 17th of March. Thank you for coming and telling us all
about that. By those noses, by those noses, by those noses. All right, Richard,
you've made your point. Coming now from the singer-songwriter something of a
sensation, Joseph, who's rapidly gone from recording single tracks at his home
in the suburb of Glasgow to selling out that city's famous King Tut's Wawa Hut
even before the release of his first EP. Joseph, you've now moved on to your
first album, Permanent Damage, and you've moved to London. Has that taken a lot
of getting used to? It's very different from Glasgow. It's a lot bigger. The
parties are just as good. The weather's equally terrible. So as I say, you've
had a sort of meteoric rise, but did you always have confidence you could make
it in the world of music? No, not really. I feel like I grew up in a very
working class background. It wasn't really written in the stars for me. I feel
like most people have connections and stuff like that. I didn't know anybody
that was in music. So it was basically my mates who became my managers. They
kind of strong-armed me into it. And you were pushed forward to sing in a
karaoke bar. Yeah, basically I was. From that night, it was a catalyst for my
entire career. Now I'm here. But you knew you could sing, you knew you could
write songs. Were you encouraged at home? We just, there was always music on in
the house. My mum was always playing records and stuff like that. But we weren't
a really musical family. It was just kind of me, my brothers and my mum, we
could all kind of sing a wee bit. But it was just never like anything I saw
myself having a career in or making a living off. But thank God. Yeah. Well,
Rolling Stone offered a description of your singing style as heartfelt lyrics,
honey soaked vocals. Do you think that sums you up? Yeah, maybe not right now.
No, no it is. People are going to come away with that as a perfectly good
description. But what are you performing for us now? I'm going to be performing
Just Come Home With Me tonight. I've got Charlotte and James with me. They're
going to be singing and playing as well. Okay, excellent. Okay, then. Joseph,
take it away. You passed me on the stairs You didn't see me there Pretend I
didn't care I didn't care Of course I still care But I'm drunk and left to play
the game I leaned in and you moved away But you linger all the same And I can't
help myself but say Well I know a kiss won't make it right And there's no future
left inside But I got no false open mind But would you just come home with me
tonight? Pieces of my soul are burning in my throat He's lighting up your phone,
your phone, your phone You're here but you're already gone, baby But still I'm
drunk and I left to play the game I leaned in and you moved away But I still
love you all the same And I can't help myself but say Well I know a kiss won't
make it right And there's no future left inside But I got no false open mind But
would you just come home with me tonight? The light has finally left your eyes
We once flew in somber skies And you were holding me so tight Will you just come
home with me tonight? But I know a kiss won't make it right And there's no
future left inside But I got no false open mind But would you just come home
with me tonight? But I know a kiss won't make it right And there's no future
left inside But I got no false open mind But would you just come home with me
tonight? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me?
Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you
just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come
home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with
me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would
you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just
come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home
with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me?
Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you
just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come
home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with
me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would
you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just
come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home
with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me?
Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you
just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come
home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with
me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would
you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just
come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home
with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me?
Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you
just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come
home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with
me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would
you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just
come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home
with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me?
Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you
just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come
home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with
me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would
you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just
come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home
with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me?
Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you
just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come
home with me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with
me? Would you just come home with me? Would you just come home with me? I used
to call you my little pug, your little toe nails, that little pug But that
changed, you couldn't see the grave we dug You were lying deep in the ground, I
couldn't move, I called out to you but made no sound Thought you were gone then,
but four years in you're back again Stop haunting me, please Just leave me be,
please When a lover speaks to me, I'm scared I'll say your name When they're
asleep with their back facing me, I see your frame Thought you were gone, but
five years home, you're back again Stop haunting me, please Stop haunting me,
please Stop haunting me, please Just leave me be, please Sometimes my mind drops
me back in our room Well I stand and I look around at the cushions and the grey
ground, your perfume Thought you were gone, but six years on, you're back again
Stop haunting me, please Stop haunting me, please Stop haunting me, please Just
set me free, please Please, please The House has worked extensively as a TV
producer bringing the natural world, wildlife and Bill Oddie to our television
screens He's also an academic, a bird watcher and author and his latest book,
Ten Birds That Changed the World, is published just now So ten important species
of birds, I might quibble about some of them as to whether they changed the
world But it's certainly true of the case of the cormorant, how do I pronounce
it, the guanay or guano cormorant? The guanay cormorant, yes That certainly
changed the world, tell us about the history of that Well it made one man,
William Gibbs, who was the Bill Gates of his day, of the Victorian era Made him
ridiculously rich and he basically made his money from slavery and shit really
Because these cormorants nest, and still do, on an island off Peru And it's very
dry there, so the guano, the poo, builds up to this enormous height Those
mountains of poo Mountains of poo And it's been there for centuries Well it had
been there for centuries until he managed to get lots of people to dig it
Unfortunately they were Chinese indentured labourers, so even when Peru
abolished slavery during the 1860s They were not freed, so they carried on, it
was the most awful story He built Tinsfield, which is a huge house near Bristol,
after the profits And became this great philanthropist, but it's got a very dark
story And the reason it changed the world was that it got farmers long before
the chemical farming revolution of the post-war era The post-second world war
era It got farmers in North America and Britain desperate to enhance their crops
by using fertiliser And so people, scientists, then went and invented
fertilisers, non-natural fertilisers, artificial ones And that led to the
revolution that has led to our countryside being in a complete terrible place
today Alright, so as you say, there's a whole story of everything going on,
whether it's colonialism or slavery Or certainly working conditions, and the
transformation of agriculture So certainly this cormorant, who are busy I
suppose building up supplies again now For when we next get round to going to
have to dig it all out and use it again But your case for that is, what are the
other ones I was trying to work out? The raven, why have you the raven as
opposed to crows? Well the raven is at the heart of many, many very early
mythologies And of course that's of historical interest, it's the first bird in
the bible But when George R. R. Martin was making Game of Thrones And he wanted
to have a character that could foresee the past, the present and the future He
picked the three-eyed raven I think it's possibly the only character in Game of
Thrones, sorry if this is a spoiler Who doesn't get horribly killed And so the
raven, and of course the raven's in the Tower of London Well you make an
interesting story there, that this is a fairly modern invention The idea that
the ravens have to be there or the kingdom falls Well it's a Victorian myth,
like so many myths in culture Because what happened was that ravens were in the
Tower They would have probably come to the Tower in the 16th century when those
executions were going on Wild birds would have come and fed on rather gorily
There's a story that I think they pecked out Anne Boleyn's eyes But what they
then did is the Victorians turned this into this great mythology about our
kingdom You know we have all these mythologies don't we about Britain Well there
are raven keepers now, they have to look after them There is the raven master,
Chris, who is a wonderful man But you reveal that they did leave the Tower at a
vital and crucial time in our nation's history That's right, they left during
the Second World War What happened was that some of them died of shock when
there was a bombing raid In the Blitz In the Blitz, and the others left, and the
Tower covered this up Because otherwise we'd have lost the war But meantime
you've got pigeons winning the war Yes, are there pigeons for all their work?
Taking messages hither and yon Well I've just walked up here from Oxford Circus
Station and of course I saw pigeons And everyone ignores them or they call them
rats with wings and they pretty much hate them But pigeons arguably changed the
course of the First and Second World Wars They certainly saved a lot of lives
when men were trapped behind the lines, the enemy lines And had to send messages
to say please stop bombing us because it's us, not them And they survived
because of pigeons getting messages out And there were sort of espionage pigeons
that were sort of spies or sent to bring messages home Well there still are
espionage pigeons Yes And yeah, absolutely, and this is one of these things
where pigeons can't be turned They can't be double agents No I mean they're
intelligent They can try They can try, they're intelligent birds but much more
intelligent than we give them credit for And of course in the Second World War
when D-Day happened They couldn't send messages by radio because the radio
traffic would have alerted the Nazis That the invasion must be going on, so they
sent pigeons If pigeons are secret agents, who's my cat working for? Well that's
a very good question Because she has taken out so many A lot of pigeons, well,
Nazi cat I think that's true actually, you've met her The other shocking story,
a shocking account in this, which I was bowled over by Darwin's finches, it
turns out everything we think we know about Darwin's finches is wrong Including
the fact they weren't even finches Yes, they're not finches The great myth about
Darwin's finches which I'm afraid the great Sir David Attenborough repeated on
Life on Earth many years ago Well I'm not sure you're allowed to criticise it
that way But I wouldn't dare Cut this guy from the whole show I'm the voice of
the BBC, he'll never work again Well what happened with Darwin's finches was
that the myth arose long after Darwin's death They weren't even called Darwin's
finches until after he died And the myth arose that Darwin had had this road to
Damascus moment As he stepped onto the Galapagos and he saw all these birds That
he clearly knew were descended from a common ancestor But had evolved to cover
all sorts of niches And that's the story, and we all know that story That's
evolution in action And it's utter nonsense It's utter nonsense that Darwin
thought it But because they were so famous people then went back and studied
them And then discovered that of course it is true that they did evolve from a
common ancestor And they do prove Darwin's theory of evolution by natural
selection So there's a sort of irony in that, that Darwin didn't really care
about them but we do now Yeah and I think it's Percy Lowe who called them
Darwin's finches in the 20th century Yes And his son, Darwin's son, sort of
promulgated this myth Yes, I think it was the mythology of the father It's
always good to have mythologies isn't it Look Stephen, thank you very much
Stephen Moss, Ten Birds That Changed The World, that's out now That's The Loose
Ends tied up for another week If you've just missed the programme and want to
hear it again It's waiting for you in the treasure trove that is BBC Sounds
Including last week's interviews with Danny Sapani and Tara Fitzgerald But
thanks to this week's guests Stephen Moss, Alice Loxton and Richard Curtis
Joseph and Anna B. Savage, Andrew O'Neill and Ben Bailey-Smith Today's producer
is Tim Banno and the studio managers are Andrew Garrett and Duncan Hannant Next
week my guests will include Soweto Kinch and Juliet Cowan But from me for now,
goodbye Loose Ends was presented by Clive Anderson There are over one and a half
million postcodes in the UK The Patch on BBC Radio 4 We randomly pick one out So
which one do I press? Clear the random postcards? And uncover a story there you
probably wouldn't have heard about They can't get the staff to put them here,
let alone a new prison with 700 more staff He said we know exactly what's up
there We're looking for something that shouldn't be up there The Patch on Radio
4 and BBC Sounds When the police lock these people up, who looks after them?
Well that's prison officers and it's all done unseen Starts next Wednesday
morning at 9