TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-21H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 it. Email Saturday Live at bbc.co.uk and we're on air tomorrow morning, just
after 9. BBC News at 8 o'clock. Ukraine's allies have been demonstrating their
support on the one-year anniversary of the start of Russia's invasion. The US
says it will send another Â£1.6 billion worth of weapons to Kiev, as well as
further sanctions on Russian individuals and institutions. Poland has delivered
leopard tanks to Ukraine and leaders from the G7 group of wealthy nations have
promised to punish any countries which help Russia evade sanctions. As our
Russia editor Steve Rosenberg explains from Moscow, the war doesn't look like it
will end soon. If Vladimir Putin has a dictionary on his desk, I suspect that
these words will not be in it. De-escalation, off-ramp, defeat. From everything
he's been saying over the last few weeks, it's pretty clear that Putin is
determined to push on in Ukraine, either because he truly believes that he can
secure a military victory at some point, or because he thinks he's in this so
deep now that he can't see a way back. Detectives in Northern Ireland have
arrested a fifth person in connection with the shooting of an off-duty police
officer in Oma, a man who's 45, is being held under the Terrorism Act.
Detectives say they're focusing their investigation on the dissident Republican
group, the new IRA. The victim of the attack, Detective Chief Inspector John
Caldwell, remains critically ill in hospital. Junior doctors in England, who are
members of the British Medical Association, will walk out for three days from
March the 13th in a dispute about pay. The government described the strike
action as disappointing. Rishi Sunak has spoken to the European Commission
President, Ursula von der Lion, as he works to get agreement over changes to
post-Brexit trading rules in Northern Ireland. Downing Street said good progress
was made during the positive call. Sir Bernard Ingham, Margaret Thatcher's long-
standing press secretary when she was Prime Minister, has died aged 90. His
family described him as a journalist to his bones. Sir Bernard had continued to
write a column for the Yorkshire Post until last month. BBC News. Now, BBC Radio
4. It's time for any questions with Alex Forsythe. Hello and welcome to St
Andrews Church in Wivelliskam, a market town in West Somerset that sits at the
foot of the Brendan Hills on the southeastern boundary of Exmoor. Wivy, as it's
known, prides itself on its sense of community. It has several volunteer
networks to support its residents, including a number of Ukrainians who've made
this their home in the year since Russia's invasion of their country, which we
mark this weekend. This is a return visit for any questions. We were last here
in 1955, though I wasn't presenting it then. This time on our panel, we have
James Heepee, the Armed Forces Minister and the Conservative MP for Wells. Prior
to politics, James was in the army, reaching the rank of Major. He served in
Afghanistan, Iraq and Northern Ireland. Darren Jones is the Labour MP for
Bristol Northwest and Chair of Parliament's Business, Energy and Industrial
Strategy Committee. Before becoming an MP, he studied human bioscience, then
became a solicitor, specialising in technology law. Mary DeGefsky is a columnist
for The Independent and a former foreign correspondent in Moscow, Paris and
Washington. Mary has a degree in modern languages from Oxford University and
spent a year as a British Council exchange student in the then USSR in the
1970s. And Isabel Oakshot is an author, journalist and commentator who's
currently a presenter and international editor at the TV channel Talk TV. She's
held senior editorial positions at The Sunday Times and The Daily Mail, and she
describes herself as a scoop-getter and a feather-ruffler. With a list, please
welcome your any questions panel. And so let's go to our first question. My name
is Anastasia. One year ago, I woke up to the sound of my mother screaming.
That's okay. Please take your time. And the news that my country was being
invaded. After months of hiding in bomb shelters, we fled from Severadanyec in
eastern Ukraine and looked for safety. Unfortunately, this war might go on for a
long time. For how much longer can the UK give military support to the defenders
of my country? Anastasia, thank you for your question and thank you for sharing
your experience with us. Thank you very much. So Anastasia's question, for how
much longer can the UK give military support to the defenders of her country?
James E. Peay. For as long as it takes. It's our honor to do so. I mean, I just,
to think that a year ago, or just over a year ago, I was in Kyiv visiting to do
the original deal for anti-tank weapons to let your government know that the UK
was going to give those 6,000 N-Law weapons. And to be honest with you,
Anastasia, at that point, we thought we were helping prepare for a resistance
campaign. And the tenacity with which your countrymen repelled that initial
attack on Kyiv was extraordinary, emboldened an international community to get
behind you. And to think that a year on, we're in the business of giving you
thousands of rounds of ammunition and anti-aircraft defense and anti-tank
missiles and tanks and artillery pieces and all sorts of besides all the time,
is yes, a fantastic reflection of the international consensus that you must be
supported. It's an amazing reflection of the diplomatic skill of President
Zelensky. But what it is more than anything else is a reward for the incredible
courage, bravery, determination and sacrifice of the Ukrainian people. And
yesterday afternoon, I went down to Salisbury Plain, where there's a few hundred
Ukrainians training one of four locations in the country where they are at the
moment. And we did an active remembrance and it was sobering. It's always
sobering when you do an active remembrance, but what was particularly sobering,
but also inspiring as I stood there and looked across into the eyes of the young
men that were lined up opposite, they're three weeks into a five week training
package in two weeks time, they will be in the Donbass ready to give their lives
in the defense of your country to recover your freedom. Slava, Ukraine, we will
give them everything they need to get the job done. James, thank you. Can I just
ask you about a few specifics? Because you will be aware of a very active debate
that's going on at the moment about whether or not the UK and other Western
countries should specifically give jets to Ukraine, something that President
Zelensky's asked for. You're the armed forces minister, will we? Well, the more
pressing ask is around artillery. That's the thing that, you know, the Russians
have now got so few armored vehicles that they are using large amounts of
conscripts as dismounted infantry. And the thing to really repel those attacks
is a big weight of artillery fire and that's the focus. We also know that you
must go on the offensive in order to recover some of your land and disrupt
Russian supply lines. And so getting you the tanks and the things that you need
for that ground offensive are the priority. And then finally, the big
announcement from the prime minister in Munich the weekend before last is even
longer range precision weapons, which will make an enormous difference. We've
offered to train pilots. The prime minister hasn't ruled out jets, but frankly,
there are things that you need sooner. And that's what we're working hard to
deliver soonest. James, thank you. Darren Jones. Well, thank you for asking your
question. It's impossible for us to understand what you and your family have
been going through. But I think all of us on the panel probably reflect the mood
of the British people that on a cross party basis, this is not a party political
issue. We're all united on this in Westminster about providing the support that
Ukraine needs for as long as it as long as it needs it. And that's not just
about the supply of military equipment. It's about the role that Britain can
play globally and making sure that we bring our allies with us so that we are
united in making it absolutely clear to Vladimir Putin and indeed to anybody
else around the world that these types of illegal invasions irrespective of the
rationale you give for saying it's legitimate are not acceptable in this world.
And there will be consequences for those actions. And we will not tire to ensure
that you will not get away with that. And so I think on behalf of the British
people, probably the people in this room, all of us on this panel, all of us in
Westminster, where they're with you shoulder to shoulder and we'll be there as
long as we need to be. I appreciate what you said about this isn't just military
support, but I want to ask you on the specifics that I put to James as well
about jets, because that is a very active discussion, something that presidency
presidents, Lindsay's asked for. James makes the point that actually that's not
the priority. Do you think Labour would support giving jets to Ukraine? Well, I
think what Labour supports is part of the discussion that's been happening in
government and elsewhere, which is what type of military jets might be
appropriate. So I think there's a debate going on, for example, where Poland
might give the type of fighter jets that Ukrainian pilots are very used to
using. And then countries like the UK and others can backfill into those
countries with the different types of jets that we have here. But that's also
why the training is important, because if we do get to a situation in the future
where the maybe American made F-35s need to be used, that you have pilots that
are equipped and skilled and able to use that kit that maybe they're not used to
using in the first instance. Darren, thank you. You write that Ben Wallace, the
defence secretary, was talking on Friday morning about exactly that, whether the
UK could effectively backfill Poland to supply jets to Ukraine. To Anastasia's
question, for how much longer can the UK give military support to the defenders
of her country, Isabel Oakeshot? Thank you for your question. Anyone listening
to you can hear in your voice just how painful that is for you. And in a way, I
was kind of glad that you did find it difficult to ask the question, because I
don't want anyone in this country to stop remembering how very real this is. And
I think there is a real danger of some fatigue setting in. I agree absolutely
with James and Darren. We have got to be on your side for as long as it takes.
But we shouldn't be under any illusion that people will increasingly question
the resources that we are sending. And we have to keep making the case that this
isn't just your war, it is all of our war. And there is no option but to keep
going. And if anything, we need to escalate what we are doing. And I have sensed
a real shift in just in the last few weeks in what the politicians are saying
and what they are prepared to contemplate. So at the beginning of the war, I was
on the Polish border with Ukraine. And at that time, there was a lot of pressure
within Poland for jets and everybody in the West was saying, no, no, no, we are
not going to do that. That is definitely shifting. So I think there is plenty to
be optimistic about. We are going to keep there until it is done. When you say
escalate, do you mean escalate military support? And what about therefore then
the risk of escalation? And that is always a question, isn't it? It is the
easiest thing in the world to say, oh, well, we can't do that because that could
lead to World War III. You don't counter a bully by capitulating. We are already
in a very dangerous situation. We have got to double down. Isabel, thank you.
Just a bit of context here. Since Russia invaded, please. Since Russia invaded
Ukraine in February last year, the UK spent Â£2.3 billion on military assistance.
It is the second biggest donor behind the US and it is set to spend the same
again next year. Mary Dzhevski. Well, I too have immense sympathy for Anastasia
and I understand because I have family in-laws who are in Ukraine and from
Ukraine. I am under absolutely no illusions about the state of the war, the
immense cruelty and hardship, the barbarity of what is happening now, especially
on the Eastern Front. But I have to say that I am one of those very few people,
I have to say, who questions how long the support from this country or from
Europe or from the United States can realistically continue. And that is for two
reasons. The first is an entirely selfish reason and it is by far the smaller
reason, which is that some Western countries defence stocks are actually being
depleted and we're not replenishing them anything like enough, not just to
supply ourselves if we needed to defend our countries, but to support Ukraine
because the pace at which ammunition, for instance, is being used is faster than
it's being produced in those Western countries that produce it. So that's the
first reason and as I say the smaller reason. The bigger reason is that by
sending weapons, ever more powerful weapons to Ukraine for, as my fellow
panellists have said, as long as it takes, we are continuing this war and this
suffering for people like Anastasia and her family. We are responsible for
continuing this war by supplying ever more powerful weapons to continue it.
Okay, James Leipour, your thoughts on that. On those two points, please.
Firstly, on this idea, because it has been suggested that the UK could run low,
for example, of ammunition by supplying Ukraine, but the broader point Mary
makes. So on the ammunition side, it is undoubtedly true that we are taking risk
against our own stockpiles to do what needs to be done to support Ukraine. Now
that triggers the need to quickly get the contracts out to not only recover what
we've given, but also to grow the stockpiles back to what they need to be given.
The threat of war in Europe has been realised over the last 12 months. But it's
also important to note that as I go around the world, and I jokingly say I'm
currently the world's second biggest arms smuggler after my US counterpart, I'm
commissioning manufacturing capacity all over the world. It's not just in the UK
that we are manufacturing and sourcing the weapons. Manufacturing to replenish
UK supplies or for Ukraine? For Ukraine. So I go around the world finding what I
can to give to Ukraine. And of course, we give stuff from our own stockpiles
too. As for the point that's made about that we are continuing the war, I think
that that is true. But we're continuing the war in order that the war ends on
terms that are acceptable to President Zelensky, because to not would be to
accept that a very significant proportion of the Ukrainian population are left
in occupied territory being brutalised by the Russian army. And therefore we
have to continue the war and support Ukraine until every inch of Ukrainian is
liberated and Ukrainian people are created. That is the point Isabella, what is
the outcome? What's the strategy that we're going for? Well, I just I just want
to reinforce the point that James made there. Because Mary, I mean, the reality
is that you're saying we're just carrying on the war. The alternative is simply
to allow President Putin to win this war. You know, we've got to be realistic.
Ukraine is not going to win it on its own. And there and he's not going to stop
destruction of Ukrainian towns and cities, and the deaths of thousands upon
thousands more young Ukrainians. But that's just a complete capitulation. I
mean, you could say that if any country illegally invaded another, oh, well,
let's just give in so that less people die. Okay, Mary, I just want to get your
thoughts on the point that if if the solution isn't continuing in the way that
the other panelists have suggested, what is the alternative? The alternative is
to get around a table and as soon as possible. Implicit in that Mary, is that
you would expect a Ukrainian territorial compromise. Yes, it's very hard for me
to see how the Ukrainian official position currently, which is that it wants to
restore its borders as they were at the collapse of the Soviet Union, which
includes the recapture of Crimea, how that is realistic. And as if even if it's
only a transitional measure, there are likely to have to be some sort of
territorial compromise that is for the sake of the survival of Ukraine and its
population. It's not capitulation. Down Jones, your thought on that. On that, on
that point. Mary is speaking on behalf of the Ukrainian people and the
leadership of Ukraine. Actually, when President Zelensky came to Westminster
only a week or so ago, he made it very clear that he was not and Ukrainian
people were not willing to accept the outcome that Mary dictates. It's for the
Ukrainian people to decide what happens in Ukraine. The actions that we are
taking are not offensive. They are defensive, not just because it's the right
thing to do, but because the world has to make it very clear that these actions
will not be accepted by President Putin or anybody else in the world that thinks
that this type of behavior is acceptable in a modern world. Mary. Obviously,
Ukraine has to have something akin to a casting vote in what happens. But
Ukraine is not the only voice here. Everybody says very idealistically, Ukraine,
it must be Ukraine that decides. But Ukraine is dependent for its defence on
Western countries. It's dependent on the United States. It's dependent on the
UK. It's dependent on European countries who are providing its defence. Without
that, it could not be defending itself. And so we have a voice in this too.
Mary, thank you. Final thought, James, on that point. That the UK, that Ukraine
is dependent on Western countries for its support. I disagree profoundly. We
cannot unsee what we have seen in Booker and a pin and thousands of other
Ukrainian towns and villages. And we cannot accept an outcome that resigns
Ukrainian women, children, Ukrainian population at large to that sort of
brutalization. We must stick with the Ukrainians for as long as it takes. So
this ends on President Zelensky's terms and President Zelensky's terms only.
Yeah. Thank you. An important discussion, particularly, of course, on this
weekend. I just want to say, Anastasia, thank you very much for asking your
question of our panel. If you want to have your say on this, if you have an
opinion on anything that you've heard from our panelists, then Anita Arnhem will
be there to take your call and hear your thoughts on any answers. Saturday
lunchtime, lines open at 12 30pm. The number you need is 03700 100 444. Now on
to our next, which comes from Gabrielle Spai. Hello. Hello. I'm asking this
question as a homes for Ukraine host. The homes for Ukraine scheme enables us to
offer refuge to Ukrainians in a vital and dignified manner. Why aren't we
offering the same help to refugees from other parts of the world? Thanks for
your question. So you've taken somebody in from Ukraine into your home, is that
right? You've taken someone from Ukraine into your home. Yes, they've actually
just moved out. We had a family with us for eight months. And how was that?
Well, it was just a fantastic way to be able to help people who really needed
help. Thank you very much for your question, which was the homes to Ukraine
scheme enables us to offer refuge to Ukrainians in a vital and dignified manner.
Why aren't we offering the same help to refugees from other parts of the world?
Isabella shot. Well, the asylum system as it is, is a complete and utter
disgrace. It is a mess. It is a complete nonsense to be spending hundreds of
millions of pounds putting people up in hotel. But that's not that's not
refugees that are coming here through the Ukrainian system. Is it also why not
extend those schemes for the people aren't the question wasn't about the
Ukrainian system, which I fully support the homes for Ukrainians because they're
genuinely fleeing war zones. What we need to do is rapidly get on top of the
backlog. We shouldn't be looking at how to house people who may not have a
legitimate claim to be here long term. We need to weed out those people who
genuinely need and deserve our help from those who are economic opportunists and
those who do not have a legitimate claim to be here need to be sent home
quickly. So how do you do that? Then how do you use your words weed out? Well,
you and what you don't do is spend weeks and weeks and in fact years sitting on
claims you put the resources in that it takes to quickly process the claims. And
I don't think that fast tracking 12,000 people by asking them to fill in a paper
questionnaire in which they are they're invited to tick a box saying that they
have or haven't ever had any criminal record or committed any acts of terrorism.
It's up to them to just declare that. I don't think the way to process it is
that approach frankly and then allow those people to come in when we don't
really know who they are and by the way bring their families to. So you're
referring there just for context for people that perhaps might not have followed
this and this is some 12,000 asylum seekers from Afghanistan, Eritrea, Libya,
Syria and Yemen are going to fill in a questionnaire instead of a face-to-face
interview to help the government in its aim to get down the asylum backlog that
you referred to Isabelle which at the moment sits at about 166,000 people. And
the question was why not offer similar schemes like the Holmes for Ukraine
scheme to refugees from other parts of the world. Darren Jones should we be? You
know I think there's a deeper problem than just capacity in Whitehall here. I
mean my worry is that whether it's in the UK or previously in the United States
or in parts of Europe how we treat refugees has become a political football for
those who see populism and division as the way to try to win elections. I
genuinely believe that the vast majority of the British people look at it and
are horrified because we as a people want a fair and just system. Of course
there should be proper checks, of course there should be proper balances, of
course where people are abusing the system they should not be permitted to have
access to kind of services or rights or obligations in the UK. But the system as
it's designed is one failing in its administrative terms but two is underpinning
a political narrative now that for many many years has been propagated by
politicians who don't really care about refugees, they just care about division
and trying to win elections. It's unacceptable, unacceptable. I actually think
those are cheap political points to make. What people care about is the
integrity of our borders. That's what they care about. Yeah and you can have you
can have you can have well-managed and secure borders but look at the evidence
of where this populism comes from. It's Donald Trump, it was Boris Johnson, it's
Marine Le Pen. This is a political strategy. I want to bring the rest of our
panel in but a quick thought Darren would you like to see the safe and legal as
they're called roots that currently exist extended to other countries and more
broadly more refugees then? I think the safe and legal routes should apply for
people irrespective of where they come from. If they need help and there's a
safe and legal route and a proper reason for them to get that help it should be
available to you. Thank you. Mary Dzhevski. Well I fully support the extension
of Homes for Ukrainian Scheme to other asylum seekers. I think it's worked on
the whole extremely well and I think it's a template for the sort of thing that
could happen but I think there are there are a couple of problems that maybe
need to be noted. One of them is that the vast majority of Ukrainians coming
under that scheme, women and children, the vast majority of asylum seekers and
people coming across in small boats are young men. These are completely
different demographics to benefit from that sort of sponsorship from homes as
homes for Ukrainians and I think that needs to be borne in mind and it may be an
argument why this is actually going to be more difficult. So does that mean
because when you talk about that you'd like to see similar schemes like the
Homes for Ukraine scheme extended what would that look like and how would that
work? Well what I was going to go on to say was that I think sponsorship is
vastly underused in the UK and we should look at Canada and to a lesser extent
the United States where community groups and church groups and individuals can
club together to sponsor new arrivals and this often works extremely well
because there's a there's a connection and there's a there are means of being
integrated into the community which at the moment by placing people in hotels
this is absolutely the opposite of what we could be doing. Okay Mary thank you.
The essence of the question James Heapoo was why aren't we offering similar help
to refugees from other parts of the world? Why aren't we? Well to answer the
specific question we are I mean as well as in a very limited capacity. Well I
mean I disagree as well as smuggling weapons into Ukraine we're still smuggling
people out of Afghanistan trying to do it all the time the people who worked
alongside UK armed forces and the wider British government efforts during our
time there that continues. We have a well-established program for bringing
Syrian refugees and similarly Hong Kongers who are leaving the growing political
situation from the Chinese government in Hong Kong. So there are other schemes.
Now the thing that concerns me just about some of the the conversation we've had
so far is the way that we conflate refugees and migrants be they legal or
illegal migrants. The two are entirely and it does and it does a disservice to
both cohorts to conflate them for the sake of one big argument about migration.
So we can have a discussion and the question was why can't we do more
specifically for refugees. I say we are doing more we can have a debate about
whether we should do even more. That's a perfectly fine thing but we must not
allow ourselves to accept because it is demonstrably not the case that everybody
that is crossing a boat in the English Channel is a refugee. 30% of them have
come from NATO member Albania with ambition. But hang on just a minute there
James because of course what the government says is that all those people coming
are illegal migrants. Some of them might call themselves refugees. But I mean
they're not. I mean they've not come from a dangerous and we do we do a
disservice to the very many people in the world who need asylum when we bracket
them in the same as those who are seeking economic migration illegally. And I
think that we should have the two debates. One is around how we control our
borders to have a legal migration policy and to control illegal migration. The
other is about the country we want to be and the refuge we want to give to those
who need asylum. They're two entirely separate debates and they shouldn't be
done as the single answer to a question about refugees frankly. I mean James why
is your party failing so badly on this? I mean you've been in charge since 2010.
Your last manifesto said that whatever you did the British people would still be
in charge of what happened. How's that worked out? Well I think we are now on to
illegal migration rather than refugees. But to have that discussion it is
extraordinarily hard to control a maritime border where there is no
international sea space between UK and French territorial waters. We are not
able to go into France to stop the waters getting in the boats. We're going to
need to get a better deal with the French for that and the Prime Minister is
engaging with President Macron for exactly that. But the moment those boats
cross the halfway line in the channel they are in the UK and so from that moment
onwards yes we need a much faster process for legislating. Yes we need to remove
so many of the legal loopholes that are being exploited by lawyers. We're
legislating for that too. We need to speed up the whole process but you cannot
stop people in the middle of the channel once they are in UK waters that are our
response to the receipt of process quicker. Well Rishi Sunak has promised to
stop the boats made it a priority so he will clear the backlog. He will. Let's
see how he gets on. If you want to have your say on this or anything else we
talk about Anita is the person on the end of the phone on Saturday lunch time
03700 100 444 is the number that you need to call. Now let's move on to our next
which comes from Nelly Gutman. Hello Nelly. Hi there. As a lover of lettuce and
tomatoes and cucumbers and salad generally my question to the panel was when
last time members ate a turnip. Nelly thanks question when was the last time
panel members ate a turnip just for a little bit of context for those who might
not know exactly what Nelly's referring to. This was a comment made by the
environment secretary Therese Coffey who was actually in her defence saying that
people should eat seasonal produce like turnips referring to the shortages of
some other fresh produce that we've seen on the shelves. So to the question when
was last time panel members ate a turnip but to the broader point too about food
shortages Taryn James. Do you know I'm largely a vegan and I can't remember the
last time I ate a turnip. Someone like me probably wants to be more regular than
you would you would think. Maybe you're feeling inspired. Maybe but there are
there are two serious issues here. One is about climate change and the other is
about UK farming. So on climate change if you think some extreme weather in
North Africa and Southern Europe has caused problems now wait to see what the
world looks like on our current trajectory for failing on national international
climate targets. Just on that of course that is that is the reason that's been
given to some of these food shortages is extreme weather events in some of the
countries that we import this fresh produce. Too hot too hot in Morocco for
example it's going to get much much hotter they're not going to be able to
produce tomatoes if we currently land. Some of the issues were about it being
too cold actually. Well but I think southern Spain was unusually cold and
Morocco was flooded as you've seen in. Climate change it may just mean weather.
Well I think pretty much everybody recognizes extreme weather is due to climate
change these days or maybe you're in a very very small minority. I am actually a
climate I am not a climate change denier. I believe in climate change the
evidence is overwhelming but there's always too quicker default to blame it on
every difficult thing that happens. Well I mean I'm pretty comfortable based on
the evidence that these incidences are due to climate change and that they are
going to get much worse much worse in the future. And so the second point is
therefore really important which is how resilient is our own supply chain within
the UK for food production. Because over the last decade or two we've become
very used to kind of globalization and kind of frictionless supply chains and of
course we used to be part of the European Union when some of this stuff was a
bit easier. All of that has changed and if we're going to have resilient supply
chains in the UK in the context of having left the European Union and in the
context of climate change we're going to have to do much more for ourselves in
the UK and that requires much more action from government who has been far too
complacent in helping farmers in the farming community in this country. Thank
you. Darren thank you. I mean James Heepee to that point. Minette Batters who is
of course the president of the National Farmers Union has been talking this week
about some of the pressures that farmers are facing in terms of energy costs, in
terms of feed costs, in terms of inflation, saying that is making it harder for
them to produce the produce that we need domestically. Yes, which is good
because you've let me off the hook off the turnip question. I'll ask you that in
a minute don't you worry. I have to be honest with you I'm, I'm, I was thinking
about this on the way here. I had a hunch. You were thinking about turnips on
the way here. Yeah and I don't really don't think I've ever bought one and I'm
not convinced that I've chosen to be one but I'm sure I will have done at some
point but last Sunday I did have great leaks passing it you know another sort of
winter seasonal veg and there is a sort of, it is a sort of mark of our times
that contrarianism in politics is so rife that normally the thing that you dare
say is I want seasonal food that has to be flown into the UK out of season
because you would get lambasted for the air miles on your food but the moment
somebody says eat seasonally everybody's jumping up and down saying we want to
have flown in salad and it's all just a bit nuts. The reality is you are in
great farming country here. There is amazing meat reared very, very locally.
Somerset is I would think home to the finest produce in the world. I say as a
Somerset. Farmers, farmers do have it tough because in supermarkets the price
points are at a place that don't match the costs of production and that's a real
challenge because in a cost of living crisis people want to be able to provide
for their families as cheap as possible and there is a real tension. The NFU
invited me to a meeting with some of my farmers near Shepton Mallet the other
day and they were making exactly this point that you know on the one hand
there's a cost of living crisis there's not much sympathy for them saying food
should be more expensive but really good quality Somerset produce can't be sold
at the bargain basement prices that too many of our supermarkets demand. I can't
say I've got an answer here and now to be completely honest with you and that's
probably a faux pas for a government minister but as an MP that represents a
rural constituency I kind of want to see my farmers able to sell their products
directly to us as the consumer so we can choose to buy more quality stuff
through markets and farm shops locally and I want to see the government and the
supermarkets work to properly address food security whilst at the same time
making food affordable. What does that mean then more direct government support
for farmers? Well I think to be fair the team in Defra are looking at this there
is a transition away from funding the EU subsidy was simply around land
ownership it's transitioning more to one around an environmental good which I
think is a good thing but what farmers would say is the thing that's never been
substituted subsidised actual food production and thus food security that's not
currently on the cards but I do think that just as we have to take our energy
security seriously we have to take our food security seriously too. Okay James
thank you. Mary are you a big fan of the turnip? I'm not aware of having eaten a
turnip other than in very disguised form in one of those sort of pureed mixes of
mashed potato mashed turnip and mashed sweet potato which makes it all so much
easier so that is probably how I've eaten turnips most recently but if we look
to food production in the UK I think that the farmers have one completely
justified complaint which is if this is true that they were not given the same
subsidies as a whole lot of other industries to heat their greenhouses and their
production lines through the winter then that is a huge neglect that was a huge
hole in what should have happened why weren't they given the same subsidies as
industry for instance because they were just as just as essential to the
economy. Just on that point to explain so Minette Batters made this point again
quoting the president of the National Farmers Union this week saying that in
terms of the government support for energy intensive industries farmers the
horticulture sector specifically wasn't included in that. James why wasn't it? I
don't know. Should it have been? Well I mean I don't know I'm afraid defence
ministers do their best to swat up on the other 21 departments of state before
they come on but every now and then there's something come up you don't know the
answer to apologies. Well thank you for your honesty James. Isabel Oakeshot on
the turnip question but also the broader question about food security and
production. I love it when politicians occasionally admit that they don't know
the answer. Thank you for that. On the turnips I grew up in Scotland so
obviously neeps and tatties were a thing and when well cooked they're actually
quite nice but I can't say that I'm making them a staple of my diet at the
moment. I think that the the subsidy system while we were in the EU was very
distorting and massively encouraged and incentivised the growth of mega farms
and monocultures which are really bad for the environment actually and I want
any subsidy system to support mixed farms smaller farms anything that produces
smaller amount of really high quality stuff which we're good at here. You know
we don't have the I've been to these mega dairies these horrendous pig farms in
other countries where you literally have tens of thousands of animals living in
the most grotesque conditions. I don't want Britain to be like that not for the
sake of animal welfare not for the sake by the way of the huge impact of
intensive farming on carbon emissions so I hope that the new system will
discourage that and build British farming that we can really be proud of. Thank
you all and if you want to call in with your turnip recipes I'm sure Anita would
love to hear from you 03700 100 444. Now let's move on to our next which comes
from Virginia Murray. Hello Virginia. Hello does the panel agree with today's
statement by the publishers of Roald Dahl's works that they will not be seeking
to censor his books after all. Virginia thank you for your question so just a
little bit of background here we know that Dahl's publisher Puffin was going to
produce a slightly changed version of some of his novels now they're going to
publish the unaltered texts alongside those changed novels so the question is do
you agree with that? Mary Dejewski. I absolutely agree with that as progress. I
wish that nobody had tried to change them in the first place. I understand that
one of the arguments for changing it is that times have changed and that some of
the language and the sentiments weren't sort of compatible with today's
sensitivities. Well that is all fine and good but I remember in my childhood the
sort of child the sort of children's books that I was reading obviously related
to 30 40 50 years before and nobody said oh you know those sentiments aren't
compatible with with life today that was the sort of children's books that we
were reading. I remember reading lamplighters about match children begging in
the streets and yes you know you didn't see that around you and and thank
goodness for that but nobody said that it was it was wrong for for children to
be reading books that were about times that were different. Mary thank you just
a couple of the changes that were proposed in the in the new text so Augustus
Gloop from Charlie and the Chocolate Factory would have been described as
enormous with the word fat removed from the book and Mrs Twit from the Twits no
longer ugly and beastly simply beastly but as I say Puffin is now publishing the
unedited versions too. James Hebe. Thank heavens I just it it it it's not so
it's a reflection of people power that the the sort of the old version were
rocketing up the sort of best selling lists on on Amazon and other online book
retailers which kind of showed what the the British public thought about that
and as Mary rightly says I mean all of these bits of literature were written of
their time and you know even classics who Jane Austen clearly isn't writing
about an experience of womanhood that anybody would recognize nowadays but that
doesn't mean that it needs to be censored and rewritten it's just literature
that was of its time that can still be enjoyed now as a glimpse as to what that
time was as well as being great writing and I just think it's such a shame that
we keep insisting on tinkering with all this stuff it's doing our society no
good at all. Now the Roald Dahl story company worked with the publishers Puffin
and Inclusive Minds which is a collective working towards inclusion and
accessibility in children's literature and a spokesman for the Roald Dahl story
company said it wanted to ensure that Roald Dahl's wonderful stories and
characters continue to be enjoyed by all children today when publishing new
print runs of books written years ago it's not unusual to review the language
she used alongside updating other details to include a book's cover and page
layout it went on to say the principle was to maintain storylines characters and
the irreverence and sharp edge spirit of the original text and as I say the
texts are now going to be published in full as well. Isabella Csjors? I think
this is a massive own goal by the publishers it's been a huge PR disaster for
them you know everybody has come out against this almost uniformly so. I mean
it's got a lot of people talking about the books. Yeah I don't think we need the
new version alongside the old version let's just stick with the old version it
went way too far I think there could be a case and in fact I'm sure there is a
case were there to be references in children's literature which were clearly for
example anti-semitic or racist or something like that but removing the word fat
is not going to make fat people any less fat or reduce the number of people with
a health problem because they've eaten too much so nor why would you change
turning white with fear to something else I mean that was one of the amends made
I mean there's no kind of racist connotation with that at all so I think this
was a just a complete kind of nonsense really and I'm really glad that the anti-
woke brigade for once won the day. I mean Darren the argument for it was that it
would be done very sensitively but it was about reflecting I suppose a different
time and a different use of language. Yeah look if there were cases of you know
racism for example you as a parent you you wouldn't want your children kind of
necessarily reading that but I think there's I think that's the key point here
the concern was about children reading children's books but that forgets the
fact that there is parenting in the equation and of course I wouldn't want my
kids who are very little alone but when they're reading books to be reading
things that are you know discriminatory or whatever in that way but it's part of
my job as their parent to make sure that either they don't read that in the
first place or if they do read something that I feel has a bit of tension around
it that you explain it to your children you kind of talk to them about the book
and I think sometimes kind of the idea of wokeness can be it can be over-egged a
bit here. Darren thank you. We're going to attempt something brave here a final
question in our last minute I'll ask you all to be quite brief but Bernadette
please go ahead. What is the most important change that's happened in this
country since any questions chaired by Freddie Greenwood came to Wilscombe as we
used to call it in the early 50s? There we are so any questions was here in the
early 50s we're back again now in a word or two each if you could the most
important change that's happened since then is a below shot. Oh god I was really
hoping you wouldn't come to the first. The most important beneficial change well
technology you know a whole new world. A whole new world. Google. Some majors
made my job easier. Darren to me my family and now parts of my constituency the
national minimum wage. Darren James thank you. Mary Dijewski the contraceptive
pill undoubtedly. James E.P. the abundance information that is now at our
fingertips I can't think of anything more transformative extraordinary.
Wonderful. Thank you all for being so speedy on that last one I'm glad we got to
it and Bernadette thank you for your question I'm glad we returned to Wilscombe
with any questions it has been a pleasure but unfortunately that is all we've
got time for now next week we'll be at Holbeck Working Men's Club in Leeds if
you want to come along you can grab yourself a free ticket we'd love to see you
just head to bbc.co.uk forward to us any questions follow the link Holbeck
Working Men's Club in Leeds get yourselves down there but from here in Wilscombe
it leaves me to say thank you to our panel thank you to our audience and thank
you at home for listening. Any questions was presented by Alex Forsythe the
producer was Cabelia Sinclair the lead engineer was Tim Allen. On Radio 4 the
Lord's Prayer is shared by Christians around the world. In this year's Lent
Talks six people reflect on the words of this prayer as we forgive those who
trespass against us sharing stories of forgiveness fatherhood and finding heaven
on earth. Lent Talks on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds begins next Wednesday evening at
8 45 Well now on BBC Radio 4 a point of view a personal essay from a leading
writer here's Trevor Phillips. This year over a million new people will come to
the United Kingdom most of them won't be going home anytime soon despite the
Brits who departed for Australia or America say we ended 2022 with half a
million more people than when the year started yet if you look at the picture
being painted of Britain by some foreign media you have to wonder why anybody
wants to come here at all when we're not freezing because we haven't got a
shilling for the meter we're dodging the incessant rain somebody's usually on
strike and if they aren't it's hard to tell the difference because the transport
system is so useless they can't get to their desks and of course we're racist
and colonialists constantly wallowing in imperial nostalgia and snobbery and
then there's Brexit but the thing is still the people come in spite of the
weather the class system and the bonkers politics strangely even many Scots no
longer seem to want to get away from us actually it may be that the only people
who really believe all this about Britain are the British the best test of what
people think of a nation is what they say when you ask them would you like to
live there in 2017 the data analytics firm gallup surveyed nearly 600 000 people
in 156 nations who wanted to move to a new country Britain ranked the fourth
most popular destination behind the United States Germany and Canada of course
these are all rich countries who wouldn't want their standard of living but
comparable nations like Spain and Italy weren't nearly as popular as the UK
Ireland Norway Holland Denmark and Sweden all richer per head than us didn't
even make the top 10 people like us they like the way we live even if right now
we suffer from a bout of crushingly low self-esteem so what's so special about
Britain our desirability isn't just about money or about democracy or the rule
of law other nations have those things too there has to be some other
explanation for the extraordinary number of people from Albania Syria and
elsewhere who risk crossing the busiest shipping lanes in the world in a dinghy
rather than settle in France the Netherlands or Germany even if they have
relatives there one obvious reason is that the foreigner arriving in any major
British city may technically be an alien but she won't necessarily feel like a
stranger on average every sixth person you meet in the UK was born somewhere
else and these days when we speak of the world's lingua franca we don't mean the
trading language of the medieval Mediterranean we mean English but much of
that's also true of New York Toronto and Amsterdam I think we differ from those
other countries in another way they accept difference but they don't much like
it we do in France women wearing the burka can be forced to remove it by police
Americans don't mind difference as long as you keep it in your own backyard
allergic to paying tax well Alaska welcomes you Mormons Salt Lake City that way
please my own theory about the USA is that if you live in a country the size of
a continent you can always find a plot of land remote enough to avoid getting on
the neighbor's nerves where you and the people who think like you can get on
with whatever you want to unfortunately if you live on an island you do have to
find a way of getting along with people who drive you mad I grew up in the
Caribbean where for the past four centuries people from all over the world have
had to rub shoulders without killing each other there they favor the philosophy
summarized in an almost untranslatable dialect phrase soon come it means that
most conflicts will sort themselves out if you just leave them alone have
another run punch while you're waiting for industrious impatient Brits that's
never going to work so we recognize our differences but try to minimize them by
turning them into jokes think Basil faulty who probably wouldn't have lasted 10
minutes in a small American town before being tarred and feathered it's not
surprising that John Cleese wants to relocate him to an island in the Caribbean
where my cousins will shrug their shoulders at his antics kiss their teeth and
light up another spliff here we call Basil's irritating behaviors eccentricity
smile indulgently and pretend it's a virtue a sort of warped cousin to
independent thinking and quite frequently we find ways of absorbing other
people's peculiar beliefs into the mainstream it's part of the British success
story starting with the first Queen Elizabeth's doctrine of religious toleration
I'm not naive about this her spymaster waltzingham in effect ran a police state
she persecuted Catholics but she also defanged the zealots on both sides of the
religious rift and made tolerance of difference a British virtue when a hundred
years later Charles II tried to impose a single set of rituals and practices on
Britain under the 1662 act of uniformity the cats refused to be heard the Church
of England expelled two thousand priests nearly one in five in what became known
as the great ejection because they wouldn't sign up to orthodoxy and thus
invented non-conformism by the end of the 19th century worshipers could choose
from dozens of groups whose main role was to stick two fingers up to the
official state church Methodists Presbyterians Congregationalists Baptists
Quakers Diggers Levelers some were very strange indeed I think I would have been
a decent ranta and if I could work out what they believed I'd have loved to call
myself a Muggletonian our tradition of tolerance of other people's oddness has
made us better than almost any other country at welcoming and absorbing the new
right up to the Windrush voyagers whose 75th anniversary we celebrate later this
year unfortunately a new brand of conformism now threatens this inheritance of
easy-going tolerance and it arises from the best of intentions in a diverse
society most of us want inequalities to be as small as possible and to rest less
on who your parents were or what they did for a living than on your intrinsic
ability and desire to succeed the problem today is that some people think that
the way to eliminate inequality is to pretend that human differences don't exist
for example it's now fashionable to say that race is a social construct and that
we're all the same under the skin to families like mine that carry the sickle
cell gene a serious blood condition that afflicts people of west african descent
almost exclusively and which in some cases like that of my own father is lethal
the notion that difference is all in our minds is just plain offensive some
people even imagine that if you remove words that describe say sex or disability
then the discrimination based on such characteristics will eventually disappear
nice idea but if you stop calling umpa lumpas umpa lumpas it doesn't make them
any more or less real trying to tackle the downside of diversity by pretending
that our differences don't exist is turning into a baleful new version of the
act of uniformity demanding groupthink enforced by the modern version of the
great ejection we now call it cancellation the person thought to be the leading
candidate to replace nicholas sturgeon as scotland's first minister kate forbes
is a member of the free church of scotland a socially conservative congregation
sometimes derided as the we freeze in the past they were taunted for having so
few grand churches rivals would sing the free kirk the we kirk the kirk without
the steeple they would chant back the old kirk the cold kirk the kirk without
the people in the old days religious and political differences could be the
object of rough humor we stopped making unorthodox belief an obstacle to public
office in the 19th century yet today zealots are slowly and not all that subtly
imposing new tests of uniformity this new movement bears as the columbia
university professor john mcgwerta points out all the features of a religion and
a particularly repressive sect at that what its disciples really want to know is
whether you are ready to bow to every article of faith large or small it's
possible to avoid the fate of the heretic but you have to sign up to the whole
kitten kaboodle and share their ideas about racial equality think what they
think about climate change or identity or the right home for the elgin marbles
whoa we tied you if you fail to recite any part of the catechism in the
prescribed manner i fear that the united states founded for people who refuse to
compromise on their faith is the only way to get to the point where the people
who are confused to compromise on their faith will struggle not to fall to the
new religion it's their way in britain the flame of non-conformism still
flickers and even here it is slowly being extinguished in politics media
universities schools and literature even sport i for one hope that the rough
spirit of british eccentricity the awkward squad of putting two fingers up to
the establishment endures stay weird britain a point of view was written and
presented by trevor phillips