TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-10-07H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 I'll dye each of our shoulders Before you become lonely Let me gaze at you once
more Let's walk together through the gates of spring So that our memories will
follow IKUSHIMA HIROSHI'S GOOD MORNING STRAIGHT I'm Hiroshi Ikshima, reporting
for K-2. I'm here to report on the latest news, sports, entertainment and other
important health issues. Please enjoy the program. This program is brought to
you by the Okinawa On My Mind Foundation. I fell in love with you In the spring
of the 19th If you say you're beautiful now Give me your original gaze If you
have a heart, show it to me Please let me know soon If you're young at least
Flowers will bloom in the spring Oh, bring me back my heart My hometown, Okinawa
Bring me back, bring me back, Okinawa on my mind Even the flowers of the first
and second generation Travel with the first and second generation While living
in the same Japan Even the pain of love and separation Oh, bring me back my
heart My hometown, Okinawa Bring me back, bring me back, Okinawa on my mind
Bring me back my heart My hometown, Okinawa Bring me back, bring me back,
Okinawa on my mind Okinawa on my mind Okinawa on my mind Okinawa on my mind The
sun is in my frozen heart And I, for you, that position I was trying to make you
feel so arrogant I'm sorry, I'm sorry I'm sorry, I'm sorry I realized the
coldness and cruelty of the positive And the coldness of the negative I'm sure
the thing I want to give you is something cooler It's not a beautiful thing, but
it's a thing that's not shaken by denial It's something that warms the bottom of
my heart more than a blanket I have only ideals, but I can't find them no matter
where I look in my heart I want to tell you, but I can't, and that's why I'm so
upset I'm tied up so tightly I'm so timid, and I'm late for my first class Words
are like a snowfall Even if I want to give you a present The more I get used to
the universe, the more the shape collapses and melts But the words I choose to
say will disappear The feelings entrusted there I can't give up on shaking your
heart Until the love reaches you more than I love you Just wait a little longer
Even if I'm just standing by your side in thin clothes I sweat unnecessarily I'm
probably going to hurt you by being so warm The more your palms are hot, the
colder your heart is Don't say such a cruel thing even if it's a joke I don't
mind if I say it, but even if it costs my whole life Let me turn it around
properly I want to save you, I want to be saved This equal I want to be saved is
now gently peeling off Hard theory, falsehood, over-exposure of pride I want
kindness more than rightness And the one who receives it is like an illumination
I don't want to be thick and painful, I just want to be alone with you I try to
fix the broken days with the words I've written I was attracted by the too high
fever I want to find the best strawberry cake By stacking up the curtains of
such failure Words are like a snow crystal If I give you a present If time
passes, it will usually spill from my memory and melt away It will disappear,
but it will be added to our story When I think back, when I finally look at you
I want to keep looking for something that will shake your heart Until love
reaches you more than love Wait a little longer I don't want any words, even if
I'm sad I'm thinking about this and that by myself by your side Even if the snow
melts, it will remain We are the rockstars I'm thinking about this and that by
myself by your side I'm thinking about this and that by your side I'm thinking
about this and that by your side Softer than rain, harder than pain, don't be
afraid and trace your secret We're here to reign, life is so vain, we're out of
fame to fly across the world I'll make you fly, I'll make you cry, I'll make you
feel you're dragging to fly I'll make you fly, I'll make you cry, I'll make you
fly Feel the beauty of life, beauty of sky, beauty of real dragons to fly And
ready to dive, ready to fly We are the rockstars The fucking rockstars We are
the rockstars We are the rockstars The fucking rockstars Life is not a game,
it's not a way, it's not a different thing It's not a game, it's not a way, it's
not a different thing We are the rockstars We'll let your wings up, leave the
chain We'll let your freedom reign You feel like a queen, you feel like a king,
you feel so jaded Let the beauty of love, beauty of red, roses to touch Soak to
the rain, harder than pain, don't be afraid and trace your secret We're here to
reign, life is so vain, we're out of fame to fly across the world I'll make you
fly, I'll make you cry, I'll make you feel, your dragons to fly I'll make you
fly, I'll make you cry, I'll make you fly Feel the beauty of life, beauty of
sky, beauty of real dragons to fly I'm ready to dive, I'm ready to fly I'll make
you fly, I'll make you cry, I'll make you feel, your dragons to fly I'll make
you fly, I'll make you cry, I'll make you fly Feel the beauty of life, beauty of
sky, beauty of real dragons to fly I'm ready to dive, I'm ready to fly We are
the rockstars We are the rockstars The fucking rockstars TREASURE I met you in
the woods, with only secrets in my heart I pretended to be normal I searched for
you and gave up My place was a place to be created That day or tomorrow, the
things that will be left behind The contract of our hearts Should I hold your
hand? What should we eat today? I wanted to talk to you about this I wanted to
eat the cake we used to eat together I laughed and fell down Our silly life will
continue I was told that I was a fool In this crazy planet I pretended to be
normal I realized that someone had decided My light was just here The weak curse
that was released that day I say goodbye to it from the bottom of my heart
Should I raise my head? The blooming flowers I wanted to talk to you about how
beautiful it was I want to tell you about the miracles of being with you I want
to tell you everything Our silly life will continue As we walk to work in the
morning, the sun rises I want to thank you, so I hold your hand Should I go
home? What should we eat today? I wanted to talk to you about this I want to
tell you about the miracles of being with you I want to tell you everything Our
silly life will continue I wanted to talk to you about how beautiful it was I
want to tell you everything Our silly life will continue Our silly life will
continue I wrote and ended up A message in a familiar language What did I want
to say? Just a single word I closed my ears and put on lipstick every day I
swung through the wind Ah, I can hear your voice shaking Ah, as if I knew
tomorrow beyond time I want to tell you about the miracles of being with you I
saw off my classmate at the station where no one was At the end of the night, I
saw it in the window Yes, it's true Ah, I can hear your voice shaking Ah, as if
I knew tomorrow beyond time Ah, I can hear your voice from far away Ah, as if I
knew tomorrow beyond time Ah, I can hear your voice shaking Ah, as if I knew
tomorrow beyond time I always feel love, pain, and strength in my heart I'm
heading for you You, who are not afraid of mistakes Don't show me your tears, I
want to keep looking at you I was looking at the blue sky that day The youth and
experience of the game are still the same I dreamed of that day forever Now, I
will never repeat it again I can't live without going back Ah, I'm tired But
little by little, I understand I'm going to fight I'm sad, I want to cry, I want
to scream I believe in you I can't put it into words You, who are not afraid of
mistakes Don't show me your tears, I want to keep believing in you I can't stop
looking at him The poster on the street corner is fading away But my feelings
for you will never fade I will never hesitate I can't see you even if I'm sad
But I want to tell you all over the world I always feel love, pain, and strength
I'm heading to you You, who are not afraid of mistakes Don't show me your tears,
I want to keep looking at you I'm heading to you You, who are not afraid of
mistakes 「I'm Heading to You」 Life goes on and on We keep going round and round
It's been a thousand years, maybe three years What can I do if I say that? Today
or tomorrow, I don't know I have to decide what to do I'm going to fight I'm
going to scream on the street corner Don't cry, you don't cry You're living
without a smile So no more, I'm no more I can't even know that pain I'm getting
on a plane, I'm getting on a plane I'm sick of it, I'm sick of it I'm at risk of
getting sick But what I want to get is love, love, love I can't really bet on it
I'm a little lonely, but I'm growing I'm going to spend it with my best friend
I'm on a train The destination is a unknown road Where do you want to go? Okay,
I don't know What's waiting for you to jump in? Open the door I feel like I can
show you everything But I can't see anything I met you again I'll make you feel
lonely So, let's have a good time I can download this I'm going to use it to
play my voice and song I'm not going to laugh at that I'm going to be evil I'm a
bad guy I don't need a good reason I'm going to be evil I'm going to sing to you
From my microphone If you can hear me I'm going to throw my voice away I'm going
to stop and hold my umbrella I'm going to make you sleepy I'm going to cry I'm
going to forget everything There's love in front of you Open the door I'm going
to sing to you I'm going to be evil I'm going to be evil I'm going to be evil
I'm going to be evil You said you were afraid of love You cried alone You came
to my lonely heart You gently put your lips together I want to protect your
secret whispers You're a cute angel I have my future You have yours Let's raise
our future Embrace love Embrace dreams I'll send you a ring Propose My dear I'll
never let go of your hand You in the red dress Hide your burning heart In the
back of your eyes You look at happiness You dance when you get drunk You can
believe in your suspicious heart A hot kiss I'll send you my wish I'll give you
a bouquet with my heart Embrace love Embrace dreams The only proposal in the
world The stars in the night sky are smiling I won't let go of your hand until I
die I have my future You have yours Let's raise our future Embrace love Embrace
dreams I'll send you a ring Propose My dear I'll never let go of your hand
You're listening to KZOO, KZOO, 1210 AM, Honolulu, Hawaii A free sample is
available for 21 and over. The Grand Parade and the Nagaoka Fireworks will be on
from 12 PM, 4.30 PM. See you at the Honolulu Festival! I want to live The shadow
grows in the distance The waves of the night erased it I shed tears Well, I
haven't noticed If you throw your heart away You'd rather get hurt Come, cut
through the cold wind and run away Someday, these drops will become jewels
Believe that you'll be reborn in a beautiful heart Become a shining light in
this world Believe in the endless me No matter how far you go, follow the path
you must follow You'll live on to the endless endless shore It's inevitable to
worry about someone It's difficult to forgive someone I can't count the things I
can't find But I'll try to love this life called me Become a shining light in
this world Even if you face a tomorrow without light Even if you're happy with
loneliness after sadness You're still breathing, you're still breathing today
You're still alive Kya Kya Kya Kya Kya Kya Kya Kya Kya Kya Kya Kya Kya Kya Kya
Kya everything. 私に幸あれ 涙に幸あれ 明日に幸あれ 世界で一つの輝く光になれ 泣いてもいい 私は歩いて行くのさ 涙は頬を流れる星のようさ
私になれ 私は叶えて生きて行くのさ ああいつの日を ああいつの日を 作詞・作曲・編曲 山口 優 歌詞・作曲・編曲 山口 優 歌詞・作曲・編曲 山口 優
風の中限りなく夢があった 駆け抜けるときめきで信じあえた 争いや疑いの言葉を知って 触れ合える笑顔まで遠くなったけど 失くさないで夢を 忘れないで愛を
心を抱いて I love you I love you I love you more 歌詞・作曲・編曲 山口 優 歌詞・作曲・編曲 山口 優 歌詞・作曲・編曲
山口 優 歌詞・作曲・編曲 山口 優 歌詞・作曲・編曲 山口 優 歌詞・作曲・編曲 山口 優 I love you I love you I love you
more 涙の向こうに輝く瞳に答えを探して I love you I love you I love you more 悲しい時でも くじけそうな時でも
諦めないから I love you I love you I love you more 失くさないで夢を 忘れないで愛を 心を抱いて I love you I
love you I love you I love you more 歌詞・作曲・編曲 山口 優 歌詞・作曲・編曲 山口 優 キツネ!キツネ!
本当の私は見せられない カッコつけちゃってごめんなさい 見つめられないくらい好きなのに 興味ないフリをしてる 恋なんか星の数ほどしたし 同じ愛すぎないし
涼しい顔でいっそもそのように あなたと話しましょう さあ愛とか未知も感じさせないで キツネ!キツネ! 女の子はバケてるんだ 純なハートバレたら
簡単に盗まれちゃうよ 男をどうして名乗った? お望み通りにバケるよ キツネ!キツネ! ねえ気づけばいい感じに キツネ!キツネ! どこかで誰かが嘘ついてる
そんなに目くじらたてないで 傷つかない程度にだれだって 上司に合わせてるの 結婚は遠先のことでも 現実見なきゃね こんなところで心を許しちゃ 後々つらいでしょ
夢なら夢だと気づかせないで キツネ!キツネ! 手抜きなんてどこかにいる どうせどうせこの世は みんな駆けやすの中 キラキラと光る真実は どこかに隠してあるんだ
キツネ!キツネ! 心の敵犯ね みんなでコンコンコン 鳴き声聞こえるか? 好きも好きじゃないも 本当かわからない キツネ狩りいっぱい コンコンコンコンコン
キツネ!キツネ! 女の子は化けてるんだ キュンなパッドバレたら 簡単に盗まれちゃうよ 男を 探してんだボーダー お望み通りに化けるよ キツネ!キツネ!
キツネにつままれて 気付けばいい価値に Hey! Hey! Oh! Hey! ジャクジャクと開けてく So look at me now 抜け出していくんだ
深い深いどこまで すべてが変わって 生まれ変わる Baby baby to lose control 月が照らす道 限りない夢を掴め もうYou know
who I am 目を閉じたら 広がる世界が 見えてくる ほら行こうよ もっと叫べ 壊せ起き上がれ もっと光れ Grow up 可能性試せ 燃え立つ炎
本当の自分を見せて それが 無限大 無限大 月を見てほしいよ 無限のPower 起き上がれ もっと行け このまま空転鳴らそう無限大 All dayからムス
思い出すよふと 俺のことが見える 追い越さないだろう それが 無限大 今風流れてくまま Zero to honey それ以上の価値 君と Fantasy
Baby baby to lose control 止まるなんて知らない 限界を超える瞬間 もうYou know who you are 目を閉じたら
夢見た世界が 本当の自分を見せて それが 無限大 無限大 月を見てほしいよ 無限のPower 起き上がれ もっと行け このまま空転鳴らそう無限大 闇が晴れて
広がっていく未来 眠って心を切る瞬間 不可能はない Let's go それが 不律不律 反則はしないよ 無名無名 追い越させないよ 心配任せてNo way
昨日の君とはさよなら Baby 無限のPower 起き上がれ 正解なし 制限なし 全てを賭けよ 無限大 もう止まらない I'm the winner
挑戦を受けてやるよ そう無限大 最高 無限大 たとえそれが誰か一人でも 心の鐘を叩いてくれ 胸の奥まで揺さぶるように 命はきっとそのためにある
生まれた意味を知るため まだ見ぬ何かその日のために 生きてゆくなら何も恐れはしない 明日のドアを叩き続ける 忘れかけた夢にまた逢うまで コインを投げて消えた道に
アレとエビルはひねったけれど 言葉は後からついてくだろう 歩き続けるのさ俺は まだ見ぬ何かその日のために 生きてゆくなら何も迷いはしない
明日はきっとそのためにある 失くしかけた夢にまた逢うため 心の鐘を叩いてくれ 俺は涙を隠しはしない 生きてゆくなら何も恐れはしない 涙はきっとそのためにある
生きてる意味を知るため まだ見ぬ何かその日のために 生きてゆくなら何も恐れはしない 明日のドアを叩き続ける 忘れかけた夢にまた逢うまで
まだ見ぬ何かその日のために 生きてゆくなら何も迷いはしない 明日はきっとそのためにある 失くしかけた夢にまた逢うため まだ見ぬ何かその日のために
生きてゆくなら何も恐れはしない 明日のドアを叩き続ける 忘れかけた夢にまた逢うまで 作詞・作曲 中島美穂 歌 松本 優 歌 松本 優 歌 松本 優 歌 松本 優
歌 松本 優 歌 松本 優 作詞・作曲 中島美穂 歌 松本 優 作詞・作曲 中島美穂 歌 松本 優 歌 松本 優