TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-20H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Just say, open BBC Sands to get started. We have to set an example as a
country. We would take responsibility for our people. And other countries are
doing that. And we seem to be an outlier who are not prepared to do that. So
these people can potentially become more dangerous. Saturday's Rugby Six Nations
match between Wales and England will go ahead after members of the Welsh team
who'd threatened to strike agreed to play. They'd been in dispute with the
bosses of Welsh Rugby because of disagreements over contracts. More than 100
professional players met the professional rugby board for talks, which concluded
this evening. A compromise package has been reached, which includes a reduction
to the contentious 60-cap rule. Tesco and Aldi have joined Asda and Morrison's
in limiting the amount of some fruit and vegetables that customers can buy
because of supply problems. The issues have been blamed mainly on severe weather
in Spain and North Africa. The handling of the police investigation into the
disappearance of Nicola Bully is to be the subject of an independent review.
Lancashire's Police and Crime Commissioner Andrew Snowden said he'd asked the
College of Policing to look into the case, including the disclosure of personal
information about the mother of two, whose body was found on Sunday. And the
Office for National Statistics has revealed that data from the 2021 census
suggests that the number of people in England and Wales who've never been
married has continued to rise. Nearly four in ten adults have never been married
or in a civil partnership up from three in ten at the start of the century. BBC
News. Continuing our celebration of the centenary of BBC Radio drama, the
Huntsman now purposefully directed his footsteps, analysing the most
groundbreaking plays from the vast drama archive. It's intensely physical. This
room. He just took your wallet. You can go to different places and tell the
stories from different points of view. Dramatic beats with me, Michael Simmons
Roberts. Everything in British storytelling, film, television, owes so much to
radio drama. On Radio 4 and BBC Sounds, on Saturday night at eight. Radio 4's
long-running series of thought-provoking talks, Four Thought, will be drawing to
a close tonight. There are nearly 400 editions in the back catalogue available
to search and listen to on BBC Sounds, of course. And tonight in the last ever
edition, Sheila Cook, who produced around 150 episodes, will be reflecting on
what she learned from her 11 years working on the programme. You can hear that
at a quarter to nine this evening, just after the moral maze. Now on Radio 4
it's the archers, and will things ever be normal again between Tony and Lillian?
Lillian! Lillian! I've got to get back. Lillian, wait a minute. There's
something I wanted to show you. Sorry, but I don't have time right now. So when
will you? Did you have your chat with Mum? Yes. What was it about? Well, if you
must know, I was here on behalf of Alice and Kate, who are making the funeral
arrangements and need to know how we're all planning to get there. That's all
sorted. Mum, you and me and Pat can all travel together. Actually, Tony, the way
things are at the moment, I'd rather travel in a separate car. What? I've
explained to Mum, and she's in agreement that I'll go with Leonie and James, and
she will go with you and Pat in another car. Is this really necessary? Yes, I
fear it is. Can't we show a united front for one day? For Jennifer's sake. She
would have wanted us to. Please don't tell me what Jenny would have wanted.
Lillian! I know full well the last thing she would have wanted was for any of us
to be upset, or to upset Mum on the way to her funeral. Now if you'll excuse me.
It doesn't have to be like this, Lillian! I'm truly grateful to you for making
the time. Of course, David. Although you're about to start carving soon, aren't
you? Any minute, yeah. Linda. Oh, Ardo, good morning. Morning. Just a quick
reminder. Sorry, I'm running late. I have a parcel arriving today between 1 and
3pm. Not to worry, one of us will be here. Great, thanks. Ardo? Yes? Don't
forget the packed lunch you requested. It's on the hall table, fully labelled.
Of course, will do. Thanks. Wow. You make your guests a packed lunch. Is that a
thing? Certainly not something we've factored in. Well, if you mean is it a
regular service, then no. But given enough notice, I don't mind. Ardo is an
exception. Of course, he's been here so long. It's less of a B&B and more of a
home to him now. Wow. It really is the full experience here. Don't be
disheartened, David. Ambrich Hall is a high-end, long-established outfit. You
really can't compare yourselves to us. No. I see that. Anyway, as we were
saying, you seem to have all the right fire and safety measures in place. Tea-
making facilities in the room itself, which is vital. Now, I see that your room
doesn't have an en suite. Yes. We have the shared bathroom, which has been given
a freshen up. Mum has the en suite, so that's one less person using the
bathroom. And Ben Ruth and I have decided that we'll try and use the downstairs
lid as much as possible. Not ideal, but needs must. It's imperative you make it
clear to anyone interested in booking that the bathroom is shared. Oh, of
course, yeah. No, it's more any last-minute snags or issues we may not initially
have thought of that I was hoping to get some ideas about. David, I can't know
what would be required or best suited to Brookfield, even with my extensive
experience and success rate, unless I see it for myself. You mean visit? Yes. I
could squeeze you in at some point this afternoon. But the main reason I'm
asking is to help Ben. Remember, it's his venture now. In which case, I will
definitely find some time to visit today and cast a final eye over everything.
Oh, but we'll most likely be with the cows, Linda. And I wanted to save you any
trouble by coming here. David, do you want Ben to make a success of this or not?
Yes. Good. I'll see you later. These adjustments to the architect's drawings are
very good, Roy. She's managed to get the square footage we were losing into the
suites on the perimeter. Yeah. Is she out on site? Yes. She's gone walkabout
with Peter. They'll discuss materials and costing, which I don't need to be
involved in. I'm sorry I've got me timings, model, that bad deal. I should have
been here when she arrived. Don't worry. Peter was on site, and Andrea's no
shrinking violet. If we're not about, she gets stuck in and makes use of the
time. If one of us can be here in future, though... I'll make sure I'm here next
time. I would have been here myself, only I was waylaid on calls this morning.
Everything okay? Yes, fine. Just my sister and her kids doing my head in. Oh,
right. You too. Why? Who's been bugging you? Don't get me started. Not your
neighbour again. Yep. This is the man who lost his wife recently. I mean, I feel
for him, honestly. Once upon a time, he was family. But he's taken me and Kirsty
at our word, and now he's popping around all the time. He was over last night
for dinner, brought a shappe's pie and some posh wine. That's nice. Only,
Kirsty's right. He does love the sound of his own voice, and once he's got some
wine in him... Oh, right. It's like he picks a topic from the news and just
rants about it, like he knows all there is to know. And when he finally stops,
Kirsty and me self have to think of something to say that doesn't
unintentionally come out as being insensitive. Oh, it's a minefield, Ardill.
Now, I do understand the most innocent comment can seem offensive or hurtful to
someone who's suffered a tragic loss. And, well, I'm known for putting me foot
in it, so the whole thing just makes me nervous. So stop inviting him over.
Simple. We can't, because it's the right thing to do, isn't it? Not if you don't
mean it. Well, we do, sort of. Just, I mean... But his family's always calling
around to check in on him, and he says he hates it. Makes him feel like he's
being babysat. I reckon he keeps coming over to ours to avoid the family
checking in. Well, that doesn't sound too bad. As soon as things settle, he'll
get back to his new norm. And now he's invited me and Kirsty around to dinner
tomorrow night to thank us for the dinner he brought us last night. So decline.
So another awkward night on the couch for me and Kirsty. Right. You've just
spent ages moaning about the guy. Why on earth would you accept a dinner
invitation? Because... The right thing to do has to come with the right
intention. Otherwise, it's hypocrisy. Um... Hello. We'll be right out. We need
it outside. Can I give you a hand with that? Oh, you're all right, Lee. I should
look where I put things. Here, let me sweep up the soil. You put the trays back.
Everything okay? No. A case of more hay's less speed. Plant in the broad beans
and then I go and knock the trays over. Did your accidents happen? This was
avoidable. Have you spoken to Helen today? Oh, as a matter of fact, I have and
she seemed very happy. Did she? Well, I'll tell you, Tony, since I switched my
perspective on the whole situation with the girls, it's like this massive
weight's been lifted. Okay, California's a long way away, but we can all still
talk as often as we can online and they can come here and maybe Helen and I can
take the boys over there. Oh, that's great news, Lee. Yeah. And I wanted to say
thanks, Tony. For what? If it hadn't been for your sound reasoning, I'd still be
moping about thinking Helen wanted to get rid of me. You are very welcome. If
only everyone was hoping to a little sound reasoning. Is this about Lillian? I'm
afraid so. She'll come round, surely. Oh, you don't know my sister. She's as
stubborn as a mule. Linda! No, there's no need to be alarmed. Hope you don't
mind. I'll let myself in. Now, there are many things here that need addressing.
You're not going to step into this kitchen in those boots, are you? Yeah, of
course I'm going to remove my boots, but, you know, this is a working farm. And
our guests will know that comes with all the reality of a working farm. Oh, no,
no, no, David. That's a rookie mistake. Your guests want to experience their
idea of farming, not the stark, smelly, muddy reality. Smelly? Oh, yes. There is
a distinct odor life in here that's a little too close to reality for my liking.
Well, with all due respect, you're not our guest, so your liking doesn't
really... I have come to help, remember. Now, I don't see a space for the guests
when they're not in their room. Please tell me they're not expected to be in
here. No, we cleared the dining room for them. Well, yes, you may think you
have, but you'll need a television in there. They can have breakfast without
watching telly, surely. Or you could install a television in the room, and you
may wish to consider a cleaner. Linda, we want to make money from this venture,
not fritter it away. Right. That's it. What? Clearly, you have no idea what it's
like to have a real live guest staying at your B&B. And I cannot, in all good
conscience, let you loose on the world of bed and breakfasting without a trial
run of this place. I will be making a booking and staying here in row as a guest
tomorrow night. Oh, no, no, no, no. I'm sure that's not necessary. We've got
your notes. David, learn not to look a gift horse in the mouth. And please
address these matters before I arrive. You sure you don't want to share this?
No, thanks. I've got my packed lunch. We'll take a quick half hour and then get
back out there with Andrea before she heads back to London. Sure. Adil? Yeah?
I'm sorry if my going on about Brian upset you. He's just... I'm sorry. Don't
worry about it. Right. Good. Only I didn't mean to. Look, if you want to feel
sorry for him, then feel sorry for him. If you want to moan about him, then
moan. But doing both is crazy. You're complaining about him for taking you and
Kirsty at your word. Yeah, you're right. I bet he sleeps in your armchair with
the television on because it makes him feel normal. How do you think he'd feel
if he could hear you now? Yeah, I'm an awful person. It's probably the only real
sleep he has right now. Yeah, of course. And I'm sorry again if I've spoken out
of tone. Roy, stop apologizing. Sorry. I lost someone. Close. A few years ago.
It's bad enough you're going through hell. The last thing you need is people
being insincere and offering fake support. So that's two taster sessions and
anything for the boys? Oh, they'll be with Helen. I'm getting some quality time
in with my girls before they leave. Well, they'll have a wonderful time with the
horses. I can see that Evie's already taken to one of the ponies. She's not
stopped stroking them since we arrived. Looks like she's a natural. Is she the
youngest? Evie? Yeah. Or will Alice be taking the lesson? Well, it'll depend on
the rotor, but we have a lovely team here, animals and stuff. Honestly, they'll
be fine. I'm sure. I just wondered. Perhaps if they come back for longer visit,
you could book some lessons for them. We'll see. Oh, you don't sound too sure.
Actually, they're about to move abroad with their mum. Move? You mean,
permanently? Yes. So I don't quite know how it's going to work once they're
settled. I want to make the most of the time I've got with them while they're
here. Good plan. It's going to be such a wrench when they leave. I can imagine.
We never know what tomorrow brings, so we may as well make the most of today.
I'm sorry, Lillian. If I'm speaking out of turn, I was so sad to hear about your
sister. But for the life of me, I can't think why you'd want to make more
distance between you and your brother at a time like this. Lee, I know you mean
well, but... He's hurting, Lillian, because of Jennifer's death and because of
the distance between you two, when you could be closer than ever. It's not
always that easy. It is if you let it be. I'm sorry. I know it's not my place.
But we should make the most of the present while we still can. If a sudden loss
doesn't teach us that, then what does it teach us? Front row is next this
evening, but first let's hear from Michael Burke about tonight's moral maze. Now
on Radio 4, here's Front Row with Nickahad. I'm joined by two artists who draw
on their British, Asian working class roots in different ways. Shiloh Kamari
Singh-Burman is the visual artist who's worked little up the tate in neon during
the pandemic, and Dwinda Bansal creates immersive works, often involving film.
In 1979, my father started introducing video into the shop. Well, my father
always had a love for film. And when he came to Wolverhampton, although he
worked as an electrician, he also at night used to help out at the local cinema,
which used to play Indian films. I suppose it was a natural step for him to
think, well, how can we as a business start supplying our local community? Both
Dwinda and Shiloh join me in the studio to discuss what connects them and what
separates them, as Shiloh's latest exhibition opens in Liverpool. Winner of the
Sony photographer of the year award, Craig Easton, joins me to discuss the life
and work of the pioneering New Yorker photography critic Janet Malcolm, as a new
book celebrating her life is published. And if you've ever told yourself, I have
not thrown away my shot, some exciting news before eight o'clock. First tonight,
a disturbing thriller that looks at race, class and middle England suburbs comes
to Netflix. After winning Best UK Short at the 2017 Raindance film for his first
short film, writer-director Nathaniel Martello White began working on his debut
feature, The Strears. The film tells the story of a young black woman who
escapes from her inner city life with a violent partner and mounting financial
pressures to a seemingly perfect life full of village fakes, fundraisers and two
mixed-race children who, importantly to her, look almost white. Inspired by a
true story, it stars Ashley Madekwai, who was BAFTA nominated for her role in
County Lines. As the movie begins, things are not going well for lead character
Cheryl. I'm sick of it, sis. I can't breathe here. What is up with you? Cheryl,
calm down. No. No, they look at you like you're worthless. They make you stand
there and wait like you're some sort of reprobate or something, like you're shit
on the sole of their shoe. Who makes you wait? You're not making any sense. Is
this one of your dips? The housing office was down there earlier asking for help
with the rent. You've got a job. You and Michael need to stop living fancy off
those credit cards. Oh, I've seen someone of the year. Three times in a row. I
should be where I am now. Call. Go check on your sister. I want more. Is it
wrong to want more? Ashley Madekwai owes Cheryl in the opening scene of The
Strears. The next time you meet Cheryl, she's using the name Neve and speaking
in a different accent somewhere in the home counties. Wonderful morning, isn't
it? Wonderful morning, isn't it? Isn't it just? And you're looking just divine,
as usual, charmer. You're coming to my charity gala this Friday. We're opening
up the door. Oh, exciting. Disability in the Gambia. And splendid. Shall I put
you down for 500 pounds? Yes, unless... Oh, no, of course. 550 even. Happy to
help. So kind. Well, writer, director Nathaniel Martello White joins me now live
down the line from London. Nathaniel, welcome to Front Row. Great to be here.
Thanks for having me. Now, that scene that we've just heard begins with Cheryl
or Neve as she is now rehearsing in the mirror how she'll greet her neighbour
when she leaves the house. And she reveals this effort involved in maintaining
this new persona. You actually use improvisation sometimes when you're
preparing. Tell me how you came up with that scene. Yeah, it's really a good
question. We were... funnily enough, that was the scene we were shooting on the
last day of the shoot. And as she was in front of the mirror and we were doing
all of her routines in front of the mirror scenes, one after the other. And I
just felt when she was in front of the mirror, essentially putting on this new
face that I just wanted her to start talking to herself. And the first scene is
like Wonderful Morning is her first line. So I just started to get Ashley to
repeat that line and to almost rehearse her Wonderful Morning. She does that
every morning sort of thing. And it just really stuck and it kind of, you know,
you've got Daenera in front of the mirror and Taxi Driver. There's a thing about
Vincent Cassel and Léhenne, people in front of the mirror, so speaking to
themselves, feel sort of iconic. Neve standing in there saying, are you talking
to me? So she's getting ready to put her mask on really, isn't she? And this
move is about race, the complexities of racism, microaggressions. They're really
deftly explored in the movie. There's a moment where a white acquaintance says
to Neve, you're practically one of us as a huge compliment. There's a dinner
party and they discuss white flight. Tell me about the idea behind pushing those
notions. What are the themes that you're exploring here? I'm definitely
exploring questions around Britishness and the British dream. And I think I'm
really exploring the sensation and the experience a lot of people of color have
existing in predominantly white spaces. And I was really interested in that
modulation and how they manage that and sometimes even subconsciously without
even realizing it. And then I was also really interested in, you know, how I
guess systemic communities can create the feeling as if you have a laden weight
on your back. And in fact, I was really interested in the idea of even a mother
sort of fleeing her responsibilities. And, you know, essentially, obviously
she's not in the best sort of relationship at that point in time. But to almost,
yeah, to sort of leave in pursuit of this dream no matter the cost. I was really
interested in that as a sort of cautionary tale that takes us into conversations
around race and motherhood. And in pursuit of the dream, it's everything is
viewed via the prism of blackness because the dream is to live essentially as a
white person in the white suburbs, isn't it? Absolutely. I think the white
middle class bourgeois ideal is a really powerful one. You know, and I think
it's something she desires and I feel like maybe she feels she deserves it and
hasn't been given a fair crack of the whip, as it were. And so, yeah, I think
it's a really powerful culture. And I think, yeah, one in which she aspires to
one, one in which she becomes. And I think we always felt of Cheryl slash Nieve
that if she'd have grown up in a proper, functional, nurturing environment that
she probably would have become, you know, deputy head mistress. And she probably
would have got the big house and stuff. It's just that she grows up in a sort of
legacy of trauma. Well, she also grows up and we see at the beginning that the
tower block, we jump from Cheryl's life in the tower block to this life that
Nieve has in the leafy suburbs. And it feels that locations are quite important.
It feels like we're watching two entirely different England's. Was that
something that was important to you as well? Absolutely. I guess I've always
felt, you know, I didn't grow up in a white picket fence, leafy suburb. I come
from London. I come from South London and there is a chaos to the urban city. I
mean, there's also an incredible culture to it and everybody sort of butting up
against each other. But I always felt there was a strange kind of idealism I had
about the suburbs and about the sort of the perfection of the suburbs and the
kind of idea of safety and community and kids playing out on the lawn. And it's
a thing, I think, which a lot of filmmakers get. Where did you get that? Because
if you didn't grow up with a white picket fence, where did the idea come from?
Well, well, my dad actually, his mom was based in Billerickie in Essex. And when
I was growing up, when we'd go there on Boxing Day, we would, I'd sort of play
out around there. And I was always struck by that sort of suburban kind of
environment and atmosphere. And I think, you know, in life, you just kind of
you're absorbing these things. And then when it comes time for you to make a
movie, I felt like I wanted to. I also wanted there's a sub genre, aren't there,
of those sorts of suburban thrillers? And I think I just it felt natural that
this movie should sort of take place within that sub genre. And there are also
clearly lots of cinematic influences. Audiences might see parallels with the
work of Jordan Peele. I mentioned director of Get Out and Us. Do you see the
strays as being part of that sub genre of what we might call black horror? Yeah,
I mean, I guess so. I sort of feel like I want to leave that open to
interpretation rather than state that as a fact. I guess for me, I've always
been interested in using metaphor or satirical tropes to explore the black
experience, because I think it's a really complex thing to step into. And when
you when you sort of set that up against genre or against metaphor, it frees it
up. And I think it allows people to sort of come towards you and maybe even
experience the racial discussions in a way that they're not even conscious of.
And so I think genre feels good for that. And I think Jordan Peele has obviously
exploded up in this place where where that now is recognisable. Tell me about
the inspiration for the film. Where did it come from? Well, initially, my mom
was telling me a story that she basically overheard about a biracial woman who
had essentially a lope to life and had started again in a predominantly white
community and had two children who were white passing and was sort of denying
the existence of her past. I don't want to sort of give any spoilers away, but
sort of this whole other life that she lived and responsibilities that she had.
And that story really stayed with me. And I just was like, I kind of feel like
there's a there's a movie in that somewhere. Well, clearly there was. I
mentioned the mixed race children. So colourism is something that it's a big
subject. It's not something we talk about very much in the UK. Is that an
important subject for you to explore? Definitely. I mean, I come from a mixed
race family. My mum's biracial. And I guess my siblings and my cousins, when I
guess when you come from mixed race family, you're not defining things
necessarily racially because you kind of accept the fact that you're you're just
this cocktail of different shades and complexions. But what's really interesting
about that is mixed race genes do strange things sometimes. And you can have one
biracial parent and one black parent and come out looking incredibly fair and
even white passing. And so that then dictates a person's experience in society
and how they're viewed, even though they have the exact same genetics as their
siblings. So I was always really interested in exploring the nuances of that.
And I don't think people really do explore the nuances of race. Absolutely.
Well, look, let's hear some more of it. Here's a scene featuring Neve, and she's
hoping to impress the almost entirely white and very wealthy crowd at a garden
party. Welcome to our home. A massive thank you to you all for making generous
contributions. Today, we dedicate our time to those less fortunate. Growing up
in barren terrains, where access to the basics becomes a gargantuan struggle. A
simple eye or ear infections can lead to blindness and deafness. What a simple
course of antibiotics could afford that child a life of seeing the sunrise and
hearing the birds sing in the morning. Well, as people will hear that Neve
adopts language of well, white saviours and she's trying to ingratiate herself.
How important is that to the themes of the movie? She's distancing herself from
her blackness, isn't she? Yeah, it's a massive part of it. And I think she's
trying too hard, clearly. I mean, she's going into the extremes of that. And we
always felt that this gala that she throws in the movie is almost going to be
her crowning moment. Right. And there are obviously there are many, many layers
to that gala because it's it's about impoverished children in the Gambia. And
she's yeah, there are there are layers to it that are actually really complex
that I think the movie I think you have to see the movie to really sort of feel
what those are. But I guess for me, it was the irony that she's kind of doing
this white saviour thing as a woman who's eloped a life of chaos. And it felt
very significant that one of the things that she's organised for this this gala
is a recital of Elgar's the dream of Gerontius. That's not a coincidence, is it?
No, I was I was looking I was looking for a piece that really encapsulated the
themes of her journey, you know, a sort of soul in judgment. Yeah, somebody sort
of facing judgment and having a kind of downfall. And I felt, yeah, that that
that piece just really felt like it really spoke to me in terms of themes. And
then for me, it really became quite a big part of the movie, her, her and the
choir and sort of getting that piece ready and in a way also being her downfall.
Right, absolutely. Now, people might recognise you from your work as an actor.
You've been in projects such as Steve McQueen's small acts films. How did that
experience as an actor inform your directing? I mean, it's a great privilege to
get to see someone like Steve McQueen work as an actor. And you're always I
think as an actor, you're learning from the process. And I'm also getting the
opportunity to watch great directors work. And then I think my experience as an
actor really feeds into how I how I direct actors. And I feel in a way, it's
sort of similar to football, you know, where like, you know, a lot of those
football managers have been footballs, footballers, they've played the game,
they know what the game means. And I feel that way about being a director. And
I've worn many hats because I've also been a playwright. And that hat is very
specific, because I think as the playwright, you're not the director, but you
have in terms of the, I guess, the creative vision of the piece, the design of
the show and all those things. You are the auteur in the room, you know, and I
think that the playwright and the actor sort of marrying together for me sort of
was where I sort of found myself as a director. And then my just my love of
cinema and consumption of cinema, learning the language of it. Yeah, you
mentioned some of the first writing you did was for the stage of play black to
was performed at the Young Vic. Has that I'm saying that's helped you hone your
craft and it's influenced your screenwriting, hasn't it? Absolutely. Yeah. And,
you know, my first two plays, you know, black to a satirical, satirical comedy
around for, you know, male black actors competing against each other. Those
characters didn't even have names. They were called black, yellow, brown and
dull brown. So I was already exploring the, you know, the idea of what color is
in there, right? Yeah. Yeah, completely. I'm reducing them really to sort of
shades. And then my my second play, Torn, which was on at the Royal Court, was
just a big family drama. And so I was really becoming interested in themes of
family. I'm going to try to do this without spoilers, because as you mentioned,
a family drama, let's return to the strays. In the final act of the film, it
feels like you want to play with the audience's sympathies. Was that important
for you to test where our loyalties lie as as we get to the final act?
Absolutely. I felt even though the movie is a thriller, I wanted the audience to
be deeply conflicted with how it plays out and who they're rooting for in the
final confrontation. Because I always feel a lot of the time in thrillers, by
the time you get to that showdown, there's just one psychopath, you know, like,
you know, and the rest of them are just trying to sort of run for their lives.
Whereas this time round, I wanted to sort of play with the nuances of that and
let the audience decide. Well, we'll have to let people to watch and see where
the psychopaths are. Nathaniel Martillaw-White, thanks for joining us. Pleasure.
Thanks a lot for having me. The Strays is on Netflix now, Certificate 15. Now,
on the one hand, artist Shyla Kamarsing-Burman and Dwinda Bansal might have
little in common. Shyla was made an MBE for her services to visual art in last
year's Queen's Birthday Honours. She's a graduate of the Slade School of Arts
and her work lit up the take during the pandemic, during crowds of thousands.
That work, remembering a brave new world, drew on Hindu mythology, Bollywood
imagery and colonial history. Dwinda's first degree was in computer science and
her first entry into the art world was in the marketing department of Birmingham
Rep. She now works as an artist, producer and presenter who creates immersive
artworks featuring several media. What connects both of them is that they are
working class British Asian women whose work can't help but reference their
cultural heritage. Shyla is a Liverpoolian Punjabi and Dwinda is Wolverhampton
born to Indian Kenyan parents. Welcome to both of you. Thank you. Thank you.
Now, Shyla, you've had a very traditional art education, art foundation course
from South Park College of Art and Design, degree in fine art printmaking and
masters at the Slade School of Art. I'm giving you your own CV here. Thank you.
What was it like for you to enter the art world in the early 80s after you
finished your masters? Oh, well, you know, it was actually quite tough because,
I mean, it seems quite a long time ago now, but I mean, you know, I was pretty
much on my own. I think, you know, when the art teachers and lecturers, you just
kind of, you just left slightly, you were just chucked on the street, you know.
And fortunately, it was the days of the GLC. So you've got the ethnic minority
unit run by Pimenta Veer. And in a way, I think I just created my own job. And I
got this residency with Southall Black Sisters. I painted a mural with a key
piper for Southall called Black Resistance. I was doing lots of jobs in schools
because in those days, there was a lot of money for artists to go into schools.
It was very hard to become an academic. But I don't think I particularly wanted
to become an academic because a lot of politics involved in teaching in an art
school and I could see that. But you're talking in this way, but you had a first
class degree. Yeah. You come from the Slade School of Arts, GLC, by the way, the
Greater London Council, and you were able to apply for these ethnic pots of
money. Yeah. But you couldn't walk into a job where I imagine your
contemporaries found it easier. Probably. And I mean, you know, well, all I can
say is, you know, shame on the art world, on institutions. I mean, you know,
they should have taken me into their wing or just said like, I mean, I made a
piece of Nine Etches called the Right Series, which are obviously based on 1981
uprisings, you know. And they were only quite like 20 years later. I would say,
yeah, the art establishment where they're here probably would say, well, we have
taken you under our wing. It only took two decades. Is that a frustration? Well,
you know what? I don't really think about it as a frustration anymore, you know,
because in a way, I just don't let them bother me or get to me because you
wouldn't ever make any work in your studio if you let them bother you. You just
I just kept on going because fortunately my mum and dad set me free. They wanted
me to do. They could see that I was doing sort of a talented or something. And,
you know, next thing I knew I was showing the ICA and Royal Academy stores
trophy. I just I've always just gone off and done my own thing. I've never
really let the art world like, you know, knock me down or pull me down about
obstacles. I just don't think thinking about it. I just say they can handle me.
And actually, quite frankly, I still don't feel they can handle me. I just keep
doing me stuff. I'm going to do my best to handle you tonight. Dewinder, I
mentioned that you've got you don't have a traditional art education, your first
degree computer science. What was it like for you to enter the art world a
little time, if I may say so, after Shyla? I think, well, for me, it was a case
of I didn't really know what I wanted to do for a degree. And then my oldest
brother is 20 years older than me. And we were approaching the Y2K problem and
he said, getting to computing because you're going to make loads of money and
you can clear all your debt. You'll be really rich. And actually, he's probably
right. But and then I think, partway through my degree, because I was the last
person to the last year to make it into the grant system. And I decided then I
was just like, no, this isn't for me. And so I left university, started
volunteering. And then I found out about this opportunity and it was a positive
action. It was called then and it was through the independent theatre council
and it was specifically for people who were trying to get into the arts but
couldn't find a way in. And that was me. And so that and then you sort of got
placed and my placement was at the Birmingham Repertory Theatre. Right. And at
that point, I didn't really know what I wanted to do. And I just said, I think
marketing's for me. And then I did that and discovered it wasn't for me. I hated
it. And then sort of found myself at a stage door going down to the back of the
at the theatre and thinking, what are they doing in there? I'd quite like to
know about storytelling and theatre making. I'd like to be in the thick of that
instead of being upstairs, stuck in an office. And you've ended up creating
immersive works and visual installations. And it's interesting that for both of
you, the thing that you share for sure is the fact that you access these pots of
money that were ring fenced for people that look like you two. I know you both
have slightly different relationships to your cultural heritage. Tell me,
Dwinda, about drawing on your cultural heritage for your art. Well, I think for
me, I was working as an immersive theatre producer and I was creating
productions about with the people's stories. And then around about 2015, I
started to question my own identity and my own heritage. And I brought a couple
of things with me, actually, which is one of them is my father's video tape from
the from the video shop and his business card and other things. But I really
wanted to start exploring the archive of material that we had. So my father died
in 1988 very suddenly. And as a result of that, our shop closed down, which was
a part electrical shop and part video rental shop. And everything got put into
storage in the garage from 1988 until 2015, 2016, which is when I thought,
actually, I want to explore work that tells the story of the working class South
Asian community from a lived experience that feels authentic, that is authentic.
And who better to tell it than someone who's actually lived through it? So I
thought, let me just do it. And the result was Jambore cinema installation. It
was in Birmingham last September in the mailbox as part of the Commonwealth
Games Birmingham 2022 cultural festival. I went along and it was it was like
being in, well, I was in your dad's shop, looking at all the videos, all the
lots of Bollywood videos. We went into your teenage bedroom as well. And it was
incredibly rich and the cultural heritage. You simply couldn't ignore it. Shyla,
tell me about joining on your cultural heritage for your work. Well, I mean, I
do draw on it all the time, but I mean, it does come out unconsciously. I don't
think about it beforehand. I think it's just always been there because I was
going to talk quite traditionally. We entered into Temple regular. We saw
Bollywood films all the time. You went to the we dance ice cream van, which, you
know, it's like even that's almost like I draw on the colours and the patterns.
And the forms in that. So I think, you know, I think when I use say like bindis
or Indian junk and Bollywood pop up materials, I mean, I don't think about them.
I actually love I love all that stuff. Also, when you're at art school, you
know, they don't really encourage you to use your own indigenous art materials.
It's still like, you know, traditional stuff like paint. Mind you, I am a print
make. I'm an etcher. So that's quite different. But they won't say why don't you
go and buy it, go and buy a packet of bindis. You take it upon yourself to use
them in your in your artwork as well. Yeah, because, you know, I mean, I like to
subvert bindis because obviously the traditional thing about getting married,
I'm not really interested in the whole nuclear family thing. Just explain what a
bindi is. Well, it's usually a red stock, either stick on or paint on. And it
does in the middle of your forehead. Yeah. And it does represent you getting
married. So I just thought when I saw all these like decorative ones, I started
playing around with them. I did all these body prints and there were these
bindis that look like tadpoles and they look like and I put them when I did
these body prints, you know, kind of like in my family because I just thought
they'd look really cool. And I thought, well, this is good because this is like,
well, action happens. And they've been quite successful. So I've used all my,
you know, cultural Indian junk and stuff because I know why I mean, but what I
do is I'm mixed up. But you're also proud of your Liverpool, the British working
class roots as well, right? What I do is I just want to say that I mix
traditional forms of art materials with Indian stuff. So I mix them. And that's
why I like to think they're a bit of a hit. What did you say? And I missed your
question. I was talking about your roots as a Liverpoolian, as a British person,
as someone who's working class. I want to talk about the importance of that. And
Dwinda, that's something you can relate to as well. Born in Wolverhampton. I
know that your working class roots are something that are important that come
out in your work as well, right? Absolutely. Because I think it's the untold
story, really, about the working class roots of the and how difficult it was.
And I think really a lot of my work is playful. It's fun. It's a bit heritage.
It's about art. And it's also I suppose a dedication to that pioneering
generation and that community of all the hard work that they did. And I'm from
Wolverhampton. I'm female. I'm Asian. I'm Sikh. I'm Kenyan. I'm Indian. And I've
got this accent. And those are all things that come together that you experience
in your installations. You make film as well, don't you? I do make film because
I think that, well, I'm sort of multidisciplinary. I think it's just for me, I'm
ultimately a storyteller. And I think that really comes back from watching
hundreds and hundreds of these Bollywood films that we did. And of course, like
I pirate copied a lot of them as well. You have just made that on national
radio. That's OK. Maybe there's a statute of limitations. Do you have a problem
being recognised by the art world as doing something legitimate? I think it's
very difficult because initially no one supported my work and I mean no one by
the means of the establishments and some of those larger organisations where I
really feel that this artwork belongs and should be and should be seen. And if
there's support there, it's like, well, you could show it here, but then we
don't have any money to pay you. But then when I had the Commission for the
Commonwealth Games, thousands and thousands of people walked through those
doors. Shyla, when you heard DeWinda talking about this, do you feel pluisser
shawls? Do you feel like I've heard all this before and this happened when I was
coming up? When you hear the fact that she's not being recognised in this way?
Yeah, I mean, you know, I mean, she's a little bit younger than me, so I mean,
I've got like more years ahead. So I've been doing a little bit longer. But I
hear her story because, you know, we should be recognised a lot more. We've
been, I think our stuff's brilliant. I mean, everyone is, I know everyone's
after me now, as you know, I'm establishing now and everything and everything,
the phones going off and the emails are happening, you know. But this should
have happened to me 40 years ago. I've been doing this 40 years now and I've
done it all alone. That's why I think of the artwork maybe feeling a little bit
guilty, you know. So I'm flying the flag for all of us. And you know, when
DeWinda says, you know, my show, my piece should have been in the museum in the
home. And I says, well, I'll help you out with that because I want to support
other younger artists because even though so I'm just doing it. I don't want to
think I'm just doing it for myself. There's a whole lot of South Asian women
artists who, you know, who should be known a lot more. I mean, I know that. But
then again, you know, I'm going to be myself up here. I think I should be the
main topmost South Asian artist because I've worked my butt off for this. Yeah.
Well, we just have to keep helping each other. And we just met today. Yeah.
Although you have. I know you've shouted out DeWinda's work in the past. You
have supported her previously. Yeah, exactly. Now, let me just ask you finally,
last week we featured on Front Row, the UK's first South Asian gallery. It's in
Manchester Museum. Yeah. And it focuses on the lived experience of the South
Asian diaspora. Let me ask both of you. Are you part of an artistic community
that's currently coming of age in the UK, DeWinda? Yes and no, I would say. I
would say yes, because there's more of the value of that work is being
recognised and our stories have been recognised and they're going into those
established places. But I think it's very difficult because what we don't want
to do is to make South Asian artists compete against each other for the same
space. Right. And that can happen and has happened. I imagine, Charlotte, you
are quite happy to be not just part of this South Asian diaspora that's come in
of age, but it sounds to me you want to appoint yourself the queen of it. Well,
I just want to be seen as an artist, full stop. You know, I know I'm in the
unknown South Asian, but at the end of the day, I'm a bitched artist. And, you
know, and and I should be seen as she should be seen as not have a label cause
well, well, well, you know, I mean, white guys were artists. We don't call
themselves when you're a male female, male white man. They're just called
artists, aren't they? So we're artists too. I think it's a great point to end
on. Thank you so much for joining us and Charlotte's latest exhibition,
Merseyside, Berman Empire, MBE, is on a fact in Liverpool until the 18th of
June. Yeah, go and see it. Throughout her career, the distinguished writer Janet
Malcolm, who died in 2021, was fascinated by photography. She came to prominence
through her journalism for The New Yorker, including six years as the magazine's
photography critic. Photography was the subject of her first book, Diana and
Nikon, and it has turned out to be the subject of her final book. It was a
memoir, Still Pictures on Photography, a memoir which has just been published.
Well, photographer of the year Craig Easton joins me now to review the book.
Craig, thanks for joining us. Thank you, Nick. Good evening. Now, it's
interesting that the opening chapter of Still Pictures, Janet Malcolm, contrasts
a picture of herself taken as a small child with a 19th century portrait by the
French painter Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingrès. She's reflecting on the
relationship between painting and photography in capturing the image of someone,
isn't she? Yeah, I look to the... I'm not sure she is, really, actually. I think
the connection between those two images, the painting and the photograph, and
their vague similarities feels a little bit tenuous, and it feels like it's used
as a slightly clunky way of introducing her childhood memories. And in that
sense, I suppose the book does bring photography and memory together in the
first chapter, but it sort of sets the tone for it in terms of its relationship
to photography. This book is unlike Diana and Nick on this book, feels more like
a memoir told in fragments of memory, and she uses these personal pictures as a
sort of springboard to dive into a pool of reminiscences. I'll be completely
honest with you. The word clunky was not one I expected to hear. This writing
feels rich and potent and powerful, doesn't it? No, no, no, no, no. I don't talk
about the writing. The writing is phenomenal and brutal and funny and brilliant,
but I think the use of photographs in this way to a small picture at the
beginning. I mean, Sally Mann did it with Hold Still, and she did it
beautifully, and I'm sure that Malcolm was aware of how she did that, but they
follow similar paths. But I think that although this memoir is lovely, I'm not
sure the photography is quite as significant in this book as it is in Diana and
Nick on. Right, I suppose it's what we put on her because she was so famed for
her writing about photography, it almost feels like that's desperate where we
want in this memoir to go. Well, I think the publishers knew that in the title.
In that opening chapter, she talks about the repertoire of stereotypical poses
that human beings draw upon when their likeness is being captured. Tell me, is
that something that you lean into and push or push against as a photographer?
Because as well as winning photographer of the year at the Sony World
Photography Awards, you also won portraiture category as well, didn't you? Yeah,
it was a really interesting phrase, isn't it, repertoire of stereotypical poses?
And it did get me thinking, it got me looking at those two pictures that she
talked about at the beginning of the chapter. And the composition, the pose of
the Bertin painting is powerful, and it reminds me of Carsh's portrait of
Churchill, this sort of towering hunk of a man that's glaring at the viewer. And
then when you've, I don't know if there's such a thing as a repertoire, though,
it feels like painting and photography approach, or can approach, portraiture
differently. And a painter, I guess, by definition, has to pre-determine and
stage the portrait and the composition and the result of that is kind of an
amalgam of a painter's impression over many sittings. Whereas a photograph is
something that happens instantaneously. Right. And, you know, it can be more
observational than that. But when she's talking specifically about that Bertin
picture, she says that Angra, what he did was he was really struggling to find a
way to make that painting work. And after repeated sittings, it wasn't working
until she saw him sitting in a cafe. Until Angra saw him sitting in the cafe in
that way with his hands on his knees. And that feels to me very sort of familiar
to an observational photographer, that in a sense the painter has seen something
and responded to it. And then I said, Okay, hold that pose, come to my studio
and let me paint you. And as a photographer, I'm an observational photographer,
that's what I do. And that feels like a very recognisable way and maybe slightly
different to other photographers who really compose their paint, their pictures.
It does really, it's a wonderful, and she explains the moment so brilliantly
when he spots the subject in the cafe with his hands resting on his thighs. It's
a lovely piece of writing. Now the title of the book still lives on photography
and memory. That conjures up other books, most famously Susan Sontag's on
photography. What does this book bring to this section of our culture's library?
Yeah, it's interesting the title, isn't it? Because I have to remember that I'm
coming at this as a photographer. And so for me too, it immediately conjures up
thoughts of Sontag and John Berger, Roland Barton, and David Campany more
recently. But he acknowledges Sontag immediately in his book. And I think in a
sense, I mean, straight question, what does this bring to this section of our
culture's library? I think it brings very little, because I think it works
better as a memoir than there's a book about photography. And her earlier work
that we talked about just before, really is a seminal text on photography. Diana
and Nikon is a brilliant piece of writing. It's a collection of all her writing
from the New Yorker from the 1970s. So it's a funny one. I mean, I think if you
come at this without the photographer's knowledge, then you will enjoy it as a
memoir. And I really did enjoy it. But I was at the Baltic in Gateshead
recently. And there it is on the shelf next to Sontag and Berger. So I guess,
you know, whatever the purpose of giving it that title, it seems to have worked.
It gives you the fullness of her life, though, doesn't it? You understand why
she's writing about what she's writing about. And does it not add therefore to
our understanding of her writing about photography now that we know more about
her? In that sense, that sense it does. She's incredibly well informed. And her
writing about photography, as we mentioned earlier, is phenomenal. And this
gives it a bit of background, talks about her friends and her family and her
parents' family and her immigration from the Czech Republic, Czechoslovakia as
it was, into New York. So yes, it does fill in that thing for people who know
Janet Malcolm's work. At one point, she writes, the events of our lives are like
photographic negatives, the few that make it into the development solution and
become photographs of what we call our memories. It's just beautiful. As a
professional photographer, did that ring true for you? Yeah, I think it did.
Yeah. I mean, I suppose it's a funny thing because I think I've got terrible
memory, but but I can remember photographs that I've made instantaneously things
I made 30 years ago right there. So, so yes, I mean, I wonder how that will
change in in, you know, modern times now where photography is a much more
disposable thing and much more available to people. But but yes, I do think it
works as as a memory. Given how disposable photography is now, and she also
talked about how a picture is a transformative act. Do you think that creative
nature of photography is something that we properly understand still? Yes and
no. I mean, you know, it's it is transformative. It can be transformative, but
but not always. I mean, by definition, it's transformative, isn't it? Because
it's taking a three dimensional reality and converting it into two dimensions.
But actually, that that quote that you just mentioned, she's talking about
transformative action. She's taking that from a previous book that she did of
her own pictures of called of Berdott believes. She's connecting her approach to
Richard Avedon and Richard Avedon was very transformative in the way that he
printed these dark, rich and, you know, contrasty pictures. But then she also
talks about about Irving Penn and his pictures and says that his portraits are
recognizable first and foremost as pens and only incidentally pictures of
people. And in that sense, it thinks, well, yes, they have transformed and
they've become pens. So I think that's slightly different to a documentary
photographer where, you know, what your photographing is, is actuality. You're
not creating it. You're not putting your stamp on it quite the same way as she
does or Avedon does or Penn does. So in in the in the fact that we can all take
pictures so easily, I wonder if we lose something. But as long as we go back to
Janet Malcolm, there's still something still there to be discovered. Oh, there's
plenty to be discovered. And, you know, I think I really enjoy it. I really
enjoyed the book and I really enjoyed her previous book and I really enjoyed the
depth of thought that she puts into her. I think it's fair to say we can
recommend it. Thank you, Craig Easton. Janet Malcolm's book still pictures on
photography and memory is out now. And Craig's new book Thatcher's Children is
available from Craig Easton dot com and his show Is Anybody Listening is on at
the Open Eye Gallery in Liverpool until this Sunday. We finish with good news
for the arts community north of the border. Creative Scotland has announced that
it has had almost seven million pounds in funding restored following a U-turn on
the Scottish government's proposed 10 percent cut to the organisation's budget.
On tomorrow's front row, we'll be reviewing David Hockney's new immersive
exhibition and the latest film from the Japanese film director Hirokazu Karida,
whose 2018 film Shoplifters won the Palme d'Or at Cannes. Join Tom Sutcliffe
live at 7.15. And finally, news for fans of hip hop historical musical. Five
years after the Olivier Tony and Pulitzer Prize winning show arrived on the West
End, it has been announced that Hamilton will be heading out on a UK tour
starting here in Manchester at the Palace Theatre in November. I'll see you in
the room where it happens. Good night. Front row was presented by Nick Aherd and
the producer was Ekanay Akuleiwu. The studio engineer was Amy Brennan. After the
news, Michael Burke asks, how should Britain make amends for its colonial past?
The storyteller and satirist David Sederas returns to Radio 4. I thought I'd
support the movement the way I had become accustomed to by donating money and
then telling people I'd donate it twice as much. The author shares his incisive
humour and social critiques of modern life and himself. The moment I got my
first vaccine, I started thinking of the coronavirus the way I think of scurvy,
something from a long ago time, something that mainly pirates get. A new series
of Meet David Sederas starts tomorrow evening at 6.30 on Radio 4 and BBC.