TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-05-04H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and on good terms with Russia suffering a fuel crisis. This is the BBC World
Service, the world's radio station. Coming up, it's World Book Club and this
month we're in Paris, France, delighted to be guests of the iconic Shakespeare
and Company Bookshop on the left bank of the River Seine. Here we're talking
with acclaimed French author Marie Dariossec about her extraordinary novel, Pig
Tales. It's the story of a young woman working at a shady Paris massage parlour
who becomes a great favourite with her lustful clients. Until, that is, she
slowly, alarmingly starts turning into a pig. A dark feminist fable of political
and sexual corruption and a grim warning of what can happen in a society without
a soul, Pig Tales scandalised readers when it was published, became the most
popular debut novel in decades and was translated into 40 languages. World Book
Club from Shakespeare and Company in Paris with Marie Dariossec and me, Harriet
Gilbert, after the news. Hello, I'm Neil Nunes with the BBC News. In the past
half hour, the countries of the United Nations have reached the first ever
international agreement to protect the world's oceans that lie outside national
boundaries. Delegates cheered and applauded as the agreement was finally signed
in New York. The details now from Esm√©e Stellard. It took almost two days of
back-to-back negotiations but countries from around the world finally came to an
agreement on how to protect the high seas. These are the international waters
that sit beyond any country's jurisdiction. They cover two-thirds of the world's
oceans and play host to most of our marine life. Until now, all countries had a
right to fish, ship and do research there but this has left the animals and
plants living in the high seas at risk from threats including climate change,
overfishing and shipping traffic. China has announced a reduced economic growth
target of about 5% at the start of its annual parliamentary session in Beijing.
The economy grew by just 3% last year, well onto target, under pressure from
strict COVID containment policies. China's defence spending is to rise by more
than 7% this year, marginally up on last year. Delivering the government's work
report, the Premier Li Keqiang said the armed forces should prioritise training
under combat conditions. Up to 200,000 people have been taking part in
demonstrations across Israel. In the largest protests so far against the
government's planned judicial reforms, Ronan Cohen was at a demonstration in Tel
Aviv. I'm a very patriotic Israeli guy and every Saturday night, this is the
ninth time that I came here and I hope that that huge demonstration will affect
and prove that we are not going to give up. The demonstrations were largely
peaceful but footage showed some protesters in Tel Aviv breaking down police
barriers. Iran says it's prepared to give United Nations inspectors greater
access to its nuclear facilities. The head of the UN's nuclear watchdog told
reporters the Iranian authorities had also agreed to install surveillance
cameras. Rafael Grossi said the talks, held in Tehran after the discovery of
enriched uranium at an underground site, had been productive. What we have
agreed is on a number of concrete actions like accesses that we are going to
have to information and places. As you can imagine, this is something that we
agree with Iran and we are going to be reporting subsequently on our conclusions
or our evaluations. Iran insists this nuclear programme is peaceful but says
there might have been unintended fluctuations in its enrichment process. World
News from the BBC. At least five people have been injured in Peru after the
security forces opened fire against indigenous protesters in the southern city
of Huli. Local media say demonstrators from the Aramara indigenous group had
encircled a group of soldiers and police officers to complain about their
presence in the area. An army helicopter threw tear gas canisters to disperse
the crowd. The Congress in Ecuador has voted overwhelmingly to open an internal
investigation in corruption allegations involving President Guillermo Lasso. The
vote could eventually lead to impeachment proceedings against Mr Lasso. Leonardo
Russo reports. More than 70% of legislators have voted against the president, a
former banker who has experienced turbulent relations with Congress since he was
elected in 2021. Mr Lasso has been accused of involvement in a corruption scheme
involving state-owned companies. On social media, he rejected the allegations
and said the congressional report lacked any logical and legal basis. The
prospect of a political crisis comes at a very difficult time for Ecuador, which
is struggling to cope with unprecedented levels of gang-related violence,
triggered by the growing power of Mexican drug cartels in the country. The
British Prime Minister, Reisha Sunak, says he is committed to ending the illegal
migration of migrants to the UK. He said no one who arrives in the UK illegally
will be allowed to stay. Writing in a British newspaper, Mr Sunak described his
determination to stop migrants crossing the Channel in small boats. The
government is expected to announce legislation in the coming week. The Tunisian
director Youssef Chabbi has won the top prize at the Pan-African Film and
Television Festival, known as FESPACO. His film, Ashkal, is a thriller set in an
abandoned part of Tunis. After the fall of President Ben Ali in 2011, the prize
was presented at a ceremony in Burkina Faso. BBC World News Hello, this is the
BBC World Service. I'm Harriet Gilbert. Welcome to World Book Club. This month
we're in France. To be exact, we're in the legendary Shakespeare & Company
bookshop in Paris to talk about a most extraordinary, daring and original novel
called Pigtails. And here with us to answer questions about it from an invited
audience and BBC listeners around the world is its award-winning author, Marie
Dariesek. Marie, welcome to World Book Club. This bookshop, Shakespeare &
Company, it's been here, I think, since 1951 in this particular location. Yes,
absolutely. It's a great bookshop. You're familiar with it? Yes, very much. Yes.
Do you come here to buy books? I do. I do. I buy books here in English. Yes.
Excellent. And there's Notre Dame and you know what happened to Notre Dame
and... We can see Notre Dame through the window behind us. Yes, of course, from
the windows and the walk along the Seine is so wonderful. I love this place.
Good. Well, we're delighted you're here now to talk with us about Pigtails.
Marie Dariesek has written more than 20 books besides being a translator and a
playwright, but Pigtails was her first novel. And when it was published in 1996,
it created an enormous stir, a mixture of admiration and shock. And before long,
it was an international bestseller, translated into 40 languages and selling
over one million copies. So what's it about? Well, it's the story of a lovely
young woman who desperately in need of work submits to the sexual demands of the
director of a perfume company. Satisfied, the man gives her a job in what she
refers to as a perfume boutique. Although to us, it's obvious that the shop is
actually a massage parlor or to be more straightforward, a brothel. And as our
heroine is sexually used and abused by clients, by the shop's manager, by her
boyfriend when she gets home, her body gradually begins to change, growing not
only plumper and pinker, but more and more like the body of a pig. Is she
actually becoming a pig? Well, let's begin at the beginning. Marie Dariasek,
would you read to us from the very first page of Pigtails in Linda Coverdale's
English translation? I know how much this story might upset people, how much
distress and confusion it could cause. I suspect that any publisher who agrees
to take on this manuscript will be heading for trouble, heading for prison
probably. And I'd like to apologize right now for the inconvenience. But I must
write this book without further delay, because if they find me in my present
state, no one will listen to me or believe what I say. Simply holding a pen
gives me terrible cramps. I haven't enough light either, so I have to stop at
nightfall, and I write very, very slowly. I won't tell you about the problems I
had getting this notebook or about the mud which dirties everything and dilutes
ink that's barely dry. I hope that any publisher patient enough to decipher this
piggle squiggles will graciously take into consideration the enormous effort I'm
making to write as legibly as possible. Even the act of remembering is quite
difficult for me. But if I concentrate hard and try to think back as far as I
can, back to right before the events recounted here, I manage to recover some
images. Marie Dariasek, thank you very much. And our first question for you from
the audience. Hi, thank you. I'm Katie Masuga in Paris, also a writer. So my
question comes a little bit from that angle. Can you please talk about your
inspirations for this text, either in your real life experiences or simply from
the world around you, of course, and from your literary influences? Thank you.
And before you answer that, we have very similar questions from two people who
couldn't be here, one of them because he lives in Nigeria. His Aba Musa Idris,
who's in Kano State in Nigeria, who emailed a very similar question. He said,
I'm a writer, a poet and a spoken word artist. What motivated you to write this
novel? And we have the same question or a version thereof from Sweden. And this
is from Julius and he rang this into the program. Hi, Marie. My name is Julius
and I'm from Sweden. As I also write, I often make use of the odd and peculiar
to tell my stories. When writing pig tales, did the idea about a woman
transforming into a pig act as the first seed? Or did you want to tell a story
about how we treat people and how it affects them? And then big transformation
evolved from that. I noticed that I often start with the oddity and then from
that everything sprouts and I realize what the story truly is about. So Julius
wants to know which came first, the idea of a woman changing into a pig or the
story you wanted to tell and then she came second. The idea of a woman turning
into a pig popped into my mind when I was a student, very bored with my studies
and I was fresh in Paris, in fact, and I was witnessing and feeling in my body
this thing that had no name at that time and now we have a concept for it. It's
called street harassment. I was not at all Emily in Paris. I was Marie
Dariussec, coming from Basque country, born in 69. And I didn't know in my small
village, there was also rape culture in my small village, but I didn't know that
in a big city, public space just didn't belong to young women at all. It was a
big shock and no way I could dress this way or that way, I could behave this way
or that way. I was always interrupted in the street. When you say street
harassment, what are you particularly talking about? I'm talking about being a
young student, going out with a sort of faith in humanity, a sort of confidence
in myself also and being in my thought, walking in this wonderful, beautiful
city and getting interrupted. Getting interrupted all the time by men, never
women, I have to say, by men who asked for anything, my name, etc. Of course,
they were not always horrible people, but they were interrupting me. I mean,
it's harder for a woman to write than for a young man walking in the streets.
It's just harder because you cannot focus. You have to beware of your
surroundings. You have to behave in a certain way. And I didn't have any
concept. I didn't know what was happening. Men were like that, and you had to
deal with this state of the world. There was no real complaint about that.
Anyway, so my pig, I mean, the first scene when she wants to get a job and she
has to lie on her knees and do what the guy wants to do. For her, it's like a
normal situation. We know, the readers, that it's basic sexual abuse and basic
abuse of power because he's the boss and she wants the job. So, you know, if men
behave like pigs, she has to show them the kind of bad sow she is, you know? So,
no, I'm joking about it, but I was full of helpless rage and it went out in a
book. I was daydreaming in a suburban bus, I remember, and I saw in a window a
perfumery clerk, a young woman like me, dressed in a very tight garment. And she
was obviously in a window and I had my character. She was me, I was her, and she
was my pig. And the novel started this way, to answer the nice people who asked
me questions from Sweden, Nigeria, and Paris. It's magical. It started with this
young woman like me in the window with Paris, with the violence in Paris that
nobody really faced. Well, Marie-Dario Seck, thank you very much. Another
question, the audience. Good evening. My name is Maxine Oropitch. I'm originally
from Croatia, but I live in Paris now. Thank you very much, Ms. Dario Seck, and
thank you for the World BBC Book Club for organizing it here at my favorite
bookstore ever. So my question concerns autobiographical elements that led you
to write this book. I mean, there are insights into sex industry that you may
have acquired in some way. And I'm not implying anything indecent, but in some
way you- Have you worked in the sex industry, Marie? I haven't, actually. I was
raised in a small village. I grew up surrounded by- I wasn't actually living in
a farm, but there were many farms, and I think I loved it. And the shock of the
big city was something. Also, I was not prepared for prostitution, for example,
for witnessing people work, sex workers in the streets, in Bordeaux, where I was
first studying, and then in Paris. And I think what's for me very important at
the core of the writing of the book is the tone of voice of the young girl
slowly becoming a pig. The story does not matter so much. I mean, I'm not the
first one who writes a metamorphosis. Ovid, Homer already had human beings
transforming into pigs, not women. And Kafka, of course, Kafka, Kafka is like
the other name of God. Really, I can imagine how Proust or Duras, other writers
I love, wrote their books. I can sometimes see their tricks and say, oh, come
on, Marguerite, or Proust, come on, Marcel, be shorter. You know, this sort of
things. Kafka, I really do not understand how he wrote his books. The only thing
that saves me from being completely crushed by his genius is that he could never
achieve a book. You mean he couldn't finish one? He couldn't finish. As if what
he was writing was even too big for his shoulders. What he gave to humanity was
too big, even for him, he couldn't finish. But I had something to say, I
suppose, but about our body, that was not there in literature. I was writing the
book I missed. Exactly at the same moment, Virginie Despentes wrote Baisse-moi.
We were very close at that moment. We published our novels at the same moment.
It was a great year. I mean, because suddenly there were other female voices who
were started in the middle of the 90s. Something was happening. I admire, of
course, Marguerite Duras, Virginia Woolf, Nathalie Sarraud, Simone de Beauvoir,
many others, but they were like single people in a way. They were anomalies in a
notion of great male voices of, I mean, wonderful writers. But, and suddenly
there was a generation. I'm sure about that. In France, I'm not really aware of
it in other countries, but in the middle of the 90s, we were a generation. So I
wasn't alone. Marie Dariusac, thank you very much indeed. Good evening, Marie.
Thank you. I'm Octavia Bright here from London. I wanted to ask you about the
pig elements because they're so richly drawn, the animalistic sense. And I
wondered, did you observe pigs for a long time before writing them? I did, yes.
It's a strange exercise. I did. It's a novel about skin and hair. And at some
point I needed to have a close look of the hairy skin of the pig. I remember
really meditating in front of the pig. You know, they are very, very clever
animals, very, very intelligent animals. I'm a vegetarian. Obviously I'm a
vegetarian. Thank you very much. We've got a question for you now, Marie
Dariusac, that was rung into BBC World Book Club by a listener in El Salvador.
And this is what she wants to ask you. Hello, Marie. I'm Isabel from El Salvador
in Central America. I was wondering about the French title, Truisme, which
translates literally in English by truism. The word truism refers to something
banal, but I imagine it was meant here as a play on the word from truie, the
French for sow. Now, the title in English is Pig Tales, a novel of lust and
transformation. In French, no subtitle was included. So I was wondering, how did
you feel about this different title in English? And did you agree to it with the
translator? Many thanks. A difficult task you gave the translator, Linda
Coverdell, having to translate this pun on the word for the French for a female
pig, for a sow, into English. And then she adds a bit, a novel of lust and
transformation. Were you happy with that? I was very happy with the English
title. I think it was great, great, yes, from Linda Coverdell. The book was
translated worldwide. So the translators had a hard time with this play on word
because you hear the word truie, sow, you say? Sow. Sow in truism. And yes, it's
about cliches. It's about stereotypes, this novel. It's about what we are used
to hear about women, et cetera. So I love the idea of truism as a banalit√©. So
how do you translate that? There was a team, the Scandinavian team, all of the
Scandinavian languages apparently could play with sog. I don't speak Swedish or
Danish or whatever, or Icelandic, but sog is the sow, the female pig. And they
played with soggekstioner, suggestion, la suggestion, which is a good idea. But
in the other parts of the world, it was impossible. So we had many schweinehai,
marranadas, piggish things that gave a pornographic or obscene tinge to the
book, which is not at all there, I think. It's not at all a pornographic book.
So how do you translate that? Pig tales, it's a great idea because you also hear
the likvet. Pig tales. Yeah, pig tales, which I didn't know the meaning when I
was, you know, 27, when the book was published. But it's a genius translation.
It's a very sweet hairstyle pig tale. Yeah, yeah, I see what you mean. Yeah,
it's children. And my pig is a loss for her. She's very childish. No, the title
is great in English. It's one of the best translations, I think. Well, Marie
Dariasek, let's meet your heroine again. In this reading, she is still working
at the massage parlor, this perfume boutique, as she insists on seeing it. But
her body is definitely starting to change quite dramatically. The director had
taken me to task for a certain slovenliness, but he didn't realize that my old
uniform, which he decided not to replace, was nowhere near as sexy as it had
been. It was much too tight. The white material had yellowed and my spare tire
had popped too many seams. I probably looked pathetic. I was so tired. My hair
was sticking up like bristles, falling out in handfuls, and I couldn't do a
thing with it. I used lotions and set my hair, trying to hide the damage, but my
lack of flair for this sort of thing became painfully obvious. I was constantly
plagued by skin eruptions that were impossible to conceal, since I couldn't use
either powder or foundation anymore. And of course, I no longer put on any
makeup, no eyeliner, no mascara, because I was allergic to it all. My eyes now
seemed smaller to me in the mirror, closer together than before, and without
powder, my nose took on a slightly piggy look that was a total disaster. Mahe
Dalyasek, thank you very much. What's wonderful about that passage is that could
be almost any woman among us. I'm too fat, my hair, I can't do anything with it,
my skin's ghastly. Of course. Look on Instagram, all these stars, women stars,
that say, I wear no makeup today. And of course they do, or they have a filter,
and it makes you feel ashamed of what you are. And actually, it got worse. I'm
sorry to say, but we had it a bit lighter, except for sexual harassment, etc.
But we could have bad skin more easily than my teenagers today. I'm telling you,
it got worse. Mahe, thank you. And another question. Hi, I'm Emma, originally
from Brighton, but living here in Paris. My question is, I wonder to what extent
the narrator is aware of the exploitative nature of her work at the perfume
shop, whether her seeming naive acceptance of the illicit favours at work as a
self-protection mechanism, or a satiric reflection on the state of our society's
blindness to abuse and corruption. Thank you for your question. The book is very
ironical, because she is not aware of what's happening to her. She's not even
aware that she's being prostituted, that she's being used. For her, it's normal.
She is what Nabokov would call an unreliable narrator. Nabokov had good reasons
to build unreliable narrators with Humphrey, you know, in Lolita, because
Humphrey has to hide what he's doing to Lolita. He's a pedophile. And when you
read Lolita, you think, oh my God, am I reading what I'm reading? Yes, you are.
But my pig doesn't have anything to hide. She's not aware, but she has to
protect herself quick, quick, to protect her psyche, her body, to make a shield
around her, you know, to shield out all these bad emotions, feelings, things
that are done to her. It's not a feminist pamphlet. It's a feminist book. It is.
But I'm not telling you what to think, I hope. I'm leaving you space in this
discrepancy between what she does, what she sees and what she tells you. There's
a big space, in fact. So she's unreliable in the way that I hope that you
understand what's happening and that she's actually saying stupid, racist,
homophobic things, etc. At some point, she says, a woman has to find a good
husband, a good husband that works and doesn't drink, you know, oh, come on,
Marie-Claire doesn't think that, of course, you know. But it's true that in my
career, I had many, well, quite a number of times, people really offended at me,
not at my narrators. And well, I think it's the day to day life of a writer.
It's normal in a way that it's the basic misunderstanding. I think readers quite
often assume that the writer is the narrator, although quite clearly you haven't
turned into a pig. I feel that. Fortunately, a lot of people found the book very
funny and I was relieved because other people found it offensive. I can
understand, but actually I wrote it like a grotesque fable. But also one of her
powers is that she makes you laugh, but she's also dignified in a way. Thank
you, Marie. And let's have a question from the young gentleman there. Thank you,
Marie-Dario Seck, for being here. I'm Anthony. I'm 25 years old. And I live in
Paris. I would like to talk about feminism again and the posterity of your book.
You said that you belong to a generation of French women writers. And to what
extent your book is a precursor to hashtag Me Too? Well, before you answer that
about the hashtag Me Too movement, this movement against social sexual abuse,
sexual harassment and so on, we've got another question that was rung in on that
very much the same subject, from Bucharest. Hello, Marie. I'm Realini from
Bucharest, capital of Romania. I would be interested to find out how you look at
pigtails today in the context of the Walk Me Too movements in council culture.
Thank you very much. So to return to Anthony's question, which is much the same.
So in what way do you think the novel was a precursor, a foretelling of the Me
Too movement? It was a precursor with many other novels, as I quoted Virginie
Despentes, Cressy Nango, of course, about incest, Lydie Selvert about violence
and mental health. And we were all dealing with this abuse that we felt in our
day to day life. And it was also our sisters who were getting raped and who
couldn't properly complain at the police station and then have a fair trial. I
know so many cases. There is a lot of work to do in justice today. The police is
getting a bit better. For example, in my homeland, Basque country, we have this
huge fiesta, the f√™te de Bayonne, the Bayonne fair in August. When I was a kid,
a teenager, if you had, we call that having problems, if you had problems at
four o'clock because you were left alone by your friends all of a sudden, and of
course you had drunk, it was your fault. Four o'clock in the morning. Yeah, in
the morning. Yeah, of course. And if you were drunk, it was your fault. I come
from that world and that space and that mental geography in a way. And I'm very
happy that there are not so many progress in the world nowadays. But about
women, yes, there are progress. Nowadays, in the fair of Bayonne, there are big
posters saying, no is no. It's even in Basque. And that and rape is bad. Truly
coming from the 80s, you had to explain that rape is bad and that it was not
your fault. So, yes, the world is changing for better for women. I am a witness
of that. So we are all of the other writers are quoted and also men because I
love men. And I try to educate my boy and my daughters in another way of being
masculine. It's so exciting to imagine all the things we can do with a new
masculinity. A masculinity that's not toxic, as the young say today. It's
thrilling to try to imagine really new ways of behaving like a man and not like
my father. So, you know, but my father was a macho Basque man. We have a very
nice, tender relationship. But we cannot talk. He cannot understand me. So all
this world pre-MeToo, it was exhausting. And it's better now, really. Marie
Dariasek, thank you. We have got lots more questions for you about Pigtails. But
first, a quick pause for the news. And to remind you that there's an archive of
more than 200 World Book Club interviews you can access via our website. Back
soon. The news after this. And it was central to the cultures that made him.
Closer music informs its people of closer values. It can be organised. It can be
spontaneous, sung in a group. And it can be about anything, work, play. In his
own words, it is music and dancing that makes me at peace with the world. And at
peace with myself. Mandela, a legacy in music. At bbcworldservice.com slash
documentaries or wherever you get your podcasts. Coming up on World Book Club,
we're discussing Pigtails, an extraordinary novel by acclaimed French author
Marie Dariasek. It's the story of a young woman working at a shady Paris massage
parlour who becomes a favourite with her lustful clients. Until that is, she
slowly, alarmingly starts turning into a pig. Join Marie Dariasek and an
audience of readers at iconic Parisian bookshop, Shakespeare and Company, for
World Book Club, after the news. BBC News with Neil Nunes. The countries of the
United Nations have reached the first ever international agreement to protect
the world's oceans that lie outside national boundaries. Delegates cheered and
applauded as the agreement was finally signed in New York after two days of
discussions. Material from marine plants and wildlife found in international
waters has benefited the pharmaceutical industry. China has announced a reduced
economic growth target of about 5%. At the start of its annual parliamentary
session in Beijing, the economy grew by just 3% last year, well under target,
under pressure from strict Covid containment policies. Delivering the
government's work report, the Premier Li Keqiang said the armed forces should
prioritise training under combat conditions. As many as 200,000 people have
taken part in demonstrations across Israel, the largest protests so far against
the government's planned judicial reforms. Footage showed some protesters in Tel
Aviv breaking down police barriers and blocking roads. Congress in Ecuador has
voted overwhelmingly to open an internal investigation on corruption allegations
involving President Guillermo Lasso. The vote is non-binding but could
eventually lead to impeachment proceedings. The British Prime Minister Rishi
Sunak says he's committed to ensuring that no one who enters, arrives in the UK
illegally will be allowed to stay. The government's expected to announce
legislation that'll push for people arriving in small boats to be removed to
Rwanda or elsewhere. Two international Red Cross workers have been kidnapped in
northern Mali. It happened in an area that's a hotspot for violence by Islamist
militias. And the Tunisian director Youssef Chabbi has won the top prize at the
Pan-African Film and Television Festival, FESPACO, for his film, Ashkal. BBC
News. Hello, this is World Book Club and here with us in the Shakespeare &
Company Bookshop in Paris, answering readers' questions about our extraordinary
novel, Pigtails, is its award-winning French author, Marie Darjec. Well, we have
a question now from New Delhi in India. Hi Marie, my name is Arunima and I'm
from India. My question to you is that when you wrote Pigtails in the 1990s,
Paris was a different kind of city. What kind of a city it is now? How do you
see the city has evolved in the present day and time? So Arunima is talking
specifically about Paris and how that has changed from the Paris you described
right at the beginning when you came here as a younger woman. Okay, the walls
are cleaner, much cleaner. I knew a very grey, dark grey city, now it's yellow
and white. I have two young daughters, they are 18 and 14, and a boy, my son.
The streets of Paris are still a very tricky public space. It's difficult to be
a different boy or to be girls in the public space in Paris still today. And
young girls and boys still ask themselves, was it because I was dressed this
way? When you say a different boy? My boy is fluid, as he says. He's gender
fluid. Yeah, he's non-binary and I think it's great. He really is part of this
big movement of generation who tries to invent new ways of being a human being
and a boy on this planet. It's great, but it's still dangerous. But okay, good
news. We heard recently that again, somebody has been cured from HIV. I mean,
HIV has disappeared from his blood, a guy in Germany. Sometimes the news are
good. Well, thank you very much, Diah Yasek. Hi, I'm Diah. I've just flown in
from Edinburgh and I wanted to ask, we've talked a lot about New Men, but can we
talk about an unreconstructed character, an Edgar? And it seemed to me that you
make him hail from the far right of French politics. And I wondered, did you
intend that? The book had a tremendous success that we were absolutely not ready
for it. At the small publishing company where I published the book, it was like
a fairy tale, a childhood dream. Everything they printed was sold out in one
week. And the publishing company, which is very close from Shakespeare and
Company, the salesman was actually riding his bike distributing the very few
spare books they had because they were all sold out. It was like a dream. And
I'm sure a part of the success was because it was the first book really
recognizably against Le Pen. Le Pen at the time, the father, was the rising
figure of the new fashion. The new fascism in France. So I was very scared and
angry. And I was also witnessing the politics of the right at the time. I think
it was Chirac at the time. Anyway, the right has always done the same thing,
putting strangers without papers, illegal immigrants in charters, in planes. Now
it's like, oh, it's like obvious. But at that time, each time a plane went out
with one or two illegal immigrants, it was like a little riot in the plane or at
the airport. Now I have the impression that nobody speaks about it anymore. And
the planes are still full of illegal immigrants. Did you design this character,
Edgar, who is an extremely unpleasant... For me, it was Le Pen. It was Le Pen.
It was Le Pen. Very directly Le Pen. Very unpleasant guy. And the story is that
the pig, the woman pig is again abused. And she's not aware that she's playing a
part in his political campaign because the political campaign, which is very
basically fascist, Edgar tries to explain what is sound healthy and what is
unsound unhealthy. And I'm also a hair of the HIV period of the... I was a
teenager during the really the big, horrible moment of the epidemics. So Edgar
is, of course, homophobic, sexist, a patriarch, trying to use people to rise.
And the media loved it when they realized it was Le Pen. They just loved it. And
coming from me, a young woman. And also, I was out of a big college in France,
l'Ecole Normale Sup√©rieure. So I had this strange... Now I realize 20 more years
after that I was both a sort of baby intellectual, you know. Baby intellectual.
Yeah, something, but also a bit, I suppose, sexy. I suppose. I don't know. OK,
I'm just looking at the old pictures and the media, the media loved it. They
loved it all. So it's so it was a big success. Thank you very much indeed. Let's
have another question now from the from the back of the room. I'm Laura,
originally from Vienna. One thing I love about your novels is the way you
seamlessly reconcile writing a compelling story with the exploration of
political themes. What is the role of the political in a novel to you? And what
takes priority when thinking about the concept of a book? I didn't hear the last
part. What is the role of politics in a novel for you? And what takes priority
when you're thinking about the content of a book? OK, the priority, again, is
the voice. The tone of voice, the musicality of the book, the harmony that I'm
setting is prior to everything. I have an idea. I have my second novel was a
husband disappears, never comes back. Oh, OK, come on. Big deal. It's been told
thousands of times. You know, it happens all the time. The way I will tell it is
absolutely what what's prior to me. The voice of the narrator, the the
vocabulary, for example, I was aware when I was writing Pictel's that she has a
vocabulary of perhaps 300 words, which is very little. Whereas on other books I
write, of course, I like to, you know, to dwell in a big vocabulary like post or
whatever. But she uses very few words. And I had to deal with that because she
well, she's not educated. She's she's and she's very candid. So for me, that's
political. And that's political, that's political, because when you're not
surrounded by enough words, it's hard to think freely. You need to have built up
concepts. And I mean, the concept, the sentence constructed. Yes. Rich sentences
at your convenience to be able to think. And when I was a kid, my parents were
readers, but they were not intellectuals. They read many different books,
detective stories and sometimes Tolstoy. It depended. My mother spoke Basque,
which is also very important for me. But I the vocabulary at home wasn't that
big. They had never heard of Deleuze, Derrida, Foucault. Of course, they had
never heard of them. When I went to school and to higher studies in Paris, when
I was lucky enough to access these studies, sometimes really some concepts and
sentences made my brain explode, pop, you know, wow. And I would understand
something. But even even after my studies, for example, Judith Butler arrived
very late in Paris. She was translated, Judith Butler. She was translated only
in 2005. You're going to have to explain it because I'm ignorant. I'm OK, she's
a gender philosopher, American gender theorist. I was already in my 30s when I
read in a book. It's difficult to read. When I read the concept of performative,
performative is, for example, when you describe a young woman as being cute,
nice, polite and obedient, you don't describe her. You give her orders. When you
describe a young boy as being tough, he never cries, etc., you don't describe
him, you give him orders. That's the performative. When you describe a mother as
being full of mother instinct and caring for children immediately, you give her
orders. You see what I mean? And all the stereotypes are built this way. When
you speak, you don't describe, you give orders. And when you're aware of that,
really, when I read that in Judith Butler, my brain exploded. And that's what
I'm trying to do with my stories. I tell you stories so that your brain
explodes. Hopefully. Would you be happy then to be described as a political
writer, a political novelist? Yes, I'm a political novelist, but I don't want to
harass you with the lessons. I want to tell you stories. I love telling stories.
There are many windows in your brain. There are many little big windows, and you
are getting used, the more you grow up, by watching always through the same
window. I want you to climb on the stair and watch through this little window
that's already in your brain, but that you perhaps never really widely open. I
love this idea of, come with me, I will show you a new way of looking at the
landscape. And that's why I love animals so much, because they look at the
landscape in a different way. And they have a different landscape. And in fact,
people have different landscapes. So I need stories to guide you as I can in
this landscape. Marie Darius, could we have another reading from Pig Tales now?
I think we haven't made enough of the fact that there is a lot of humor in this
book, a lot of quite dark humor. And at this point, our heroine has shacked up
with a rather lovely partner. He's a guy called Yvan, much nicer than Honor√©.
And the problem with Yvan is that he's a werewolf, which is to say that every
full moon, he turns into a wolf, which is a bit problematic. But on those days,
they decide to eat at home. We had dinner delivered regularly, every evening on
the full moon. I ate the pizza. Yvan ate the pizza man. And he had to eat every
last morsel to avoid causing a stench. So Yvan grew plump, cute as could be. We
sampled every pizzeria in Paris to cover our tracks. Speedo pizza, flash pizza,
weasel pizza, vroom vroom pizza, faster pizza, etc. We'd have the deliveries
sent to fake addresses. Yvan used false names to rent studio apartments for the
occasion. Getting rid of the vehicles was another problem, but that's what the
reverse sun is for. We'd wait for a moonless night and splash! We really lived a
life of adventure, another Bonnie and Clyde. On the one hand, our everyday
existence was quite pleasant. We had a superb apartment, love. And then, once a
month, there was a new trap to set, different situations to deal with, new
sensory experiences, fresh smells, exotically. Tasty deliveries. I do like their
dining system. Anyway, we have got another question for you now, Marie Dariasek,
from Isabel in El Salvador. Hello, Marie. It's Isabel again from El Salvador in
Central America. Big Towns is your first novel that you published in 1996. Did
the writing process take long? Could you have written it when younger? Or did
you have to wait to be a writer? Or did you have to wait to be of a more mature
age to write on lust? Many thanks. I love that. You weren't exactly that mature
then. You were only 27. But did you need to be 27 rather than, say, 19 to write
about lust? Here I address all the would-be writers, and I encourage you to
write and believe in your writing. We need new voices all the time. Actually,
it's not my first novel. It's my first published novel. I wrote before Pigtails,
I think, three or four manuscripts that I sent. The first one, I managed to
finish it when I was 17. And I sent it from my Basque country to four
publishers, I remember, in Paris that I found in the Minitel. It was the
ancestor of internet. Anyway, I found those addresses. Like, it was like another
planet, really. And two of them answered, Gallimard and Les Editions de
Mesnuits. And they told me, it's not mature enough. You should go on. They
encouraged. There were letters of encouragement. And for the second novel, I was
received by J√©r√¥me Landon, who was the boss of the Editions de Mesnuits. J√©r√¥me
Landon, seen from here, from Shakespeare and Company on the bank of the Seine,
was like the godfather of French literature. He was the editor-in-chief, the
great publisher who discovered Beckett, who discovered Robbe Grillet. All the
nouveau romans came from Les Editions de Mesnuits. So I went there like for a
rendez-vous with the commander. And he gave me two pieces of advice. You're very
young. Don't try to better this manuscript. Write a fresh, write a new one. And
it was a very good piece of advice. Don't get nervous on trying to am√©liorer, to
make better a manuscript. Write again. Another story, another book. The second
advice was very bad. It was do nothing but write. I was just a student in Paris.
I had no money. My parents had no money. I had to work at some time. You know, I
had to get a job, etc. So anyway, fortunately, Pigtails was a bestseller. And
the problem of having a job was magically solved. It changed my life, this book.
Thank you very much. And we've got a question now from Pakistan, from Lahore.
Hi, this is Kayum Rani from Pakistan. I was just curious to know how does the
mother feature in this novel? Apparently, she's the only relative to her, but we
see her only in the beginning or the end. So it is quite an interesting thing to
explore more. Thank you. So it's the narrator's mother. We meet her near the
beginning. We meet her near the very end of the novel. She's clearly not got a
very terrific relationship with the narrator. How do you see her role in the
novel? She's the sort of woman who tries to survive herself in a man's world in
a very different way than her daughter. She collaborates in a way to the man's
world. And the times are tough in what I imagine to be the future of Paris. I
mean, it's so nice to write science fiction because you can do anything you want
and you can exaggerate what's already happening and caricature it a little bit.
But the major point between this mother and this daughter is that the daughter
is really on an escape. I mean, she's changing her body and she's escaping the
human species, the human breed, and she's becoming something else. And for a
mother, it must be very difficult to see a daughter turning into a pig. I mean,
it's a tragedy. So it's a story between themselves. The lady from La Horre is
right. It's a very it's only a sketch. I didn't develop that aspect. But after
that, all of my novels, almost all of them deal with mother and daughters,
fathers and sons also, but mothers. And one of my other bestselling book was a
book called Le B√©b√©, the baby about my first child being born. It's not a diary,
but it's about what young mothers are supposed to be or to do. And if the lady
wants to read about motherhood, it's there. Me as a young mother and stereotypes
about mothers. Kayum in La Horre, there you are, the mother. Another question
from the audience. Yes, at the back there. Hi, I'm Laura from Vienna. Has your
experience as a psychoanalyst made you a better writer? Thank you for the
question. Psychoanalysis is a long chapter of my life. It made me better to get
on the couch myself. It made me a better writer to get rid of my neurosis, of my
my my mental habits on the couch being analyzed myself, seeing a psychoanalyst
myself, being a patient myself, being a psychologist. It's too long a story, I
think. So not another chapter. But the story of Pig Tales, actually, even to me,
it's a bit incredible. I had the idea in my mind, like hovering in my mind, the
clerk, the perfume clerk, the tight white garment, the Paris as a as a cruel
city. I had it all. I had the pig. But I didn't dare start. And the first
sentence of a novel. And I was very, very depressed for the reasons. I was my I
was a bit in my life with a honoree, with the wrong guy. But I was as we all do.
I was young. I didn't want to get a job. I had money was tight. I was I was in a
it was a hard moment of my life. I was living in a suburb of Paris. I was very
it was very melancholy. And I decided that instead of committing suicide, I
should get, you know, see a shrink. And I found a good one, which is not that
easy. When I read my papers, years after the first session, the very first
session, when I told this unknown guy, I don't know why, but I'm not happy. I
wrote the first page of pigtails the very afternoon of the first session. And I
don't know how to tell you more than that. It made something move in my
unconscious. And as you may know, author and authorize have the same root, the
same etymology. So I allowed myself to become an author. I authorized myself to
be an author, really on that couch. I got rid of everything that was irrelevant
for the writing, my family, everything. I made it into fiction. I mean, you
know, and I cured myself as best as I could. Well, we thank you very much
indeed. And we've got it, we're going back to Pakistan, actually, but to a
different questioner. This is Basila in Lahore. As-salamu alaykum. My name is
Basila Hasnain. I'm a 38 year old reader from Pakistan. Reading pigtails was one
of the most wonderful experience I had last year. It felt very much needed and
important because I have grown up with metamorphosis and then animal form as
classics, the analogies and allegories of human life as animals. But I always
thought there is something missing when it comes to women and how we feel about
transformation, because our bodies is more of a site of transformation, change,
and all that chaos that we go through. I can speak about that as a woman, as a
mother. My question is, I have always understood writing as an act of defiance
and resistance. And at the end, we see this nameless protagonist making an
effort and still retaining a relationship with writing. I am confused how this
rebellion is not quite out there at the end. The protagonist seems quite
contended with her new fate. So does that mean that writing is not an act of
rebellion anymore? That's such an interesting question because it is true that
at the end of the story, your nameless heroine is quite content to be a pig, but
she's remarkably happy. So therefore she won't be able to write any longer. As I
understand the question, she's asking whether this is because she's given up on
rebellion or whether writing actually isn't an act of rebellion any longer.
Thank you for this really rich question. She writes to understand what's
happening to her and writing makes her more free, free to think, free to be more
aware. And in the end, she is with boars, you say, les sangliers? Boars. In the
end, she is with boars in the forest. But it's not exactly a story of
metamorphosis. It's a story of oscillation between two states. At some points,
she's very animal. At some other points, she's very human. She oscillates
according to the level of aggression against her or the level of pleasure.
Sometimes, sometimes she's very happy to be a pig because she's, wow, you know,
in the mud or eating like a pig or behaving like a pig. It's good also, you
know. So in the end, I'm not sure she's not stable. Nobody, nobody is stable.
It's a story of that, you know. And she may come back to the city and to the
human body. I don't know. In fact, the end of the book is to me is more open,
but I wrote it a long time ago. So maybe I should rewrite the end. I'm not sure.
But for about the body, I'm 54. So I have been changing. I have not been stable
in my opinions in feminism. My feminism has always been in metamorphosis. And at
some points in my life, in my 30s, I was very much against the idea of
essentialism and that, oh, yes, we have a body that is in metamorphosis with
cycles and we feel time and the moon more than the men. I was very cautious
about that because I was afraid that it put us in a sort of ghetto of animality.
And, oh, yes, we are much more sensual than the men. Oh, wow. Beware. So now
being 54, three kids, etc. I'm you know what? I had to wait to be here at
Shakespearean Company with you to realize that the werewolf scene with the pizza
and the blood and the eating happening once a month is, of course, a metaphor of
the periods. I can tell you I was not aware of it. They love each other very
much. I like that couple very, very much. He's a great guy. I love him. But,
yeah, of course. So I like to write in a state of I'm a bit dumb when I write.
I'm sure to be a writer, you don't have to be too clever. You don't have to know
too much what you're doing. And it's one of the things you're doing, rebelling,
or do you no longer see writing as an act of or have you ever seen writing as an
act of rebellion? I hope writing is always political and that can change things.
But it's very slow. I'm also a citizen and a feminist and a militant. I'm also a
militant. And some actions can be really more efficient than a novel, I'm
afraid. But on the long run, novels can make changes. I hope so. I hope so. If
not, I wouldn't write, I suppose. And now, after all these years, I see this
novel like a punk novel. Really, it's a punk novel. And I couldn't have written
it this way today. It would be much more sage, much more wise. Yeah, much more a
bit boring, I think. I'm happy I wrote it when I was young. We've got time for
just one more question. The gentleman there. Hi, I'm Juliana and I live in Paris
and I would like to know, Marie, do you like pets and what would be to have a
pig at home? A pig at home? Thank you for your question, for your naughty
question. I'm not George Clooney. I think he had a pet pig at some point. But a
pig, like monkeys, they tend to grow and to become not dangerous, but, you know,
they move a lot. And of course, they need space and nature. And we treat them so
badly. A pig needs to put his nose in the mud. And also pigs are not dirty. They
are clean. If you put them near a clean pond, they will be very clean. They need
to hydrate their skin. My skin is very dry. So if there's only mud, they will be
dirty. But they don't want to be dirty. No animals want to be dirty. So I would
not have a pig home, of course. I would not eat a pig. I have a dog. Her name is
Odette, like, you know, Swan's girlfriend in La Recherche du Temps Perdu.
Odette. Marie Dariasek, thank you. And on that, we have to leave it. Next month,
the American author Paul Theroux will be talking with us about his travelogue
Deep South, an account of his eye-opening journey through the southern United
States. If you'd like to ask Paul a question about the book, just email us or
tweet us at BBC WBC. You'll find the relevant details on our website, where you
could also download well over 200 World Book Club podcasts, interviews with the
world's most interesting authors, from Ma√Ølis de Qu√©rangal to Mohsin Hamid, from
L√©la Slimani to Lionel Shriver. But for now, from me, Harriet Gilbert, and
producer Karen Holden, thank you to Jill Huggett for marshalling your questions,
to our superb sound engineer, Joe Lawrence, to all you members of World Book
Club, whether here at Shakespeare and Company in Paris or around the world. And
of course, especially massive thank you to this month's guest, Marie Dariasek.
Thank you, Harriet. Thank you, everybody. This is The BBC World Service
exploring the seriously fun work of The Flying Seagull Project. In half an hour,
the cultural frontline with Tina Dehealy. We meet creatives at the forefront of
the AI revolution. Artist Holly Herndon tells us why she's recreated herself in
computer form with her digital musical twin called Holly Plus. And we hear from
a chatbot who's challenging improvised theatre. From our own Corris watts show,
because, think, even strategies like that can go your own