TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-00H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 by James E. Phelan. It was abridged by Mary Ward Lowry. BBC News at eleven
o'clock. Nurses have agreed to pause their two-day strike next week as they
begin pay talks with the government tomorrow. Thousands of members of the Royal
College of Nursing in England were due to walk out on Wednesday next week. The
General Secretary of the RCN, Pat Cullen, believes a deal is possible. I think
this is a significant step forward. Every nurse in England today can breathe a
sigh of relief, and more importantly our patients can. So let's get round the
table tomorrow. I'm very confident with the move from government, and certainly
we will do our very best to make sure that a fair pay deal is obtained.
President Biden says the United States and its allies won't waver in their
support for Ukraine. He said in a speech in Poland that Russia's bid for land
and power would fail. He was speaking hours after President Putin used a speech
in Moscow to blame the West for the war in Ukraine, and announced that Russia
was suspending its involvement in a key nuclear arms treaty. The SMP leadership
contender, Kate Forbes, has denied her campaign has been derailed by comments on
gay marriage. Some key backers of the finance secretary have withdrawn their
support after she said she would have voted against equal marriage laws. Ms
Forbes, a member of the Free Church of Scotland, said people wanted politicians
to give straight answers. Shoppers at some supermarkets are being told they can
buy only limited amounts of fruit and vegetables such as tomatoes, cucumbers and
lettuce because of shortages. ASDA is restricting customers to just three of
each item, and Morrison's is to bring in similar measures tomorrow. The
problem's been caused by bad weather in the Mediterranean and low domestic
production. Football. Liverpool have been thrashed 5-2 by Real Madrid in the
first leg of their Champions League round of 16 tie. The English side had gone
2-0 up at Anfield before the Spanish champions took control of the game. BBC
News. The master of satire, David Sedaris, is back with his unique blend of wit
and wisdom. I know that people are now taking pictures of themselves at funerals
because when I looked up selfies at funerals was the third option. The humorous
laughs at life and himself. I've been studying Japanese and I'll say something
to Hugh, I'll say, oh did you know that this is how you say, and he says, we're
only going for four days. A new series of Meet David Sedaris starts this
Thursday evening at 6.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Well now on Radio 4, Alex
Edelman's peer group in which the American comedian takes a personal look at
what life's like as a millennial, with a little help from his friends. This
week, Alex is looking at materialism and what millennials value in a world with
so much choice. Hi, I'm Alex Edelman, a comedian, millennial and Pisces. Only
two of those things are relevant today. This is the second series of peer group,
a four-part series about Generation Y. This series is different from the first
in two ways. One, you'll be hearing a bunch of my friends throughout the
episodes. And two, I've got a bit of a bitter outlook now considering how much
money I lost on Bitcoin. This episode focuses on material things, what we need
and what we value. I find I don't need much actually. I'm very set in my ways.
I'm still using old Â£10 notes. It's a fight at Tesco's every day. They're like,
it's not legal tender anymore. Well, it is to me, damn it! I'm Alex Edelman.
This is Peer Group. As a generation, we are pretty poor. So the irony of talking
about what we would like to own is not lost on me. It's like an armless man
talking about his favourite watches. But when I asked all my friends what they
wanted, no one said an actual thing besides a house. Everyone said they would
like a house. But come on, what is it, 2009? Silly millennials thinking they
deserve shelter and retirement before 85. But a lot of these rosy-eyed dreamers
told me that in terms of material things, there's actually too much to choose
from. This is my friend Alfie. I actually love that from Alfie. Someone told me
once that there are 15,000 different kinds of hot chocolate. That's too many. It
should just be the stir bit and the pour bit. Has anyone been to an artisanal
ice cream shop? A few yeses. What has happened to ice cream? I went into a fancy
new ice cream place in Brooklyn and I knew something was wrong. Because I went
up to the counter and I was like, do you guys have chocolate? And they were
like, kind of. I think what happened was a few years ago, they all got together
and they're like, hey guys, you know ice cream? Let's ruin it. Because I was
like, what's your most popular flavour? And they're like, it's a balsamic
reduction. And I was like, do you know where I can find ice cream? And then a
child walked in and I was like, oh good, a child won't put up with this kind of
bullshit. And he was like, do you have olive oil? That's my favourite flavour.
And I was like, it's not a flavour, it's olive oil! You need to be bullied so
badly. How unfair that bullying is going out of style just as this kind of ice
cream is going into style. You're going to get the most annoying generation of
children who are like, my favourite flavour of ice cream is like blood orange
and duck fat. That's not how it works. So like the ice cream is seasonal. I feel
the way about ice cream, the way I feel about sex, which is like vanilla is fine
and anything else scares me. Like it's just, it's too much. There's too much
choice. And I didn't know any of the choices because I never heard of like one
of the flavours, they're like, this is a Simon and Garfunkel ice cream of the
month. And I was like, what are you talking about? They're like, it's parsley,
sage, rosemary and thyme. And I was like, come on! It's better than the box or
someone just like punches you in the face. At some point I got a mint chocolate
chip because I was like, that's the most normal kind of ice cream. And the guy,
as he hands me the mint chocolate chip, he goes, just so you know, it's
ethically made. And I was like, yeah, a whole bunch of children are going to
like die in a mine getting me ice cream. What's ice cream that's not ethically
made? Like you trade for it with Libya or something? And he was like, no, the
mint in this ice cream is from a place called Oswego, New York, from a shelter
for people who have escaped domestic situations. And I was like, you put sadness
in my ice cream? Why would you put sadness in my ice cream? And by the way, if
those people are making ice cream flavours, they should not be making mint
chocolate chip. They should be making Rocky Road to reflect the emotional
journey that they've been on. And everyone I spoke to, by the way, there was a
massive amount of disaffectedness with what's on offer. And I think we've lost
this like functional understanding of how weird this amount of choices. And I
wondered why this radical shift has taken place. And my friend David had a
slightly political reason for it. I think this generation feels that they have
been betrayed. They have been lied to. They have been sold varying sets of bills
of goods that haven't come true. And they feel that the system isn't working. So
they're interested in something radically different. Seeing so many failures of
capitalism and also being willing to look at something that could be radically
different. The failures of capitalism, like Crystal Pepsi or like fidget
spinners this year, remind us that there are going to be more failures of
capitalism. So people don't get attached to much. Like I'm shocked to find I
miss stuff that was on the internet. I miss MySpace. I miss Tom. Tom. Remember
Tom? Sure, I have Facebook, but none of the founders were like personal friends.
And it wasn't like you met people that way. You sign up to MySpace, already had
one friend. It was Tom. Not like that bastard Mark Zuckerberg. He's been
casually ghosting my friend request for nine years. Oh, Tom. There's something
very human about his photo. Remember he was just like wearing a white
undershirt. It's like they took the photo and were like, Tom, do you want to put
on a nicer shirt for this photo? He's like, it's not like anyone is going to see
it, guys. And he was like looking over his shoulder, presumably for like
Facebook and Twitter, which were like looming after him. Mark Zuckerberg also
loves a T-shirt, but there's something very sinister about it. Mark Zuckerberg
says he owns multiple versions of the same T-shirt as clothing because he
doesn't want to make silly decisions in the morning. There's a quote from Mark
Zuckerberg. I wear the same T-shirt every day because I really want to clear my
life so that I have to make as few decisions as possible about anything except
how to best serve this community, which is great. Except I don't believe that.
Pick out a different shirt, you weird robot. Here's my friend and comedian Jack
Knight. Why do you need to own things? Other than the fact that the American
dream is to own land and da da da this and da da da that. What are you going to
do with it? Sit there and just have it? I mean, I understand that logic and I
get that something will replace cars, but when I say I'm old fashioned, I'm
like, why does it have to be Uber? Uber is so weird. It's so weird. I don't
think we give any credit to how absolutely crazy Uber is as just like a concept.
Uber is a negotiation you make with your phone for every ride. It's just like a
guy in the, you're like, hey, it's me. Uber. Here's the deal. You, stranger's
car. 11 pounds. Deal. And we're like, deal. And then they came out with Uber
pool. Has everyone heard of Uber pool? Yes. A few shaking it. Here's Uber pool.
It's just like, hey, it's me. Uber. New deal. You, stranger's car. Three of the
creepiest goddamn people you've ever met. You're going from East London to West
London. They're going from North London to South London. Guess who's getting
dropped off first. It's not you. It's going to take 11 and a half hours. And
we're like, that's crazy. And it was like, wait, wait, seven pounds. And we're
like, seven pounds. And he's like, deal. And we're like, deal. Has anyone heard
of Uber express? Has anyone heard of it? Yes. It's not here yet. It's wonderful.
Here's what Uber expresses. They don't swing by, pick you up, bring you to your
destination, drop you off. Here's what happens. You walk to a location. They
swing by, they pick you up. They drop you off near your other location. Then you
walk. It's the bus. They invented the bus. Uber's like, hey, me again. Uber,
here's the deal. You want to go from East London to West London. Here's what
happens. You walk to Stansted airport. You fly to Heathrow via Johannesburg.
Someone swings by, they pick you up. They drop you in Shepherds Bush. It takes
two and a half days. We're like, that's crazy. And it's like, wait, wait, four
pounds. Four pounds. And it's like, deal. And we're like, yeah, obviously it's a
deal. It's four pounds. By the way, here's what I didn't know. Remember Ashton
Kutcher? Yes, he's still alive. I didn't know that. Ashton Kutcher, still alive.
I just thought he was like fidget spinners, like a pop culture fad from the
2000s that was just gone. But like, no, still alive. And I found out about it
because I ran into a friend and I was like, what are you up to? He's like, I'm
working for Ashton Kutcher. And I was like, the estate? He's like, no, still
alive. This is crazy. My friend told me Ashton Kutcher was still alive. And I
was like, why? And he went, he invested in Uber, which is crazy. Because it
means for Ashton Kutcher, dude, where's my car? Isn't just a crappy movie he was
in. It's a business plan that made him hundreds of millions of dollars. Here's
my friend and journalist, Rebecca. I am worried that I'll never be able to buy a
house, but always have that kind of balancing voice of the fact that I don't
need to buy a house. Why do I need to buy a house and be fixed in one place?
Because I think when you get so used to being not permanent, nomadic, yeah. Then
the idea of being tied to one place petrifies me. I think, well, if you don't
like your neighbors, what if you decide you don't like the area, you can't just
pack up and leave. It's fixing you in one place. By the way, the idea that
millennials can't own houses is like a bit of a joke. Now people are like,
millennials never gonna be able to own houses. But like, it is what everyone I
spoke to wants. In terms of like a possession, everyone was like, we need a
house. But like, if you get past the fact that people aren't going to own a
home, what is everyone's prized possession? And Alfie had an answer that was
really sweet. Things that I've bought me as an adult that bring me joy. Yeah.
One of which would be the huge cast iron pot that I use to make stews. I get an
adult sense of joy from that. Yeah. A pot that makes stews. Clearly, you know, a
family heirloom to be passed down from generation to generation. You know, like
I get that. I have a pair of shoes that I love and they're really basic. And
here's why I love them. Because I have one foot that's a size 12 US and one foot
that's a size 10 and a half US. And now you're like, oh, well, if you convert to
the UK, is it make you not a monster? No, it doesn't. And I've always felt weird
about it. And I've always had to buy the bigger shoes, right? I always buy size
12 US shoes because you can't buy smaller shoes and pray for, you know, one foot
to just like make it work. Like, so here's what happens. I buy the larger shoes
and one foot fits and the other foot just like rattles around like a widow in a
big house. I love that some of you owed for that, by the way. Like it was an
actual widow instead of my left foot. Like he's been dead for five years, Doris.
Stop collecting newspapers. And so I always have to do this. And a few months
ago, I went into a shoe store on Regent Street in London. And I explained the
situation to the shoe guy. And he said, oh, that's fine. We'll sell you one shoe
that's a size 12 American and one shoe that's a size 10 and a half. And I almost
started crying in a men's shoe store. I was like, that's so nice of you. No
one's ever done that for me. It's so sweet. And he's like, it's not that big a
deal. I was like, it is a big deal. And so like, I'm checking out and I said to
him, what are you going to do with like the orphan shoes? And he's like, what?
And I was like, the other shoes from this, these, like, what are you going to do
with them? And he said to me, oh, I'm going to hold onto them just in case
someone with the exact opposite situation comes into the store. And I was like,
if that happens, you give that guy my number. Cause we are buying shoes together
for the rest of our lives. I'm going to be like, Tom, do you want to learn how
to ice skate? Because this only works if you're all in, baby. But I don't
collect shoes, obviously. So like when they're done, they're done. They're like
treasured possessions, but they're like out of my life as soon as they're not
useful anymore. One of my favorite memories from childhood is I used to collect
stuff. Here are the two things I collected. I collected baseball cards and I
collected a rabbi cards. And I know there are a few of you who are like, rabbi
cards aren't a thing to which I would say, hell yes, rabbi cards are a thing. In
Hebrew, they're sometimes called Gedolim cards. And they were like a cross
between top trumps and panini stickers and extreme Judaism. If you're having
difficulty imagining rabbi cards, just like picture the Anglican vicar trading
cards you guys have and just like chew them up a bit. I didn't want rabbi cards,
by the way. It was just how childhood went because I asked for baseball cards
and I was given rabbi cards. And then I asked for baseball cards again, and I'd
get given rabbi cards. So then I asked for rabbi cards and I got given rabbi
cards. Like that reverse psychology just doesn't work on my parents. But I did
start asking for rabbi cards because I realized that I could trade them for
baseball cards. And once I did, you know, I had like a whole bunch of new
confidence. By the way, in terms of the rabbi cards, I know what you guys are
thinking. Uh, was there Rav Shimon Bar Yochai? Of course there was Rav Shimon
Bar Yochai. He was a rare card. My friend, Zach Rubenstein, told me that Rav
Shimon had collected all the cards when they were first printed to make himself
more rare. And my father told me that it wasn't true and that Zach was lying to
me. And I was like, you never believe me. Why don't you believe me? And he's
like, because Rav Shimon Bar Yochai died in the second century, which really
made me doubt the authenticity of the autographed Rav Shimon Bar Yochai card
that Zach had traded me. Alex, were there statistics on the back of these rabbi
cards? You bet there were statistics on the back of these rabbi cards.
Knowledge, faith in God, influence, agility. Just kidding. Not agility. Some of
the cards are little factoids about the rabbis. Rashi made wine. Hillel became a
rabbi at 15. And Rabbi Tarfon hit 73 home runs in a single major league season.
Actually, one of those might be Barry Bonds, but I'm not sure. My parents were
right to give me rabbi cards instead of baseball cards because I've lost some
interest in baseball, but I am still very much an observant Jew. And I've seen a
whole bunch of baseball players in real life. But one time I met Chief Rabbi
Jonathan Sacks, aka Rabbi Card 231, modern sages for the ages. And I got really
giggly. So I'm like, that probably is the right one. I still collect books and
comedy memorabilia, but like a little less intensely because like I've always
craved security more than any actual like thing, like too much. When I was a
kid, do you ever tell a story to a friend and you're like, this is a funny
story. And then everyone in the room, in my case, all my girlfriend's friends
looked at me and halfway through my funny story, I was like, oh, no one thinks
this is funny, but me, they think it's the saddest thing they've ever heard.
They were all talking about imaginary friends that they had as children. And I
was like, I had an imaginary friend. Well, not an imaginary friend. I had an
imaginary bodyguard. And everyone was like, why? And I was like, well, it's very
small. And so like to make myself feel more safe, I had an imaginary bodyguard.
Isn't that funny? And everyone's like, no. And I called my mom and I was like,
mom, um, do you remember if I had an imaginary bodyguard? My mom just went, we
remember Keith. And I was like, what? And she went, give us an hour. They hung
up the phone. 45 minutes later, I get a text message video from my parents. And
it's a video of our TV screen from my childhood home, which they're recording.
And the video they're taking is shaking so hard because they're laughing so
much. It's a home video of me and my brother sitting at a kitchen table. And my
mom says to my brother, AJ, how was school? And he goes, it was good. And then
she goes, Alex, how was school? And I just went, hold on. Clear. And she was
like, you made us put out food for Keith. And I was like, well, lots of people
make their parents put out food for their imaginary friends. And she's like, you
made us put it outside so Keith could eat it while he was watching the
perimeter. And by the way, my girlfriend tried to save me because she was like,
guys, it's just basically an imaginary friend. And ruining her attempt, I was
like, uh, he wasn't really a friend. We had a professional relationship.
Material possessions, they really don't mean much to me because it's security
that's so important now. And material possessions is supposed to bring that, but
they don't, even in terms of status symbols, like that's Instagram. And so like,
I think for like all of millennials is economic insecurities, not being attached
to stuff is like actually a really healthy attitude. Here's my friend and
comedian Moses Storm. Why would you be working on all this stuff to accomplish
what? When it's always going to feel like this, the way that you're feeling now
of like, you never have enough, you need to keep working. You need to stay
relevant. You need to achieve the next thing. It's always going to feel exactly
like it feels right now. You might have a weird up year, but then there's,
there's a new challenge that arises where it's like, now you got us to stay. Now
you got us to say, and you got to put the next huge thing out. Millennials are
in pursuit of stuff, but it's not an actual thing. I think it's in terms of like
stuff that will make them feel safe and happy, just like everybody else. And I
think for all of its manifest faults, my cohort just realizes that stuff doesn't
do that. Just look at Hollywood actor, Mark Wahlberg, a star of Transformers and
the Departed, because this week Mark Wahlberg published his routine. So I assume
some of you have seen this and I'm not going to bore you with the details. I'm
going to entertain you with the details. This does not sound like a happy
person. Here's his routine. Mark wakes up at 2 30 AM. Then he prays for half an
hour and he better pray because from 3 40 AM to 5 15 AM Mark Wahlberg is working
out. Spoiler alert. It's not his last workout of the day. Then he showers. Sadly
it is his last shower of the day. Fortunately for Mark, this shower is an hour
and a half long. Then he has his first of three snacks. This snack only takes
half an hour. Only half an hour for a snack? Why are you saying only? Here's
why. Because snack number two is from 8 to 9 30. The snack is an hour and a
half. He would save a whole hour and a half if he just ate one of the snacks in
the shower. Mark Wahlberg spends two and a half hours of his day just eating
snacks. I just imagine Mark Wahlberg in like a tiny room just staring at the
wall eating a Kit Kat very slowly. What does Mark Wahlberg eat? A good question.
Sorry to read this. I start out with steel oats, blueberries and peanut butter
for breakfast. Then I have a protein shake and a peanut butter for breakfast.
Then I have a protein shake, three turkey burgers, five pieces of sweet potato
and then it's 5 30 in the morning. At 8 o'clock I have 10 turkey meatballs. At
10 30 a.m. I have a grilled chicken salad with two hard-boiled eggs, olives,
avocado, cucumber, tomato and lettuce. And this gets really Donald Trumpy right
here. Then at 1 o'clock I have a gorgeous New York steak with green peppers. At
5 36 o'clock I have an absolutely beautiful piece of halibut or cod or sea bass
with some vegetables, maybe some sauteed potatoes and bok choy. And then I have
a lot of aqua hydrate during the day. And then he goes, that's it. Has the
phrase that's it ever been used more inappropriately? First of all, that's crazy
for your digestive system. Crazy. Now we know why he spends an hour and a half
in the shower. Here's my favorite detail. Golf. Mark Wahlberg golfs every day,
but it takes half an hour. Golf starts at 7 30 a.m. and is over by eight
o'clock. Can you imagine Mark Wahlberg playing a full round of golf in half an
hour? Because I can. It's all I've done this week is imagine just Mark Wahlberg
clinging to a golf cart going 60 miles an hour down a fairway with the most
stressed out caddy of all time played by like Jack Whitehall for comic effect.
Just excuse me. Can I play through? I'm Mark Wahlberg. I have one minute and 44
seconds to play each of these 18 holes. Here's what's so interesting about this.
Mark Wahlberg schedule, which starts at 2 30 a.m. and ends at 7 30 p.m. does not
include bathroom breaks. Unless he's just like leaning out the side of a golf
cart with his pants around his ankles. The conference go at 60 miles an hour.
Whitehall's like, Oh, my God. In 2017, Forbes said that Mark Wahlberg was
Hollywood's most overpaid actor. In reading this, I was like, No, he's not.
Because that's crazy. That's a horrible life. By the way, this explains a lot
reading through this entire schedule, which includes all that stuff. You know
what else is no time for acting. He hasn't budgeted any time for acting. So I
assume they call him. They're like, Mark, do you want to do Transformers? And
he's like, Yeah, can I do it during a snack? Like we've let go of some of the
meaning of this stuff, because we were actually invested in like physical
things. The way that like it's changed would actually be really, really
devastating. Remember, I was talking about that ice cream shop. Like it means
something to me, because when I was a kid, my grandfather died. My father took
me to this place in Austin, Massachusetts called the White Mountain Creamery.
And I remember this like super clearly. And we went in, I had a banana split
chocolate, vanilla, strawberry, the way that God intended. Hot fudge over the
top and bananas on the side. It was in one of those glass bowls, like the old
fashioned glass bowls. And I ate it with a long handled metal spoon. I remember
I had so much ice cream. The best bit of the meal was the simple was the simple
water at the end to wash all the sugar out of your mouth. Your mouth feels so
clean. I remember like that emotion. And my dad said to me, he's like, Alex, I'm
sorry to tell you this. Your grandfather died. And it was sad, but that was the
right way to tell me. Now, imagine if my father took me to one of these
artisanal ice cream places for that. And I was like, Can I have a banana split?
They're like, We don't have that. I was like, Well, what about chocolate,
vanilla and strawberry? Like, We don't have chocolate, vanilla and strawberry.
We have cigarettes, Himalayan sea salts and lavender, bramble berry with real
thorns in it. I was like, Can I have hot fudge? We don't have hot fudge. We just
sprinkled parsley over the top. Can I have it in a glass bowl? We don't have any
glass bowls. We just put on like a butcher's wood block and like you get a
powder style if you want. You can just like snort it off the wood block. Always
scream at you and play inaccessible jazz in the background. Um, can I have a
long handle metal spoon? We don't have a long handle metal spoon. We have clogs
carved by very sad people. We have sadness clogs and you eat your ice cream out
of your sadness clogs. And then maybe it would be better because my father would
be like, Um, Alex, I was going to tell you your grandfather died. I'd be like,
Well, actually, that's the second worst thing that happened to me today. Anyway,
to sum up, there isn't like a ton that this generation needs, except houses. I
don't know how many times I can stress that we really need houses. And so like
speaking personally, there isn't anything that I really need. Although if anyone
has a mint condition, Eliezer Benhorkenis, the Damascus rocket, real nickname. I
needed to complete a set. I've been Alex Edelman. Good night. Alex Edelman's
peer group was written by Alex Edelman with additional material by Ivo Grant. My
peer group was Alfie Brown, Jack Knight, Moses Storm, Rebecca Nicholson, and
David Burstein. The producer was Sam Michelle, and it was a BBC Studios
production. And we'll join Alex again at the same time next week here on Radio
4, when he'll be looking at the very millennial preoccupation of social media.
Until then, you can hear many more episodes of Alex Edelman's peer group on BBC
Sounds. From classic tracks to brand new covers. This time the girl is gonna
stay for more than just a day. Radio 2's Piano Room. Watch on iPlayer, listen on
BBC Sounds. Now on Radio 4 to Westminster, where there are questions about who
should be allowed a gun. Today in Parliament. Order. Order. Good evening, this
is Sean Curran at Westminster, where there's a call for a change in the gun
laws, after an inquest jury accused the police of a catastrophic failure to
protect the five people shot dead in Plymouth in 2021. After Dunblane, firearms
units were to be given as much training and guidance as possible, and yet Devon
and Cornwall police had no formal training for two decades. Also tonight, a
minister lets rip on sewage spillages. Current water company performance is
totally unacceptable. And former trade unionists condemn the government's strike
spill. This is a time for industrial relations statesmanship, not political
preening and posturing. On Monday, a jury at the inquest into the deaths of five
people who were shot in Plymouth said there had been a catastrophic failure at
the firearms licensing unit of Devon and Cornwall police. Jake Davison shot his
mother, a three-year-old child and three adults before turning the gun on
himself. The inquest found that the police had failed to protect the victims and
the public by allowing the killer to legally own a shotgun. A Home Office
minister, Chris Philp, told the Commons it was a truly horrific incident. On the
12th of August 2021, in Keown, Plymouth, Jake Davison shot and killed five
people, wounded two others and then took his own life. The deceased victims were
Maxine Davison, 51, the perpetrator's mother, three-year-old Sophie Martin and
her father, Lee Martin, 43, Stephen Washington, aged 59, and Kate Sheppard, aged
66. He said the government kept firearms licensing under review and he told MPs
changes had been made. There were strengthened controls issued through statutory
guidance in October 2021, a few months after this awful incident, to make sure
the police must ensure people are medically fit to receive a licence and that
full medical checks have been undertaken, something which did not happen, of
course, in this case. A new digital marker system to flag firearms owners to GPs
is also currently being introduced. The minister said Devon and Cornwall Police
had assured the Independent Office for Police Conduct that it had made changes
following a report from the watchdog. But depending on what the coroner might
recommend shortly, I am currently minded to ask the Inspectorate to go and look
specifically at the arrangements that Devon and Cornwall have in place for
firearms licensing to confirm their suitability. And he said the government
would make further changes to the gun laws if they were needed to protect the
public. Labour's shadow Home Office Minister, Sarah Jones, echoed the inquest
jury's criticism of the police. After Dunblane, firearms units were to be given
as much training and guidance as possible, and yet Devon and Cornwall Police had
no formal training for two decades. The firearms licensing supervisor told the
court he'd done a two-day training course in 1998, but nothing else until 2020.
How could it possibly be that the person in charge of deciding whether someone
was safe with a gun hasn't even been trained on how to use the risk manual? This
casual approach to risk was dangerous and proved to be fatally flawed. The
Labour MP for Plymouth-Sutton and Devonport, Luke Pollard, said his community
was angry and he called for comprehensive changes to the gun laws. We've been
failed locally by our police, but nationally we're also being failed by gun laws
that need to be brought up to date. The families of the victims and those who
survived want to see changes. A review of gun laws to bring them up to date, to
make them 21st century. An urgent review of gun licensing, which has failed us
so badly, not just in Devon and Cornwall, but for every other gun licensing
authority everywhere else in the country. The Conservative MP for South West
Devon, Sir Gary Streeter, welcomed the review the minister had talked about. Can
I ask him not to close his mind to a thorough review of the law in relation to
firearms? Because I think I take the point that it's quite ancient, some of it,
and it needs to be brought together and looked at in the light of internet
influences, as well as medical conditions. Another Conservative, Selaine Saxby,
asked about the review of the licensing arrangements for Devon and Cornwall
Police. We've already heard that it does have a high level of gun ownership
linked to those remote farms that do require them for work, but there is a
concern that actually there's already a backlog in the renewal system and that
the rurality is not adequately reflected in the resources that the force
receives. A Labour MP, Rachel Maskell, said she wasn't reassured by the
government's response. Particularly around mental health, but also for victims
of domestic violence and their former partners. I've got a constituent right now
who is in hiding because her former partner has had his firearms returned to
him. So what reassurance can he give to ensure that this incident will not be,
that will be the last, and that my constituent will also be safe? Chris Philp
said firearms licences weren't a right. A Conservative, Sir Julian Lewis, had
another concern. Is it correct, as I think has been reported, that in this
tragic case, the murderer's mother appealed to the police to have the returned
firearm removed from him and was ignored? If that is true, isn't it also the
case that no change in any licensing system will be able to compensate for that
level of bungling incompetence? The minister said very bad decisions had been
taken in this case. Now, the government has faced calls from its own MPs to up
its game and force water companies to invest in infrastructure. The demand came
as a minister was again urged to do more to stop raw sewage spills. Alicia
McCarthy reports. Labour's Shadow Environment Secretary Jim McMahon reckoned
people were sick and tired of sewage in streams, rivers and seas. The water
companies know they can laugh all the way to the bank because the government
won't take action. The regulators know the government won't take action because
they've taken away the capacity to take action from the regulators. And all the
while, it's local people who are suffering. The Environment Minister, Rebecca
Powell, told him she'd been clear that current water company performance was
totally unacceptable and both the British people and the government expected
better. She said the firms must act urgently to improve, but added that since
privatisation, they had spent billions on infrastructure. And because of our new
storm overflow reduction plan, they are now committed to Â£56 billion of
investment up until 2050. And Â£7.1 billion of that is already underway, and that
includes the Thames Tideway super sewer. The Conservative MP, Caroline Noakes,
explained that some of her constituents had suffered disruption to their
supplies three times in just five months, including in the run-up to Christmas.
Constituents of mine have gone without water to wash with, to drink, to cook
with, to flush the loo with for days on end. Caroline Noakes said customers
needed better ways to hold water companies to account, and rather than fines,
she wanted a levy, forcing them to invest in the network. Rebecca Powell agreed
the failure was unacceptable and was asking for another urgent meeting with the
water company involved. But a neighbouring MP and fellow Conservative, Paul
Holmes, said 20,000 of his constituents had been without water before Christmas
and thousands just last week, something that he said stemmed from a chronic lack
of investment. Will the government up its game now in not asking water companies
to invest in infrastructure, but enforce them to do so going forward? The
minister insisted the government was taking steps. Water companies now had to
have action plans, and her department was consulting on raising the cap on fines
for environmental pollution to Â£250 million, something Labour's Geraint Davies
thought couldn't come soon enough. Water bosses are actively allowing more
pollution because they know it's cheaper to pay the fines than do the investment
to mend the leaks and to stop the sewage. The Lib Dem former leader, Tim Farron,
represents part of the Lake District and reeled off a list of rivers that had
suffered sewage outflows. And on Windermere Lake, at the heart of the English
Lake District, 71 days of sewage flows. All of this, outrageously, is legal.
It's legal. So when is the government going to force the water companies, not
just to clean up their act, but to clean up our lakes and our rivers too?
Rebecca Powell wasn't having that. If I might say, he's a fine one to talk,
because I believe the Liberal Democrats had the water minister under the
coalition. And what exactly did he do? The Green Party MP, Caroline Lucas, said
during 2020 and 2021, raw sewage was dumped in Britain's rivers and seas more
than 770,000 times. But the pay of water company executives increased, on
average, by a fifth. She too wanted firms to be forced to invest profits in
improving infrastructure and... Will she look again at bringing companies into
public ownership so money is properly reinvested, not siphoned off to
shareholders? She doesn't seem to understand why people are so angry when those
water companies are swimming in cash and the rest of us are swimming in sewage.
The minister insisted there was now more monitoring of water companies'
performance and there would be more investment in infrastructure. Alicia
McCarthy. The Royal College of Nursing has called off next week's 48-hour strike
in England to restart pay talks with the government. But with walkouts by
teachers and rail workers still on the cards, ministers are pressing ahead with
a bill to reduce the impact of stoppages on some key services. When members of
the Lords debated the proposals for the first time, a government minister, Lord
Callanan, told them the number of days lost during the second half of last year
was the highest since 1989. This bill aims to maintain a reasonable balance
between the ability of workers to strike with the rights and freedoms of the
public to access those essential services during those strikes. Under the plans,
some employees, for instance in the rail industry and emergency services, would
be required to work during industrial action and they could be sacked if they
refuse. But Lord Callanan was insistent. This legislation is not about sacking
workers. It is about protecting people's lives and livelihoods by enabling
minimum service levels to be applied during strikes. But speaking for Labour,
the former TUC general secretary, Francis, now Lady O'Grady, wondered if the
minister had considered what she called the real world consequences of the bill.
It would poison relations between employers and unions by rigging the balance of
power still further against working people and by seeking to frustrate the
effective expression of legitimate grievances. A Conservative former minister,
Lady Browning, highlighted the impact of strikes in emergency services. When I
leave home and come here during the week, I leave behind carers in charge of
somebody I love very much. And the last time there was an ambulance strike, I
basically said as I went through the door, don't take him out for a walk today.
Now, that was because I didn't want to put that additional risk into his life. A
crossbench or independent peer, Lord Judge, who used to be the Lord Chief
Justice of England and Wales, was worried that the powers in the bill to set
minimum service levels didn't require parliamentary scrutiny. A unilateral
change in the contracts of employment of hundreds, thousands and thousands of
people can be changed by a piece of secondary legislation. And that's all this
bill is. Labour has pledged to repeal the law if it gets into government, but a
Conservative, Lord Dobbs, thought it would survive. No future government is
going to lay itself open to the accusation that they are anti-patient, anti-
commuter, anti-student and anti-the-ordinary-worker. No Labour government will
risk the accusation that they sold the public interest out to any paymaster. The
bill cleared its first hurdle in the Lords, and it now goes for more detailed
scrutiny, when peers will have the chance to make changes. You're listening to
Today in Parliament with me, Sean Curran. Still to come, the astounding effect
of kicking the habit. If smoking disappeared, the great majority of this, the
worst of our cancers, would just disappear. But first, MPs say voters in England
could be turned away from polling stations this May because of new rules
requiring photo ID. But a minister rejected claims that the change was designed
to benefit the Conservatives. David Cornock explains. Voters going to the polls
at council elections in England this May will be required to show a form of
photo ID, such as a passport or driving licence. People without an approved
document can apply online for a free voter authority certificate, but official
figures suggest take-up so far has been slow. A Liberal Democrat, Helen Morgan,
said requiring photo ID was a thinly-veiled attempt by ministers to make it more
difficult to vote. They'll be aware that the Electoral Commission's analysis
that this rushed rollout means that the May elections can't be run, in their
words, in a fully secure, accessible and workable manner. And she said of 2
million people who would now need a new form of ID, only 1% had applied. Does
the government have any handle on the level of awareness amongst the general
public regarding the need to bring ID with you to vote this May? I would say
that the government is sleepwalking into a disaster, but I'm afraid to me this
looks a little bit more cynical. The local government minister, Lee Rowley, said
many of those 2 million potential voters wouldn't have local elections this
year. Of that group, a number will choose not to vote, much as we would like
them to do so. We would have chosen never to have voted and we would encourage
them to do so, but ultimately that is what the purpose of a democracy is. People
have a right both to vote and not to vote, and we are seeking to encourage them
to do so. We are seeking to guarantee that integrity. He said it was estimated
that around 98% of the electorate did have a valid form of photo ID. Alex Norris
for Labour said the scheme was a solution in search of a problem. You are more
likely to be struck by lightning 54 times than you are to be queuing behind a
person committing voter fraud at their polling station. He said there were only
72 days until the local elections. We are risking widespread disenfranchisement.
When is the minister going to wake up and act to prevent these voter ID
requirements from locking huge numbers of people out of their democracy at the
next election? Lee Rowley dismissed his argument. The honourable gentleman
continues to perpetuate the myth that this is some form of suppression. It is
absolutely incorrect. And we have a responsibility in this place, putting aside
party political views, we have a responsibility in this place to make sure we
are temperate with our language, particularly when it relates to something as
important as a ballot box. Chris Stevens for the SNP questioned why older people
could use their travel passes as a means of ID, but younger people couldn't. It
would seem that there is some gerrymandering going on, Madam Deputy Speaker. The
fact that types of ID for students and under 30 Oyster cards will not be
accepted, but Oyster cards for over 60s will be accepted. How does the minister
explain that? Lee Rowley said older people had to show their passport or driving
licence to get their travel card, whereas the rules for other passes were less
strict. A Conservative Paul Bristow wondered what all the fuss was about.
Picking up a parcel, borrowing a library book, voting in internal Labour Party
elections, these are all activities for which you require photo ID. Does the
minister agree with me that this battle, this argument, has already been won?
The minister agreed, but Labour's Clive Efford wasn't persuaded. All the
independent research indicates that this will disadvantage people who are least
likely to vote Tory. So can the minister tell us, what is it that attracted him
to this piece of legislation? Absolutely, it's safeguarding the integrity of the
ballot box for the long term. The new rules will apply in England at council
elections and across the UK at Westminster elections. The SNP's Alison Thewliss
was worried about possible confusion. Can he explain to me how it will be that
people will understand the requirement for voter ID in Westminster elections,
when there are different franchises, there are different elections, and the
challenge for many of us trying to campaign in elections is getting people
registered at all. Surely it's going to be the case that people are going to
turn up expecting to vote and not being able to. Lee Rowley acknowledged that
elections were run differently in different nations, but he said that was
nothing new. David Cornock reporting. Now, this April will be the 25th
anniversary of the Good Friday Agreement. Labour's Shadow Justice Secretary
Steve Reid has questioned how the government can achieve its plans to rewrite
the UK's human rights law and introduce a Bill of Rights without breaching the
agreement. His proposed Bill of Rights will mandate British courts to override
the European Convention on Human Rights in certain circumstances and restrict
access to convention rights through British courts. But the Good Friday
Agreement guarantees direct access to the courts for any breaches of the
convention. The Justice Secretary, Dominic Raab, told MPs that under his plans,
the UK would remain a state party to the European Convention on Human Rights. We
can remain absolutely committed to the Good Friday Agreement with the Bill of
Rights, not least because, if he bothered to read it, the ECHR is retained
within a schedule to the Bill of Rights. Steve Reid pursued his point. The truth
is he has no answer to that question, and his plans to rip up the Human Rights
Act would create fresh divisions in Northern Ireland where there's still no
agreement over the protocol. So what discussions has he had about these reckless
plans with the government of the Republic of Ireland or with the US government,
who have made clear that any unilateral attempt to weaken convention rights in
Northern Ireland would threaten a future US-UK trade deal? Can I thank him? He
needs to read the Bill of Rights. It envisages us staying a state party. It
retains in a schedule the ECHR, which is why all of the other concerns that he
has melt away. The SNP's Stuart MacDonald wanted Dominic Raab, who's also the
Deputy Prime Minister, to offer what he called a full-throated defence of the
European Convention on Human Rights. Both the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime
Minister have repeatedly failed to rule out withdrawal from the Convention in
the longer term, and the impact of that would be international humiliation for
this country and a severe blow to international human rights law. It's actually
shocking that these questions even have to be asked of any government. During
the exchanges, the Justice Secretary said the government had made it clear that
it wouldn't rule out ever withdrawing from the ECHR in the future. He said the
UK needed a legal regime that could tackle illegal immigration. At the moment,
probably the single biggest UK concern around human rights is the trade and
misery that we see with small boats and illegal immigration across the country.
So if he's committed to human rights, he should back us in taking every measure
that we conceivably can to deal with that problem. Dominic Raab. Now, the
government's Chief Medical Advisor, Sir Chris Whitty, has criticised tobacco
companies for marketing cigarettes at what he called the most vulnerable
teenagers. He also told MPs on the Health Committee that it was completely
unacceptable for vape manufacturers to try to attract children to their
products. Christina Cooper reports. During the pandemic, Sir Chris Whitty became
a household name, answering questions alongside ministers at televised Covid
briefings. His profile is lower nowadays, but he's still the most senior health
official in the UK. And so the Health Committee asked him to be the first
witness at a major new inquiry into preventing illness. The Committee Chair, the
Conservative Steve Brine, set out the scope of the investigation. In your view,
as our Chief Medical Officer, is the NHS sustainable in the future without a
complete step change in how we prevent ill health? Professor Whitty replied that
disease prevention was one major way to make the health service more efficient.
He said a large number of the most severe diseases were preventable, or could be
diagnosed early, when they were easier and cheaper to treat. For example, he
said cervical cancer was very preventable, thanks to vaccines or screening, and
lung cancer was highly preventable. Lung cancer is our number one killer of a
cancer. It's a horrible way to die. Most people who are diagnosed die within a
year, very unpleasantly. 79% of all lung cancers are preventable. The great
majority of that is caused by smoking. Cigarette packets in the UK are required
to carry a warning that smoking kills. However, the latest figures from the
Office for National Statistics reveal that nearly seven million people in the UK
smoke. Professor Whitty explained what would happen if they all gave up. If
smoking disappeared, the great majority of this, the worst of our cancers, would
just disappear. Professor Whitty condemned tobacco companies for targeting the
most vulnerable in society. The cigarette industry goes to the most vulnerable
teenagers, and it aims to addict them at that stage of their lives, and then
when they find they can't come off, they're hooked. Most people who smoke don't
want to smoke. This is framed by the cigarette industry as an issue of choice.
Actually, they have deliberately taken the most vulnerable children and people
in society and taken their choice away from them by addicting them at an early
stage of their life. The Conservative, Caroline Johnson, who's also a GP, was
concerned that vaping, a safer alternative to cigarettes, had become a fad.
Heavily marketed at children, which is developing a whole generation of
teenagers completely addicted to sucking little nicotine sort of coloured pop
things. Sir Chris Whitty said vaping rates among children had doubled over the
last few years, and marketing it to them was utterly unacceptable. As well as
smoking, he identified air pollution, outdoor and indoor, and obesity as other
major problems. But he told Steve Brine they could be fixed if there was a will
to do so. If Parliament chooses to enact some of the things it could do, we
could improve things like air pollution, reduce things like smoking, and reduce
the risks of obesity in the most vulnerable. So those are political choices. But
it's self-evident that those choices are not being made to the extent that you
would like. Correct. Professor Whitty said deprivation was very clearly linked
to worse health. He complained that people living with obesity were unhelpfully
framed as making individual choices. But in areas with higher obesity levels,
the food and exercise choices were heavily constrained. You might, for example,
go up at High Street, one chicken shop after another. No, that's not to single
out chicken shops particularly, but just to make the point that the range of
choices that are available in much more affluent areas are simply not there, and
the facilities are simply not there. And depressingly, he said, health
deprivation was deeply entrenched, with the areas most affected by Covid and
obesity often the same places that had the highest child mortality rates in the
1860s. The SNP's Martin Day was flabbergasted to hear that some areas had
problems dating back to the 19th century. It seems to me dealing only with the
consequences of poor diet and higher weight isn't enough. We need to tackle
poverty, and poverty is such an underlying factor. But as you've quite rightly
said, that requires often a political decision. So Chris Whitty agreed it was
for political leaders to take decisions. But he pointed out that the soft drinks
levy was an extraordinarily successful policy, leading to a reduction in sugar
content and slightly higher sales. I've been quite struck by how many of the
political leaders are expecting industry to say, please give us no more
regulations, no regulations, and quite the reverse. What industry says, we'd
quite like to do this, but if you don't put a regulation in place, our
competitors will try and undercut us. His take-home message was that more health
spending should be directed towards preventing illness. A Conservative MP, Paul
Bristow, agreed, but... It's a very difficult thing to achieve, I think. But we
need to change our minds. That is why we are so fortunate to have bold political
leaders who can take these long-term decisions. A remark which amused the
committee chair, Steve Brine, who joked that he could see why Professor Whitty
had lasted so long as chief medical officer for England. Christina Cooper. MPs
have condemned the Indian government after the country's tax authorities raided
the BBC offices in Delhi and Mumbai, weeks after the broadcaster aired a
documentary in the UK critical of the Prime Minister, Narendra Modi. The DUP's
Jim Shannon said the justification of financial irregularities had been used
before to shut down freedom of speech. Let's be very clear. This was a
deliberate act of intimidation following the release of an unflattering
documentary about the country's leader. Since its release, there's been a
concerted effort to prevent the documentary's screening in India. He seemed
surprised that the British government hadn't made any comment about the raids. A
Foreign Office minister, David Rutley, said he was following the matter closely.
Respect for the rule of law is an essential element of an effective democracy.
So too is an independent media and freedom of speech. They make countries
stronger and more resilient. That's why we regularly engage with different parts
of India's media and support it. The minister said he couldn't comment on the
specifics of the matter. But several MPs, including Labour's Hilary Benn, wanted
to hear a more forceful response. He said India's ruling party had... Actually
described the BBC as the most corrupt organisation in the world. Is it not
incumbent upon the government to stand up for the BBC and its integrity? David
Rutley insisted the government did stand up for the BBC and it considered the
World Service to be vitally important. And that brings us to the closing
headline from Westminster. There's been a call for the gun laws to be changed
following the verdicts of unlawful killing in the inquest into the Plymouth
shootings in 2021. We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are
distributed via third party services and platforms. And the BBC stream you are
currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an
internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the
manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to
stream on BBC Sounds.