TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-02H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The Israel News Israeli and Palestinian security officials meet in Jordan to
talk peace and make an agreement of sorts, but it's a different story on the
ground. CROWD SHOUTING Clashes in the West Bank leave one Palestinian and two
Israelis dead. At least 59 people have drowned in Italy's deadliest shipwreck in
years. This type of tragedy should have been avoided, not lived how we're having
to live it today and how we will live it again in the future. Nigeria awaits the
outcome of one of the closest presidential elections in years, hopes of a Brexit
breakthrough in the coming hours over the intractable Northern Ireland
conundrum, and in English football, Manchester United finally end their six-year
trophy drought with victory over Newcastle in the League Cup. I think the mood
in the club is good in this moment and we have to keep that positive vibe and
then even more has to come. This is Alex Ritson with the Newsroom. A full
bulletin of the latest world news is next. Hello, this is Julie Candler with the
BBC News. Israeli settlers in the occupied West Bank have set fire to
Palestinian houses, shops and vehicles, killing one Palestinian man. Earlier,
two Israelis were shot dead in the same place. Yusuf Taha reports. The violence
took place in the village of Hawara, just south of the city of Nablus. The
Palestinian Red Crescent said it was treating nearly 350 people, many of them
from smoke inhalation, but also gunshot wounds and stabbing. Residents have
accused the Israeli security forces of helping the settlers carry out the
revenge attack and preventing ambulances from reaching the scene. Video footage
shows many properties completely engulfed in flames, which are dispelling the
night darkness. Last Wednesday, Israeli forces launched their deadliest West
Bank raid in nearly 20 years, which left 11 Palestinians dead in Nablus. The
latest West Bank unrest follows a rare meeting between Israeli and Palestinian
security chiefs at a Red Sea resort in Jordan. President Biden's top Middle East
adviser and Egyptian officials were also there. They agreed on measures to quell
the current wave of violence and the Israelis said they would stop approving any
new settlement outposts for six months. But within hours, the Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu tweeted there would be no freeze on settlements.
Tens of thousands of people have taken part in protests across Mexico against
government plans to slash funding for the National Electoral Institute. The
largest demonstration was in Mexico City. Organisers said that half a million
people had taken to the streets nationwide. President Andres Manuel Lopez
Obrador had accused the Electoral Institute of being corrupt and partisan.
Exiled Belarusian opposition figures say that a Russian military plane has been
damaged in a sabotage attack inside the country. They've attributed the attack
to what they call anti-government partisans. With more details, here's Charles
Haverland. Drones are said to have caused two or three blasts at the airbase
near Minsk, damaging a Russian A-50 military surveillance plane, its avionics
and radar, and taking it out of action. BIPOL, a grouping of former law
enforcers now opposed to the autocratic government of Alexander Lukashenko, says
it was responsible and that its operatives are now safely out of the country.
It's not possible to confirm the Belarusian opposition's account of what
happened, but this reported attack's also been highlighted by Belarusian
journalists. Many Belarusians oppose their government's support for Moscow's
invasion of Ukraine. Local reports say there's now been a crackdown on civilians
near the airfield. Nearly 60 people trying to reach Europe are known to have
drowned after their boat sank in rough seas off southern Italy. Officials said
at least 12 were children. 80 people survived, but it's feared the casualty
figure could rise as it's not clear how many were on board the vessel. World
News from the BBC. The first results have been announced from Nigeria's tightest
election since the end of military rule in 1999. The governing party candidate,
Bola Tinubu, won in one of the party's strongholds, Hekiti State, in the
southwest. More results are not expected until Monday. The successful candidate
in the race to take over from President Mohamedou Buhari may not be known for
some days. The President of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, is to
meet the British Prime Minister, Rishi Sunak, on Monday. They've said they would
work to solve a dispute over post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern
Ireland. Ian Watson reports. It's likely that goods going from Great Britain to
Northern Ireland and remaining there would be exempt from cheques. But there'd
be no exemption for goods going via Northern Ireland to the Republic and
therefore entering the EU. But getting a deal with the EU could actually be the
easier of the Prime Minister's tasks. Much trickier will be winning the support
of the Democratic Unionist Party, who are warning that the wrong deal could
deepen divisions. And if the DUP doesn't like the detail of the deal, they'll
continue to refuse to rejoin a power-sharing government in Northern Ireland.
Chile will deploy troops on Monday to patrol its borders with Peru and Bolivia
in an attempt to control the entry of undocumented migrants. Military units will
be posted to the northern regions Tarapac√°, Antofagasta and Arica, with powers
to detain anyone passing through unauthorised border crossings. The mayor of
Colchane on the border with Bolivia said he was seeing 400 unauthorised
crossings a day. One of the most hyped pouts in the history of boxing novices
has ended in a split decision, with Jake Paul suffering the first loss of his
career at the hands of Tommy Fury in Saudi Arabia. Paul is a social media star
and brother of fellow YouTuber Logan Paul. Fury has featured in reality TV shows
and is the brother of world heavyweight champion Tyson Fury. BBC News. Hello,
this is Alex Ritson with the Newsroom. Amid already rising tensions between
Israel and the Palestinians, Sunday saw one of the worst outbreaks of violence
seen in the occupied West Bank this year. They are shooting at us. We are not
going to leave this house. After two Israelis were shot dead in the village of
Huwara, just south of Nablus, Israeli settlers set fire to Palestinian
properties. A Palestinian man was killed. The unrest came a few hours after a
rare meeting in Jordan between Israeli and Palestinian authority officials to
try to restore calm. There was some progress, including an Israeli commitment to
stop discussing new settlement building for four months. But later, the Israeli
Prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, tweeted there would be no freeze on
settlements. Some Palestinian factions have also expressed criticism. So where
does that leave the negotiations? That's a question I put to our correspondent,
Yolande Nell, who's in Jerusalem. It's very difficult to say because you have
the Palestinian authority, which controls only parts of the West Bank, which
sent its officials along, both political and security officials. And of course,
there is this big division because it's the Palestinian group Hamas, which
governs Gaza. And then within the Israeli government, you do have these
different streams, even within the coalition. And it underlines how this could
cause trouble for the Prime Minister, for Benjamin Netanyahu. He's leading one
of the most right-wing governments in Israeli history. And as much as he has
committed to making these announcements, particularly on settlements, these are
key issues for some of his ministers. The finance minister, Bezalel Smotrich,
came out. He actually has responsibilities over Jewish settlements in the West
Bank. And he was basically saying he would not abide by an agreement. He said, I
have no idea what they spoke about in Jordan. He wrote that on Twitter. But he
said, one thing I do know, there'll be no freeze on the building and development
in settlements, not even for one day. Nonetheless, it is quite a statement to
make this joint commitment to make immediate steps to end a surge in violence.
What happens next? Is it more meetings or will there be concrete action? There
is a plan for another meeting to take place in Sharm El-Sheikh in March. We had
acknowledgement from the US National Security Advisor. As much as he praised the
meeting as a starting point, he said, implementation will be critical. We assume
that lots more has been decided, a lot of detail perhaps, behind the scenes at
this unusual summit that's not being put out there in the public domain at this
stage. It wouldn't be helpful for either side if that was to be the case. But I
mean, just a reminder of how things really have not got calmer at this stage.
The Israeli military says tonight that it is hunting for a Palestinian gunman
who killed two Israeli brothers who came from a settlement near Nablus. They
were killed, shot dead in a car near Nablus. Settlers in that area have been
starting fires. They've attacked Palestinians. We're hearing from the
Palestinian Red Crescent that more than 300 people have been injured in this
violence and one Palestinian man has been killed and he was shot. All of this
still looks very dangerous. And as the international community knows very well,
we are heading now into a very sensitive period when the Islamic holy month of
Ramadan starts. That's at the end of March. This year it's going to overlap
again with the Jewish Passover holiday and that looks set to raise tensions here
in Jerusalem. I mean, generally there are tensions during Ramadan around the Al-
Aqsa Mosque in the occupied old city of Jerusalem. This is a bitterly contested
holy site for Jews. It is Temple Mount. So the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound or Haram
al-Sharif is the third holiest site in Islam. It's also the holiest place for
Jews and you can guarantee that more Jewish visitors will want to go there and
that will cause problems during Ramadan. Yoland Nel in Jerusalem. A search and
rescue operation is continuing after a boat carrying people trying to reach
Europe sank off southern Italy on Sunday. Nearly 60 people are known to have
drowned, including a number of children. Those who did survive came ashore near
the town of Cretone off the Calabrian coast and are being helped by the Red
Cross. John Donison reports. Another tragedy in the Mediterranean. The migrant
boat broke up in rough seas just off the Calabrian coast. Rescue workers
struggled in the conditions to recover bodies from the water. It's thought
around 150 people were on board. Dozens, including a baby, are known to have
drowned. The regional governor visited the scene. Calabria is a region that
welcomes people. Last year we welcomed 18,000 migrants, but we can't be
abandoned by the rest of Europe. This type of tragedy should have been avoided,
not lived how we're having to live it today and how we will live it again in the
future. And reacting to today's loss of life, the head of the European
Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, said altogether EU countries must redouble
their efforts to tackle the migration crisis in the central Mediterranean.
Around 80 people were brought ashore alive, among them migrants from Iran,
Pakistan and Afghanistan. Despite the dangers, Italy is one of the main landing
points for people trying to reach Europe in small boats. Almost 12,000 migrants
have already arrived by sea in Italy this year. In 2022, more than 105,000
successfully made the crossing, with over 1,300 dead or missing. Although high,
those numbers are way down on the 2016 peak, when there were over 180,000
arrivals by sea. The government blames people traffickers and has pledged to
stop the boats. At the Vatican, Pope Francis expressed his sorrow for the latest
loss of lives, which he said included many children. He said he was praying for
the dead, the missing and those who survived. And those survivors, like hundreds
of thousands before them, face an uncertain future. Under the white sheets
behind them, those who didn't make it. John Donison, in some of the first
results announced from Nigeria's presidential election, Bola Tunabu, the
candidate from the governing party, has secured victory in the southwestern
Ekiti state. Elsewhere, millions are anxiously awaiting the outcome of one of
the closest elections for years. My colleague Oliver Conway asked our Nigeria
reporter Azizat Oluwa how the outcome was shaping up. As of this moment, you
know, it's still too close to call because there are still many results being
collated that are expected to get to the national headquarters of the AINEC
relations center. And it's quite interesting already on social media because all
the supporters of these different presidential candidates are saying that from
their own assessment, their candidates are leading. And that is why all
journalists and media organizations in the country are very careful of the kind
of numbers they put out. They are waiting for AINEC to be, you know, the
organization, the electoral umpire, to be the one to announce the result. And
it's quite confusing at the moment. Yeah, I mean, when are we likely to get a
better picture of who is going to win and whether it'll go to a second round?
Maybe close to the evening of Monday, then we'll get clarity. But on Tuesday,
yes, we should know if this is going to go into a runoff. And it's quite
complicated because to win in the first round, you need a series of votes from
across the country. So is it likely to go to a runoff, do you think? That's what
people are discussing at the moment. Like you said, you can't just win by
popular vote. You have to be able to have this spread across the two thirds of
the states in Nigeria. So it's not about you winning the whole states in your
region. For example, Bolatunubu sweeping the southwest, or Bita will be sweeping
the southeast where he's from. You have to be able to claim some votes in other
parts of the country. And there has to be that spread for them to be able to say
that you are truly the acclaimed president. So if none of the candidates is able
to pull votes two thirds of the majority of the votes across the country, it
will definitely go into a runoff. Azizat Olaoluwa speaking to us from Lagos.
Britain's decision to leave the European Union created what has been an
impossible conundrum for the British province of Northern Ireland. That's
because it shares an island and therefore a long land border with the Republic
of Ireland, which is still in the European Union. Any attempt to put in place
border checks would be enormously controversial and previously were a factor in
years of inter-communal violence. The Northern Ireland Protocol, which was part
of the Brexit deal, effectively put a border in the sea between Britain and
Northern Ireland. But it's run into difficulties. Now there's hope of a solution
as the British Prime Minister Rishi Sunak meets the head of the European
Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, later on Monday. Rob Watson told me more. So
the Northern Ireland Protocol was arranged as a way of trying to prevent there
being a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, which
could be a focus of attacks for paramilitaries. And so essentially what it said
is let's treat Northern Ireland, if it was still part of the European Union, at
least its single market, in terms of the trading of goods to avoid any checks.
And essentially what the protocol did therefore was to say, right, let's have
Northern Ireland sort of stay inside the European Union's single market for
goods. In other words, for Northern Ireland to be treated somewhat differently
to the rest of the UK. And we think what this deal will try and do is to just
sort of soften the edges of that way in which Northern Ireland is different to
the rest of the UK and to make trade easier, at least when it's just trade from
Great Britain into Northern Ireland. And if it goes well for the British
government and the European Union, you would see an improvement in relations
between the EU and the UK. You would see Rishi Sunak, the Prime Minister, no
doubt try to claim that he sort of cleared up the mess left by Boris Johnson
when it comes to Northern Ireland. And the hope would be on Northern Ireland
that it sees a return of power sharing between those parties that essentially
would rather have a united Ireland and those that want to see continued union.
That's mainly the Democratic Unionist Party, which up until now has refused to
share power because of its opposition to the protocol, to post-Brexit
arrangements, which it has felt has made Northern Ireland less British. So from
what you're saying, an awful lot of the problems which Brexit has left behind
for the UK and to a lesser extent for the European Union could be sorted out in
this meeting between Rishi Sunak and Ursula von der Leyen on Monday. But I did
hear what normally is a massive danger word at the very start of what you said,
and that was the word if. If. So I guess you've got the on the one hand, the
classic on the one hand, on the other. On the one hand, if things go well for
Rishi Sunak, I think you would hope that this would begin to see putting Brexit
as an issue to bed in UK politics. Not completely. Now, it is a big if, because
on the other hand, I mean, it is possible that hardliners within the governing
Conservative Party and in the Democratic Unionist Party, which wants continued
union between Northern Ireland and the UK, will say, you know what? Northern
Ireland is still being treated differently to the rest of the UK. It remains in
the European Union's single market for goods. It is being treated differently.
We won't have it. In which case you could potentially see a return in British
politics to the kind of absolute chaos we saw over many years in the post Brexit
period. I mean, if it turns out that the hardliners within the governing
Conservatives think, you know what? We don't like this deal very much, but maybe
it's not making us very popular with the British electorates to keep banging on
about Brexit and looking divided, then I think that could be a huge boost to his
leadership. But actually, if in the end the Conservative Party is so utterly
riven by divisions over Brexit and with hardliners digging in, and if the main
Unionist Party in Northern Ireland, the Democratic Unionist Party, absolutely
refuses to accept this deal, then Rishi Sunak's premiership could be a mortal,
mortal danger. Rob Watson. Now, Julie Candler is here. And Julie, you've been
looking at some of the other stories that the news desk has been covering today.
Yes, reports in The Wall Street Journal and The New York Times say the US
Department of Energy believes that as a result of new intelligence, it's likely
the coronavirus pandemic was due to a laboratory leak in China. This would mark
a shift by the department, which had previously said it was undecided on how the
virus emerged. The FBI also believes the pandemic was because of a leak. But the
White House has stressed that American intelligence remains divided on its
origins. The 29th Screen Actors Guild Awards ceremony is underway in Los Angeles
to honour the top actors from television and film and widely regarded as a
reliable bellwether for the Oscars. Nominees include Michelle Yeoh and Colin
Farrell. The Banshees of Inisheeran had everything everywhere all at once,
topped the nominations with five nods each. Staying with Hollywood and tributes
are being paid to the Oscar-winning film producer Walter Mirrish, who's died at
the age of 101. He was best known for overseeing the production of classics such
as Some Like It Hot, West Side Story and In The Heat Of The Night. Julie, thank
you, Julie Candler. Time for the sports news now. And Paul Serres joins me on
the line. And Paul, it's been a while, an awfully long while, but Manchester
United finally have their hands on some silverware. Yes, they do indeed, Alex.
They beat Newcastle 2-0 in the final of the English League Cup at Wembley
Stadium on Sunday to win their first trophy since the Europa League under Jose
Mourinho back in 2017. They're still in the FA Cup, they're into the last 16 of
the Europa League after beating Barcelona last week, and they're up to third in
the English Premier League too. An excellent first season so far under Eric ten
Hag. He said after the match that his side are in a good place. Due to hard work
and togetherness and cooperation with so many. And I want to mention the staff,
I want to mention a lot of departments, I want to mention all the directors,
definitely I want to mention the fans. And I think the mood in the club is good
in this moment. And we have to keep that positive vibe and then even more has to
come. Can't help but feel a little bit sorry for Newcastle, though, Paul. But a
disappointment also for South Africa in their first ever Cricket World Cup
final, though. That's right, Alex. Yes, they've never been in a Cricket World
Cup final before. Men's or women's T20 or One Day International until this year
when they were hosting the T20 competition that just finished on Sunday.
Unfortunately for them, they came up against Australia, the reigning champions
who had reached eight of the last nine World Cup finals and have dominated the
sport. Australia won it by 19 runs at a packed Newlands in Cape Town.
Sounalousis, the Proteas captain, said she was proud of how far her side have
come. Obviously, we got a sniff of how final is and, you know, the feelings and
the nerves and everything. And I feel now we have the heartache of not winning a
final. So I think, you know, obviously getting through that hurdle of the
semifinal, I think, you know, next year's World Cup, when we get there again,
it's not going to be a big thing for us anymore to, you know, to break that
curse or whatever. I think now it's just for us to really look at that final and
say, OK, cool, how are we going to get through the final and be on the other
side of that? One other significant result from Sunday, Alex. France beat
Scotland in the Six Nations Championship to bring their hopes of a grand slam to
an end. Paul, Sarah's thank you. They're better known in the arena of social
media, but a little while ago, Tommy Fury and Jake Paul took to the boxing ring
for a much-hyped bout in Saudi Arabia. It ended in a split-decision victory for
Fury. And already there's been talk of a big-money rematch. The BBC's boxing
reporter, Steve Bunce, was at ringside. We're under the stars. We're in a UNESCO
ancient site here on the outskirts of Riyadh. And we've got two men in the ring
making an awful lot of money, but with an awful lot to prove. The fight was
nicknamed the Search for the Truth. Well, perhaps they both found the truth.
What we had, we had blood, we had guts, we had a knockdown, we had points
deducted for illegal blows, we had tears at the end. We had the winner sending a
message to his newborn baby daughter called Bambi. We had the loser saying, I'll
learn more from that fight than I've learned from my previous fights. And then
the two of them declaring they'd have a rematch. What more do you want from us a
night of the fights on a Saturday? And these are, well, they are officially
proper boxers, but they're better known as YouTube influencers. Did the right
man win? He was, Tommy Fury was the one who at least was from a boxing family.
Yeah, Tommy had a lot, the burden of his name, the Fury name. He's got cousins
and brothers and fathers and uncles, all of whom are thought as amateurs and all
of whom are thought as professionals. And of course, his brother Tyson Fury is
the world heavyweight champion. So Tommy had the pressure of the name on his
shoulders. And Jake Paul, well, he's also got a name and a reputation. He's one
of the biggest YouTube people and influencer, reach of something like 220
million, if he puts out just a basic tweet on social media. So they both had an
awful lot of pressure on their hands. And Tommy is in theory, the more
traditional boxer, but they were both novices. Tommy's had just eight fights.
Jake Paul's had just six fights. And there were moments in the eight rounds when
it looked like that, but they never stopped trying. It wasn't a masterpiece. It
wasn't a fight filled with stunning ring craft, but it was filled with
unbelievable effort. And for that, they need to be commended. Sure, they're
probably going to make about $10 million each, but they still need to be
commended. Blood, gut and the BBC's boxing reporter, Steve Bunce. K-pop has
swept the world in the shape of the boy band BTS, as has K-drama. Think of the
survival series, Squid Game. But is Korean reality TV about to become another
entertainment success story? A new Netflix survival show, Physical 100, has
stormed to the top of the charts. Our Seoul correspondent, Jean McKenzie, has
this report. One, two, three! One, two, three! Stop! Try to connect, can't you
connect? This is one of the most defining moments of Physical 100. Let's do ten
more! Get up, get up! Female wrestler Jang is spurring on her team as it
struggles to drag a one-and-a-half-ton ship through sand and upper ramp. On
paper, they're the weakest team, but miraculously, they complete the task. Oh,
did you do it? Did you do it? Think of this as the real-life Squid Game. A
perfect physical match. Except nobody dies. It's become Netflix's most popular
non-English programme around the world, making it the first reality TV show ever
to grab this top spot. Three, two, one! Physical 100! The show has been such a
surprising success that they have cobbled together an event for fans at the last
minute along the river here in Seoul, and 50 of the contestants have turned up.
Oh! Oh! Pulling that ship was the hardest thing I've ever done, says Jang. Her
fellow contestant, Jo, praises her. It was only possible because of you, he
says. I know that one thing people really did love about the show is how nice
you all are to each other. Yes, people cheered each other on and comforted each
other. I think our foreign fans found these moments beautiful, says Jang. It's
the Korean way, says Jo. Hello, I'm the female contestant, Lee Dahyun. All
afternoon, the contestants entertain their fans, removing their shirts to flex
their sizeable biceps. Why do you like the show so much? Oh, because there's a
lot of hot people. Yeah, me too. Everybody knows Korea. It's really cool. I love
it. The industry here is now watching the success of Physical 100 with
excitement. Last week, Amazon Prime brought its first Korean reality TV show,
Ginny's Kitchen. Want to come to our restaurant? It features a group of
celebrities attempting to run a street food restaurant in Mexico. It's been made
by one of Korea's biggest entertainment companies, CJ. Sebastian Kim is their
sales director. We have around 200 producers. These 200 producers are scratching
their heads to make a better show every day. This opens a great opportunity for
them. If these kinds of shows can travel outside Korea, that means more funding
coming in from that show. That gives them more freedom to produce a bigger show,
a better show. If K-pop and K-dramas show the polished side of Korea, K-reality
offers fans the chance to see the unvarnished side, what sits at the heart of
the culture that they've grown to love so much. Jean McKenzie in Seoul. The main
news this hour, Israeli settlers in the occupied West Bank have torched
Palestinian buildings, killing one Palestinian man after two Israelis were
earlier shot dead. You've been listening to the Newsroom from the BBC World
Service. You're listening to the BBC World Service. Hello, I'm Razia Iqbal,
welcome to News Hour. Welcome to Newsday on the BBC World Service. You're
listening to the Newsroom. World news from the BBC. From every corner of the
globe. India is set to overtake its giant neighbour as the most populous country
in the world this year. More than 90 million Nigerians are registered to vote in
next month's elections. He told police he wanted to prevent the establishment of
communism in Brazil. World events as they happen. We are heading towards the
front lines here in the northern Donbas. At 10 o'clock this morning, dozens of
police and military piled into a medical clinic in Palermo. Nina Hardy and her
husband live in Santa Barbara by a little creek that suddenly turned into a
raging river. In depth and impartial. We are seeing some of the most extreme
measures imposed as the authorities try to get their target of what they're
calling societal zero. Truth and justice, that is who won today. News on the BBC
World Service. Eugenics was intended to improve Victorian society, but became a
fuel for the rise of white supremacy. Roosevelt says that race suicide is the
greatest problem of civilisation. Eugenics, the movement to breed better humans.
It would have been better by far for them and for the rest of the community if
they had never been born. Join me, Adam Rutherford, for Bad Blood, the story of
eugenics on Discovery, just after the news. BBC News with Julie Candler. Israeli
settlers in the occupied West Bank have torched Palestinian buildings, killing
one Palestinian man after two Israelis were earlier shot dead. The Palestinian
Red Cross said about 100 people were being treated, many after inhaling tear gas
fired by Israeli security forces. Organisers of protests in Mexico against
reform of the electoral agency say half a million people have taken to the
streets across the country. The Mexican president accuses the INE of being
corrupt and partisan, but critics say the changes are an attack on democracy.
Belarusian opposition figures say that a Russian military plane has been damaged
in a sabotage attack inside the country. They've attributed the attack to what
they call anti-government partisans. Two top US officials have appeared to
contradict each other over Chinese military support for the Russian invasion.
The CIA director said he was confident that China is considering providing
Moscow with lethal equipment, shortly after the national security adviser said
there was no evidence this was the case. Early results in Nigeria's general
election have given a governing party candidate victory in the southwestern
Akiti state. Attacks on some polling stations delayed voting in parts of the
country. Chile will on Monday deploy troops to its borders with Peru and Bolivia
in an attempt to control the entry of undocumented migrants. The operation will
last for 90 days. England and Wales have raised the legal age at which a person
can get married from 16 to 18. The change is intended to protect vulnerable
children from forced marriage. In boxing, Jake Paul has suffered the first loss
of his career at the hands of Tommy Fury in Saudi Arabia. Paul is a social media
star. Fury has featured in reality TV shows and is the brother of world
heavyweight champion Tyson Fury. BBC News. This is Discovery from the BBC World
Service. I'm Adam Rutherford and you're listening to Bad Blood, the story of
eugenics. So far in Bad Blood, we've explored the history of eugenics and its
resonance in today's world. But today we're looking forward. In an age of
genetic screening, gene editing and embryo selection, where do we go from here?
It starts with a buzzing phone at dawn. BUZZER And it's a buzzer that's been
buzzing for a long time. And the buzzing phone at dawn. BUZZER On the 28th of
November 2018, I was awoken to discover a barrage of missed calls, text messages
and voicemails. Something new and dramatic had happened in my professional world
and news was coming in from Hong Kong. On the 27th of November in 2018, I got on
a flight to Hong Kong. I was travelling to go speak at the International Summit
on Human Genome Editing. I was planning to give a lecture on how we can safely
develop a bench-to-clinical pipeline for human germline genome editing. In other
words, how we might edit human embryos. This is Dr Helen O'Neill, a lecturer in
reproductive and molecular genetics at University College London. I go to a lot
of conferences. They all vary in size and in attendance. This was a very big
summit where people were flying from all over the world to convene. So it was
quite an exciting event with many big names, Nobel Prize winners and famous
scientists who were attending. This is a meeting to explore scientific
developments in medical genetics. Some of these techniques require regulations
and ethical oversight. So the conference is also a forum to establish how these
emerging technologies should be governed. The message of the summit wasn't to
talk about or convene solely about scientific advances, but how we can
appropriately govern, how we can discuss the ethics, how we can talk about the
future. So as a result, ethicists, religious stakeholders were invited to speak
at the summit. Now, some kinds of gene editing are already in medical use today,
mostly as a therapy for diseases. There is, however, another kind of genome
editing that is far more controversial. It's a method that has the potential to
change the genomes not just of people alive today, but of our descendants, the
future genomes of the world. It's called human germline editing, and it's banned
in more than 70 countries worldwide. The reason germline genome editing is so
controversial is because you're not editing one person's genome. You're editing
a generation of genomes. So every child that they have and the future children
after that will carry that mutation probably. Back in Hong Kong in winter 2018,
just hours before the conference began, a titanic news story broke. Then we
start off with a story of China's gene-edited babies, which is making headlines.
We start at the second international summit on human genome editing. It's taking
place in Hong Kong, and it's fair to say it's caused a sensation. A scientist
from the University of Shenzhen says he has successfully altered the DNA of twin
girls to help them resist the HIV virus. Chinese health officials were kept in
the dark about this experiment. Dr He spent an hour inside there, very calmly
defending his work. But will the details of what he's done be fully published?
Will they be fully shared for others, others to review and make their
independent assessment? You could not hear a single thing except clicking of
cameras for almost the first 15 minutes. The chair was really trying to
reprimand the journalist to say, you can take a picture in a minute, please let
him come out and speak. And after quite a tentative wait, Dr He did come on
stage to give a presentation about his research. What was somewhat surreal about
this was looking around the room at all of these esteemed professors, Nobel
Prize winners, and they were just as taken with the moment. So everyone, them
included, were turning around with their phones and taking videos and
photographs of what was happening because it was such a strange and profound
moment seeing this person walk on stage, to essentially confess to what they had
done. And as a result, there was almost this schoolboy-ish feeling of pity, I
think, about this rogue who had gone ahead and done these things. So what had He
Jiankui actually done? Well, during the IVF procedure with a Chinese couple, he
had taken some embryos and put them in a tube insert the next day into the
vagina and around the first 3-4 days of the processing, he had given the period
to the Chinese couple. He had taken some embryos and used the gene editing
technique called CRISPR in an attempt to engineer their DNA in a very specific
way. He was the first to edit a human embryo and transfer that embryo for a
pregnancy in fact a third girl born called Amy, but that was not made public
until much later. He Jiankui's plan was to edit their genomes to make them
immune to HIV. Their father is HIV positive, a particularly stigmatised
condition in China, so the parents were apparently determined to avoid the same
fate for their children. He Jiankui had targeted just one specific gene called
CCR5. Now there's a rare but naturally occurring version of CCR5 that makes it
virtually impossible for the HIV virus to enter a cell, so people who have this
version are immune to HIV AIDS. He Jiankui's plan was to gift these babies that
immunity. It sounds well-intentioned but it was in fact deeply misguided. The
technology and the science was not ready to do this reliably, let alone
responsibly. Helen O'Neill was due on stage immediately after He Jiankui. I was
confused because working with embryos, working with CRISPR, I knew exactly what
needed to be done in order to do this right and we're not there yet. So I was
highly sceptical about this. Frankly I was disappointed that it could be done so
prematurely and to ruin the chances of doing something right. My whole talk was
about how we do this right and to have somebody just do it in a sloppy and hasty
manner to just be the first was hugely frustrating actually. In the current age
it is surprisingly, perhaps alarmingly easy to edit DNA. You need some software
to design what you want to change, you order a bunch of chemicals, you mix them
up and inject them into a cell. There is a bit more to it than that but that's
basically it. If you want to do the same but in a human embryo then the IVF
process provides the eggs that you want to edit. To combine these two things IVF
and gene editing requires specialist training but it's not particularly
challenging in principle. In reality there are profound uncertainties in this
process. First the type of gene editing used CRISPR is not perfect. It's quite
possible that it will not only perform the edit that you want but also others
elsewhere in the genome. Another thing is that it's likely that the intended
mutations didn't happen in every cell. Some cells will end up with different
genetics than others. And the third thing is that we really don't know that much
about what CCR5 actually does. It does confer immunity to HIV but just like so
many genes in our cells it probably does a whole load of other stuff too in many
different tissues throughout the body. Overall the effect that this attempted
edit may have had on Lulu and Nana is wildly unpredictable. And none of this
even matters because by his own admission the edits Hei-Zhang Kui attempted did
not work. He presented data in Hong Kong which showed that he had changed their
CCR5 genes but in completely new ways and did not succeed at introducing the HIV
immunity. But he went ahead and implanted those embryos anyway. After initially
being lauded by the Chinese media the press coverage swiftly turned to
condemnation. In the first instance the very first press releases which came out
were from Chinese officials and Chinese newspaper sources saying China is the
first in the world to create a genome edited baby. That quickly, that initial
China is the first headline quickly changed. In fact none of those headlines
are, you can't search for any of those headlines. Now they've all disappeared
because the initial feeling of pride was quickly dissipated because of the
international disgust and annoyance that this had been done so prematurely. More
than 100 scientists in China have signed a letter condemning claims made by a
Chinese researcher that he helped create the world's first genetically edited
babies. Aside from the ethics and morality what Hei-Zhang Kui did was illegal.
He was sent to prison for three years. The true identity of Lulu and Nana and of
the third baby, Amy, has been kept private. We know very little about them and
can only hope that they are healthy. The scandal made it clear that the era of
customising the human genome for desirable traits, the age of designer babies,
is already here. In this final episode of Bad Bloods we're casting an eye to the
future. Genetically engineered babies are already in the world and this reality
is what we're going to have to grapple with. Could advances in genetics and in
reproductive medicine lead us into a new eugenic era where the wealthy select or
even design the kind of children that they want? Well before we start
speculating about the years and decades to come it's worth remembering what's
already available. The future, after all, is built on the present. It seemed
like a miracle when it happened. The birth of the first test tube baby was one
of the wonders of the century looking back. Louise Brown gave hope to millions
and was history. Well an egg from mum got took out and Mr Sturgeon put in this
funny dish. He put it back in and then told me to go home and here I am. That
was a 10 year old Louise Brown explaining how she was born as the first test
tube baby conceived via IVF in 1978. The dawn of IVF was a revolutionary
treatment for couples struggling to conceive but today the process of IVF
enables all sorts of other choices. Around 8 million babies have been born to
IVF to date. I would say upwards of 10 million babies have had their genomes
tested. Since the late 80s families with hereditary conditions have had the
option of selecting embryos in the IVF process that are free from the genes
bearing those conditions. Things like achondroplasia that we talked about in the
last episode or diseases such as cystic fibrosis or muscular dystrophy. But as
our understanding of DNA has changed, we have to move beyond the simple
Mendelian model of genetics. The game is changing yet again. So one of the
newest applications of genetic screening in embryos is not to just look at one
gene or to look at whole chromosomes but to look at many different genes in
combination. Most traits and diseases are influenced by many genes so we call
them genes. So we call them genes that are related to the genes that we have in
our body. So we call them genes that are related to the genes that we have in
our body. So we call this type of analysis polygenic. Things like height or body
shape or personality traits like neuroticism or happiness or diseases like
diabetes or heart disease are all polygenic. In the last few years polygenic
screening has entered the market where you look at a whole range of genes
instead of just one. Here's Helen O'Neill again. And so from that you can
develop almost a prediction of what somebody's risk might be for having a
condition based on a collection of genes. Clinics are looking for risks
associated with diabetes or heart disease, lower intelligence. The intelligence
one is quite a controversial issue obviously because some places will say that
they're screening for high intelligence and the reality is they're not screening
necessarily for high intelligence but learning difficulties. At the moment
polygenic screening is not used in the UK for embryo selection and is indeed
illegal but elsewhere in the world the rules are much less strict. In America
there is no regulation that prevents the use of embryo selection with polygenic
screening and several companies offer such services for anyone of a number of
diseases. Indeed the first child who was selected using polygenic screening was
born in 2020. The future of reproduction is already here it's just very few of
us are participating. This is Dr Jamie Metzl the author of Hacking Darwin and a
former member of the World Health Organization's expert advisory committee on
human genome editing. He thinks about the ways in which current technologies
could develop and how they might be applied in the decades or centuries to come
and by the future of human reproduction he means test tube babies. And the
reason why we're going to be doing the act of reproduction in labs rather than
inside of bodies is because it allows us to apply many of the tools of
technology for very good purposes. Jamie is talking here about the kinds of
genetic testing that help us screen out genetic diseases so far so familiar but
as we've seen new kinds of polygenic testing are also becoming available. And
the question is how far can we go from there? Would we be comfortable for
example selecting an embryo that had the highest likelihood of living a long and
healthy life? At some point in the future let's say that we live in a much
hotter environment would we be comfortable selecting an embryo where that person
would be better able to live in whatever those new circumstances would be? We
can't meaningfully predict these things now but they are plausible targets for
future geneticists. But let's keep going. What if you supercharged IVF, combined
it with other technologies? If we could increase the number of human eggs
available in the in vitro fertilization process that would be a game changer. In
the process of in vitro fertilization IVF it's around 10 to 15 eggs being
extracted is the average and that places a limitation on what is possible
through embryo selection. Right now there is a technology that already exists
not being yet used in humans but over time it very likely will be called in
vitro gametogenesis. And what this involves is taking an adult cell, it really
could be anything but let's use a skin cell. So you take these skin cells back
in time to be stem cells and then forward in time to be egg precursor cells and
then egg cells. And so let's just say you could have a million, you can really
pick your number, but let's say you have a million skin cells from this process
and then you could get one million eggs. The average male ejaculation can have
around a billion sperm cells and so if we can increase the number of human eggs
then you could theoretically at least fertilize a million eggs. You could grow
those eggs in vitro in a laboratory for five days. You could use a process, an
automated process, for extracting a few cells from each and then use our
analytical tools for saying of these million possible options, which single
option is the one that we would like to implant. If we open up the number of
eggs it supercharges our ability to use, potentially use, embryo selection as a
way of driving not just individual reproduction but if enough people do it our
evolutionary trajectory as a species. Jamie's imagination here is drawing on
existing technologies, so perhaps not beyond the scope of science fact. But this
is a series about eugenics. Is this eugenics? Well in one sense no. Eugenics is
traditionally thought of as a top-down state-imposed control of reproduction.
This is something else. The new genetics is providing some people, in fact some
wealthy people, with new choices about what their children will be like. Today
we're talking about personal choice as the driver and contemporary genetics
provides a tool that is vastly more precise than the clumsy understanding of
inheritance of the early 20th century. But it's still an issue of control where
some kinds of people, some traits, are valued and others are not. Could these
technologies end up amplifying divisions and inequalities? Here's Professor
Paige Harden from the University of Texas where she directs the Developmental
Behaviour Genetics Lab. Whenever there's inequalities, whenever there's power
differentials and new technology enters the mix, whether that be genetics,
whether that be advances in health technology, whether that be the internet, the
gravitational pull is for that to be used in ways that reflect and entrench the
inequalities that are happening. It's already true right now that reproductive
technologies are available to some groups and not others and wealth is the
primary determinant of access. Using IVF as a fertility treatment is expensive.
In the UK it's available via the NHS but around 70% of those who use it are
paying privately. It costs at least ¬£5,000 per round. But as Paige Harden says,
all new technologies amplify inequality. Genetic tech is no different but does
access to genetic technologies inevitably lead to a kind of biological
hierarchy? Oftentimes people think the alternative to that is what I've
described as genome blindness, which is basically we shouldn't open Pandora's
box. We shouldn't look at it. It's inevitably dangerous to try to understand the
genome in relation to human lives. And I contrast that genome blind perspective
with what I call an anti-eugenic perspective, which is to say, yes, there is
this incredible new technology that we can use to measure the human genome. Yes,
it's clear that the genes that we happen to inherit shape our bodies and brains
in ways that matter for our social outcomes. How can we not ignore that, not use
that information to entrench inequalities, but instead use that information to
see how people's lives differ and intervene in ways that bring about greater
equality in the ways that we want people to enjoy greater equality. Paige makes
the case for actively using genetic information as part of a social and
political policy agenda. Now, for many people, that rings alarm bells. But Paige
is arguing for anti-eugenics, genetics in the service of progressive social
policy. So one example we can think of it currently in the US, if a child has
has a learning disability or a suspected learning disability, they can apply for
accommodations in their school. So they might get extra time on tests or they
might get access to tutoring. And parents are allowed to bring many sources of
information to bear when they're saying, my child needs these extra services.
And one thing that's really interesting is they can bring in family history. So
if you say, you know, their older siblings were dyslexic or their older siblings
had an autism spectrum disorder, and they're showing early signs of a problem,
that family history becomes relevant towards getting them access to services. So
right now, we have these genetic predictors and they're not very good. They're
called polygenic scores and polygenic scores are correlated with approximately,
but far from perfectly with things like learning disabilities, with things like
diagnoses of autism spectrum disorder, with things like just difficulty getting
through school. So I think an interesting potential application eventually is to
think about could genetic information be yet another piece of information that
parents and children could use to advocate for additional services for
themselves. So polygenic scores could be leveraged in just the same way a
medical diagnosis or a disability might be grounds for support. It might sound
alarming, but the point is here that genetics can't and shouldn't be ignored.
This surprising argument reveals that amplifying division and hierarchy is not
an inevitable consequence of the new genetic information. Our politics, our
values, the incentives driving how it's used, these are what will determine the
repercussions. Of course, there is a lucrative market for this kind of stuff.
The concern is that polygenic scores are a new way to encode and quantify a
hierarchy. Just like in the heyday of eugenics, some genes, some people, are
better than others. But giving individuals autonomy, granting them control over
how they reproduce, well that's powerfully anti-eugenic. As genetic technologies
develop and become ever more widely available, that is the tension we will have
to navigate. For me personally, one issue that polygenic embryo selection brings
up is this kind of horror at re-entrenching or re-instantiating the idea that
some children are better than other children, and particularly along these kind
of classist lines or the old eugenic preoccupations with intelligence test
scores. At the same time, and this is particularly salient to me because I live
in Texas, I think parents and prospective parents' reproductive autonomy is
under attack. And that's a value that I hold quite dear, people's ability to
make decisions about the children that they bring into the world and will be
responsible for caring for. I think those two values around the kind of broader
social reverberations of polygenic embryo selection and protecting individual
parents' autonomy in their reproductive decision-making is a really strong
tension. I think that this is a topic that's going to require a lot of wisdom
and a lot of deliberation. Wisdom and deliberation, perhaps two things that were
missing in the history of eugenics. The anti-immigration, racist, ableist and
sexist policies of the 20th century may well have happened even if eugenics had
never existed. But eugenics gave them a cloak of scientific respectability,
bigotry disguised as biology. But did we learn the lesson? Hei-Chan Kui is out
of prison, back in the lab, and there will be more like him. As new technologies
come along, there is always the possibility that they will be marshaled into the
political ideologies of the day. Science and medicine are always political. The
discussions we're having today in the age of the genome echo the eugenics of a
century ago. To know this history is to inoculate ourselves against it being
repeated, or so we hope. Desperately in need of work, she submits to the sexual
demands of the director of a perfume company. Her body gradually begins to
change, growing more and more like the body of a pig. World Book Club with Marie
Dariasek. Saturday at 12 GMT. In 30 minutes, the climate question. Record-
breaking temperatures in the Alps has led to a bad start to the ski season.
Picture grass-green slopes without a flake in sight. This sight will likely
become more common thanks to climate change. We ask, can the ski industry
survive? The Newsroom is next.