TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-10H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Who tells me we're running out of time? Our editors today were Laura Cooper and
Tom Field and the studio director was Hannah Montgomery. Have a wonderful day.
BBC News at nine o'clock. The journalist who revealed hundreds of Matt Hancock's
WhatsApp messages has insisted she acted in the public interest. Isabel
Oakeshott confirmed she'd broken a non-disclosure agreement she'd signed before
helping the former health secretary write his book about the Covid pandemic. Mr
Hancock said it was a massive betrayal and breach of trust. Ms Oakeshott told
Today she wanted to reveal the truth. This is about the millions of people,
every one of us, in this country that were adversely affected by the
catastrophic decisions to lock down this country repeatedly, often on the
flimsiest of evidence for political reasons. The latest messages published by
the Daily Telegraph suggest Mr Hancock wanted to have schools closed as the
number of Covid cases rose towards the end of 2020, while the education
secretary at the time, Sir Gavin Williamson, wanted to keep them open. The
school's minister, Nick Gibb, who held the same job during the pandemic, said
decisions had always been taken with the best interests of children in mind. We
listened very carefully to the evidence and we discussed those issues very
carefully about whether schools should remain open, but ultimately the decision
was taken right across government that schools should close. And then we had to
make sure that we were doing everything we could to make sure that children
could continue their education at home, which is why we were procuring millions
of laptops and computers for children. A post-mortem examination is to be
carried out on the body of a baby found by police searching for the missing
child of Constance Martin and Mark Gordon. The remains were discovered in an
area of woodland near Brighton, close to where the couple were detained on
Monday. The Duke and Duchess of Sussex have confirmed they've been asked to
vacate their home in the UK. Frogmore Cottage in the grounds of Windsor Castle
was given to the couple by Queen Elizabeth in 2019. Eurovision fans who want to
attend this year's competition in Liverpool will be able to buy tickets next
Tuesday. They'll cost up to Â£380. BBC News. Matt Hancock's leaked WhatsApp
messages bring back memories of the pandemic and a question, did we get it right
on lockdown? That's the subject of the Five Live phone-in, just starting now
with Kata Alam. Here on Radio 4 in 45 minutes, Peter Ross will be visiting the
country's oldest firm of Muslim undertakers as he discovers how burial delays
intensified the grief of mourning families after the Grenfell Tower disaster. A
tomb with a view. It's at 9.45. Before that, we concentrate on symbols of ritual
and memorial from a more bygone age. Here's Melvin Brack, within our time.
Hello, in many parts of the world, it's possible to see huge stones that have
been placed in the landscape. Often they're visually striking and highly
prominent. They're called megaliths and such stone monuments in Britain and
Ireland mostly date from the Neolithic period. The oldest ones are up to 6,000
years old. In recent decades, scientific advances have enabled archaeologists to
learn large amounts about megalithic structures and the people who built them.
But much about these stones remains unknown and mysterious. With me to discuss
megaliths are Vicki Cummings, Professor of Neolithic Archaeology at the
University of Central Lancashire, Julian Thomas, Professor of Archaeology at the
University of Manchester, and Susan Greeney, Lecturer in Archaeology at the
University of Exeter. Susan Greeney, how do we define what a megalith is? Well,
the word megalith is formed of two parts from the ancient Greek, mega, huge, and
lith, from lithos, stone, so they're just large stones. And the term gets
applied to a whole range of different monuments, mostly in Europe, dating from
prehistory, but anything really that's been built out of very, very large stones
can be termed a megalith. When you say mostly in Europe, are you implying that
they're all around the world? That's right. They're found in many different
parts of the world. And although they're prehistoric generally in Europe, across
the world, in fact, in some places, they're still being built today. Can you
briefly give us some idea of the different stone monuments there are? In
Britain, there are a number of different types of monument that get built, which
we call megaliths. There are enclosed tombs, chambers of various types, passage
tombs, long barrows with large stone chambers. Long barrows, you mean those
humps that you see? Yeah, that's right. The long barrows with the stone chambers
in particular would come under the term megalith. And we also get enclosures of
different sizes and shapes, so sort of freestanding stones, stone circles,
standing stones just by themselves, or in rows, sometimes in avenues, and a
whole range of different types. A lot of them seem to be burial monuments, but
many of them are not related to funerary activity. And let's just stick to the
British Isles, largely in the West and Ireland, of course. Are we talking about
a lot of sites there? Yes. The distribution of megaliths in Britain and Ireland
is very much a Western and Northern thing, because of where stone outcrops and
because where stones are available. I don't know if I can put a number on it,
but it must be in the thousands. I know there's about 35,000 in Europe alone, so
there's a huge, huge number of these things. When did they start discovering
them and deciding that they were worth looking at, instead of being the great
lumps of stone lying, being covered with moss? The first records we have are
really medieval, particularly Stonehenge. It's Stonehenge that gets written
about the earliest, really. There are medieval manuscripts with images of
Stonehenge, for example. It's not really until the 17th century, 16th century,
that people start to then discover and write about other megalithic monuments.
Avebury, for example, isn't really known about until it gets rediscovered by
John Albury when he's on a hunting trip. Many of the studies really flourish in
the Victorian period and later, when people suddenly start to get interested in
who built these monuments and when, and start to ask the kind of questions that
we're still trying to answer now. When you say Avebury was rediscovered, and you
talk about finding Stonehenge, do we find them in a way, on the whole, that we
see them now, or have they been much built up since they were first, in inverted
commas, found? They have changed quite a bit, and we have very good records of
how they appeared 300 years ago or so. People like William Stukeley, for
example, of the antiquary, were recording and drawing them, and we know that he
was doing that at a time when quite a lot of them were being destroyed. So
whether that was because people were breaking up the stones because they wanted
the land for agriculture, or because they thought they were pagan monuments, but
certainly they are now very much ruins of what they would have been in the past.
Thank you. Julian, Julian Thomas, can you give us some idea of the age of these
monuments? They're of very different ages. So in Europe, probably the earliest
that we've got date back to about 4,700 BC in the west of France, where you
start to get the coming together of a whole series of ideas about burial and
stone to create what eventually emerge as characteristic monuments like passage
tombs. In Britain, 3,900 perhaps, shortly after the beginning of the Neolithic,
but in other places, very, very different. So in the Caucasus, many of the tombs
are around about 3,000 BC. In some places, they're still building them today. So
places like Madagascar and Indonesia. So can we go back to the Neolithic? Can
you give us some idea of what's going on in that period? More importantly, well,
as importantly, why it's going on in that period? It's really quite important to
recognize that it's not just a matter of megaliths starting at a particular date
and then continuing. They tend to very often occur in waves of particular groups
of monuments. And rather than just being an attribute of a particular kind of
people, I think they're likely to be built preferentially at times when there's
some kind of stress or dislocation or enhanced competition going on. So at the
beginning of the Neolithic, that's certainly a period when there's a lot of
population movement. What date would you give us? Around about 4,000 BC in this
country. So 6,000 years ago. Yeah, so 6,000 years ago. Shortly after that, we
start to see lots of these monuments starting to be created. At the same time. I
mean, so did this all begin at the same time? Was there a movement in monuments
as it were? In this country, they start out quite spotty and then they increase.
And obviously, these are stone monuments. They're found principally down the
western side of Britain. But that's a little bit of an artificial picture
because there are complementary monuments made of earth and timber that are
principally found down the eastern part of Britain. Good to bring in the
timbers. Well, they're obviously much more easily destroyed, aren't they? Yeah,
absolutely. And I think that that aspect of the temporality of these monuments
is very important because timber monuments are going to rot away on a timescale
that's comparable with human life. And sometimes they're deliberately burnt down
as well. So the way in which these different kinds of monuments work with memory
is quite different. Some work as mnemonics because they remain in the landscape.
Others create a spectacle in their destruction and therefore they find their way
into oral testimony over time. Thank you. Vicki, where... Let's just keep
setting your last question really in this area. Where are they mostly set in
Britain and Ireland and what does that tell you? So the vast majority of early
Neolithic chambered tombs are found in the west and the north of Britain and
they're found right the way across Ireland. So they're built very commonly and
there are many, many thousand monuments across Ireland. Why is that? It just
seems to be something that really articulated and meant a lot for those people.
Whatever was going on in those particular communities, whatever building a
monument meant to those people, they needed to do it again and again and across
the landscape. But it's much more sporadic throughout Britain. So there are
large areas of Britain where there are no megalithic monuments, even where there
is stone available for people to actually construct them. The variety was
briefly alluded to earlier in the programme. Can you give listeners some idea of
the variety of different monuments which would come in the capacity of
megaliths? Yes, so in the early Neolithic, we've got a whole variety of
different types of chambered tomb. A chambered tomb is a monument that's built
out of stone and there is a chamber area that's created out of upright stones
with a stone on top to create a sealed chamber and then that's encased within
either stone or earth. So the chamber itself would be encased or enclosed within
a mound or a cairn. One of the types of chambered tomb that we get, particularly
in the middle Neolithic, is something that we call a passage tomb or a passage
grave. And there's smaller numbers of these, but where they are constructed,
they're often absolutely spectacular, really, really large chambers. So you
could fit many tens of people, if not hundreds of people within the chamber. The
reason they're called passage graves is that they have a long, thin passage,
which runs from the chamber to the outside of the monument. And once again,
they're encased within a large mound or cairn. And why do they encase them in
that way? I think it's partly structural. You can't sort of have a free standing
chamber for the most part because it'll fall over. But I think it's also about
making them very visible to people within the wider landscape. Can you tell
people what a dolmen is? Well, a dolmen is a particular type of chambered tomb
and they are classed as chambered tombs, but they are one of these that often
don't actually have any burials within them. And the distinctive thing about
them is that they are a chamber constructed out of stones, but they have an
absolutely massive capstone on the top, which is much larger than is actually
needed to encase the chamber. And the largest example is at a site called
Brown's Hill in County Carlo in Britain and Ireland, and the capstone is 160
tonnes. So it's absolutely enormous. And it's not needed to create essentially a
box, a stone box for burial underneath. So it's something of a little bit of a
different type of megalith. I think we could pause here for a second and say,
how did they manage to... They built on the whole a place where rock was
available, but they tilted the cartage from A to B or sometimes A to Z. How did
they do that? In the case of dolmens, it seems that they were actually using
glacial erratics, so stones that were already deposited in the landscape after
the last ice age. And all they're essentially doing is digging around that stone
and elevating it in situ. So they're not having to drag it very far, they're
building where the stone was actually found. And when, once they're built, do
you have any information about how often they were used, how they were used, how
they figured in the landscape of people's daily life, for instance? There are
some examples where there are burials within them. The vast majority of dolmens
are found in Western Britain and in Ireland. And unfortunately, in those places,
for the most part, there's very poor bone preservation because the soil is
acidic. But there is an example over in the west of Ireland, in Pall-na-Bronne
in County Clare, which was built on top of limestone paving, and there was
excellent bone preservation. And in actual fact, they'd buried really quite a
large number of people into the monument. What do you know of the burial
practices of the time? In chambered tombs and long barrows, people were
depositing the dead in a variety of different ways, sometimes cremations,
sometimes inhumations. And particularly with long barrows, it wasn't just that
somebody got buried and then was never moved again. These were places where
bones were circulating. People were entering these tombs and adding new burials
and moving older burials around. Sometimes people were stacking up long bones
and skulls in particular parts of the chambers, and sometimes arranging the
burials by the age of the person or by their gender. So it's a variety of
things. And we can't think of these as being kind of places that where people
will lay undisturbed after they were deposited. But these were places that
people returned to time and time again to interact with the bones, sometimes to
remove them from the tombs altogether, sometimes to add new burials. And so
these are places where the dead were very much part of living rituals and part
of activities and ceremonies that were taking place. Was there any sense that
they were preparing them for the next life, as in Egyptian tombs, for instance?
There isn't a huge amount of evidence for grave goods in the early Neolithic. We
do get the odd things, some small stone beads, that kind of thing. But they seem
to be perhaps more personal items rather than being equipped to go to the next
world. That does change. In the later Neolithic, we get some cremations that
have got very fine objects with them, for example, polished stone mace heads, so
sort of perforated stone items that seem to have been symbols of status. For
example, one of the cremations at Stonehenge is accompanied by one of these mace
heads. But it's fairly rare that we get people buried with food and equipment
and costume that we'd think that that would meant an afterlife. Were the people
specially designed to look after burials the equivalent of priests? That's an
interesting idea. I suspect that there were specialists who were in... the ones
who were allowed to go into some of these tombs and interact with the dead and
perhaps observe things like solstice alignments. I think everybody didn't have
access to the tomb in the same way. So, yes, I suspect they were ritual
specialists. I mean, I think it's really important to point out that the vast
majority of people in the Neolithic weren't buried at all in any of these
monuments. So I think for the vast majority of people, they're probably being
buried perhaps in rivers, perhaps they're being deposited in different places.
So it does seem to be that only special people or particular sets of communities
were being picked out for burial in places like chambered tombs. There are
particular people, not necessarily the people who are important in the sense of
status or power, but people who are understood as the beginning of genealogical
lines very often. Thank you, Susan. Can you give us some examples of the
connection between farmers and the megaliths? And these are on farming land, I
presume. So what's going on there? Yes, there's traditionally been a very strong
connection between megalithic monuments and the arrival of farming. In fact, the
4000 BC date that we've been talking about, the beginning of the Neolithic, is
when people come to Britain with the first domestic crops and with the first
domestic animals. Come from where? Come from continental Europe, both the kind
of Iberian coast, Atlantic coast and also from the kind of low countries in
France. And these people bring with them traditions of building monuments, which
are then adapted and changed, but in effect implemented in Britain. And it's
long been thought that people to build monuments have to be farmers. They have
to have had enough time and surplus food in order to supply the workers or to
provide material for the feasts and things that went with these monuments. And
that's been a kind of long held idea. But actually, we now know of a number of
sites across the world where people are building relatively large monuments,
megalithic monuments, in some cases, who are not farmers. They are hunter-
gatherers. They are procuring their food by gathering wild resources. And so we
have some sites, for example, in Jomon, Japan. So talking about kind of the
Neolithic period, but in Japan, the Jomon period, and also a site in modern day
Turkey called Gobekli Tepe, where they are just about on the cusp of developing
farming, developing the first, using the first domestic crops, but they are also
hunting, but they're building spectacular temples and stone, sanding stones.
There's not a hard and fast link between farming and the building of megaliths.
So getting to the matter, as it were, Julian, why, what are these people
building these megaliths for? What do they intend them to do? A whole range of
different things, because- There we go. Yeah. So these are societies that
clearly don't have the state. They don't have the same kinds of institutions
that we have to maintain social order from one generation to a next. They don't
probably have fully instituted elites. There's probably a certain amount of
jockeying for position within these societies. So on the one hand, it's a way of
increasing your profile within society to be the person who's responsible for
setting up or inspiring- You build the monuments. Absolutely. Or you organize
the people to build the monument and you have the feasting and you have the
ritual activities that you're alongside with. How do we know about the feasting
and ritual? Well, we certainly do get the remains of feasts in the forms of,
particularly in Scandinavia, huge quantities of smashed pottery outside the
tombs. In the forecourts of other tombs, we get hearts, we get animal bones and
so on. So there's all sorts of social activity focused on these monuments and
the building of the monuments. But also, we've said that these are early
agricultural societies. They're probably at very low population densities. And
so bringing together dispersed populations at fixed places, I think is also very
important. Having a place where you know other people are going to be at
particular times of year, being able to exchange gifts, to acquire marriage
partners, to acquire information, all of this is tremendously important. So on
the one hand, there's the aspect of increasing prestige and status, but on the
other hand, there's social integration. So these monuments, instead of just
reflecting society, are part of the way in which society is built and
articulated. How do we know that? Well, we don't. This is all very much
inference, but that's archaeology. But you've got to infer from something. Sure,
and all of this, again, is down to the little traces of information that we have
from these sites. Seems strange, these great big things all over the place for
thousands of years, and you keep telling us how little you know. Well, again,
that is archaeology, because we're dealing with societies that don't have
written records. And so it is all down to inference. And I think that's why,
when you look at the way in which archaeologists have understood Megalithic
monuments down the centuries, you keep finding changes in the way in which we
understand these. So it's almost as if Megaliths form a kind of barometer for
archaeological thinking. And every time the ideas change, you see them in new
light, and you start to think about them in slightly different ways. So every
hinge, every circle, and so on, has its own, as it were, population, not
resident, but coming for special events. Is that what you're saying? I think
that's right. Does religion, any sort of religion, play any sort of part in
this? I'm sure it does. But I think we need to think rather differently about
religion, because again, we're used to the great world religions, the religions
of the book, religions that have written scripture and that have a liturgy. It's
very unlikely we have any of that going on. It's far more likely that religion
is quite fluid and varies from one group to another. But because it's
traditional or oral religion, rather than written religion, I think it's very
likely that you don't have a kind of a presiding deity. It's very likely that
you don't have an idea of different realms, like heaven or hell or underworld.
Instead, I think that it's likely that spirits, deities, ancestors are
understood as being imminent in the landscape, and that when people are actually
constructing these monuments and reorganising the landscape, it's as if they're
engineering the cosmology at the same time. Do they, Pro? I really don't know
the answer to that. I would think it's extremely likely that when you look at
the way in which passage tombs, for instance, are organised, and the way that
they seem to resonate with sound, that they're certainly chanting, I think
there's a vocal element to all this. What's the evidence for that? Well, people
have done audiological studies of the interiors of these monuments and found
that they do seem to resonate with a low male voice, which is kind of
interesting. This wasn't the archaic just whistling for, keep his courage up?
Well, that's entirely possible as well, because being inside these monuments is
going to be quite an experience. Remember, there is very little in the way of
architecture like these monuments that people would have experienced before, and
particularly with a passage grave, you're entering into a dark space that's
covered over, you crawl down a low passage or crouch, and then you open out into
a big open area where you're encountering the remains of the dead. All of this,
I think, is going to be an almost overwhelming experience for people. Yes.
Vicky, did you want to come in? It's important to remember that we're talking
about megaliths being built over about 1,500 years or so, and of course, beliefs
will have changed in that period. And we know that people are, for example,
treating their dead in very, very different ways at the beginning of the
Neolithic to how they are at the end of the Neolithic. And they're building
different types of monuments, they're building less enclosed spaces and more
open stone circles and things like this. We can only assume that the religious
beliefs changed. And for us as archaeologists, it's very difficult to get inside
the minds of people who lived in that period. But we can only go on the evidence
that we have. And for example, tombs, at least we can at least infer that they
were being used for funerary purposes and other things. But later on with stone
circles and things, excavations often don't find any artefacts at all. And these
places seem to be kept quite clean, quite separate from everyday life, perhaps
sort of sacred ritual spaces. So we can really only use our imaginations about
what was happening within those spaces. Yeah, thank you very much. Stone circles
seem to have appeared rather late in this chronology. When was that and why was
it late? So stone circles appeared for the first time in the British Isles
around about 3,200 BC. That seems to be about the earliest occurrence of them.
And that was in Orkney, where they first appear. And they seem to spread south
from Orkney. Why did it start in Orkney? That is one of the big questions. And I
think there's something very special going on in Orkney. There seems to be a
coming together of really quite sort of a vibrant and lively Neolithic culture.
A whole series of different things are occurring in Orkney around about that
time. And it seems to be... So they have the very first appearance of grooved
ware pottery, which is a distinctive type of pottery that's flat based and
enables a whole range of sort of different types of food production and storage
to happen for the first time. Up to that point, pottery had been round based and
seems to be predominantly for cooking and in quite small quantities and perhaps
serving. So you've got that change. You've got people living in large
conglomerated settlements for the first time. So the most famous example is
Skara Brae. And people seem to be also constructing stone circles. We think that
perhaps they're taking the outside of a passage grave, which in Ireland was
marked by a series of standing stones around the outside. And they're removing
the bit in the middle and just building the circle on its own. Is this prompted
by any defensive consideration? I don't think so. It would be very easy to
attack a stone circle. There's no evidence of anything like that happening at
stone circles. And we do have evidence of actually attacks at other types of
Neolithic monument. So there's an earlier type of earthen monument called a
causewayed enclosure. And a very famous example, Crickley Hill, appears to have
been attacked. There's a lot of arrows found around the outside. And it seems to
have been, or the timber elements seem to have been burnt down. There's actually
from chambered tombs, really quite a high incidence of people who've been
affected by interpersonal violence. So we think about one in 10 people who are
buried in chambered tombs were potentially killed either through an arrowhead.
So we get arrowheads embedded in people that are buried in chambered tombs or
with a blow to the head. So actually we tend to think about the early Neolithic
and early agriculture as being quite peaceful. But actually there seems to have
been quite a lot of violence. And I suspect it's about the creation of a
founding families, founding communities effectively, and people falling out over
that and killing each other. Can you tell, give the listeners a reasonably
detailed account of the earliest, one or two early stone circles? The Stones of
Stennis in Orkney is one of the earliest stone circles. It was a modest size.
Some of the really large ones are found further south. So what about this one in
Orkney? So the Stones of Stennis in Orkney is about, I think about 30 metres
across. It's got a series of quite large upstanding stones. It's part of an
increasingly monumental landscape in that area of Orkney. So nearby we've got
the passage grave of Mays Howe, just down the road. There's a settlement called
Barn House, really very, very close to the Stones of Stennis. And then just
across the water, we've got the Ness of Brodga, which is a site that's currently
under excavation. And that really is another amazing conglomeration of almost
monumental houses at that particular point. And it's a monumental landscape that
grows and grows throughout the late Neolithic. Susan, back to you. Is there any
particular reason why people, why they move to stone circles? That's a really
good question. I'm not sure we know why they move. There's a shift to circular
monuments that happens around about that 3,200, 3,000 BC date. We get stone
circles, the earliest stone circles, as Vicky's been describing, in Orkney and
also in places like Cumbria. And- Castle Rigg, that for instance. Exactly,
Castle Rigg and another one, which you may know, Long Meaghan, her daughters,
which seems to be a particularly early example of a large stone circle. And
probably the connection to Ireland is where we kind of have to look for the
origins of these circular passage tombs. The largest ones are places like
Newgrange, where you have enormous, great big circular mounds surrounded by
large curb stones, and in fact itself surrounded by a stone circle. So perhaps
we have to look to Ireland for the ideas coming across to other parts of
Britain. But circular monuments were a fashion, really became the favoured shape
for monuments, both stone circles and also earthwork hinges. Did people live
there as well as go there for deals and agreements and meetings? Not at stone
circles. We have other forms of monuments where people do seem to have been
living for short periods of time later on in the Neolithic, but stone circles
and other circular monuments seem to be very much more ritual and ceremonial
spaces. Julius. That point about circular structures is really important because
at the same time, you're seeing a change towards circular houses, which seem to
have their origin alongside a whole series of other things up in Orkney. And as
well as stone circles, we're getting timber circles, including concentric series
of timber circles nested inside each other. And I think all of these new forms
of monumentality that are coming in when you come to the start of the third
millennium are in some way related to houses. And you're getting a whole suite
of structures from the very small to the very large. And this is, I suggest,
about the way in which you're engineering newer and larger societies. So as you
move towards the end of the Neolithic, I think that you're finding new
frameworks for mobilising larger and larger groups of population in order to
construct these huge structures like Stonehenge, like Silbury Hill, like
Avebury. But what part is really, if any, is religion playing in this? And if it
is, what is it? I think it must be some change in the rituals that are being
carried out and the religious beliefs. And there's a key thing about stone
circles, not all of them, but some of them are related to the skies. And you
have to think about the circle being the horizon and being the skies that you
can see. And a number of these stone circles are built in places where you get a
good view of the horizon or of nearby hillsides and sort of almost in natural
amphitheatres. And I would argue that the circularity is something to do with
that. And that may be a shift in the religious beliefs. What would you say, it's
a very local example, Castle Rigg up in Cumbria, where I come from near Keswick.
But everything you've said, the stone circle, still markedly there, although
it's nothing like the size of Stonehenge. But it is very much in a basin. It is
totally surrounded by these fells. Well, let's call them hills or mountains. Is
that typical? There's great variation in the kinds of locations that these
monuments are placed in. So sometimes you find, particularly with stone
monuments, that they come at the end of long sequences of inhabitation of a
particular place. And it's almost as if they're a closing statement at the end
of that kind of a sequence, bringing things to end and turning these into places
of memory. In other locations, the place is clearly positioned so as to be
extremely conspicuous. So the monument is to be seen, but you can turn that
round and say that there are other monuments that are located to have commanding
views of the coast or of rivers or of hills or of mountains. Other places,
again, it's clear that they've been positioned so as to fall on natural
routeways, so that you're going to encounter them as you move around the
landscape. And that suggests that many of these monuments have a kind of
mnemonic character to them, that they're reminders of tradition, of the past, of
ancestry, and so on. And what I think all of these things have in common is that
they make us aware that these are people who have a very intense and very
sincere understanding of landscape, whether it's topography or whether it's the
history of landscape. Vicki, can you talk about the scientific techniques which
have come into archaeology to date the megaliths? So we're able to date
megaliths through radiocarbon dating. So we would need something organic in
order to get a radiocarbon date. So human bone would be ideal or anything short-
lived. And that's able to give us a date range for when something was deposited
there. So we're able to date often use of chambered tombs, for example, through
radiocarbon dating human remains. And that has led to what? It gives us a
precise chronology and an understanding. We've talked throughout this about how,
actually it's quite a complex series of monuments being built at different times
in different places by different people. And if we can pinpoint the exact dates,
we can start to create more nuanced narratives about the arrival and spread of
the Neolithic and people doing particular practices like building megaliths.
Susan, do you have any idea of what people at the time thought of what they were
doing and why? One of the really interesting things about the radiocarbon dating
recently is that we've been able to get much more precise dates. And for
example, for some of the long barrows, so some of the chambered tombs, we know
that they're being used for burial. And it used to be thought that these were
places that were open for centuries and people would inter a few people every
generation perhaps. The radiocarbon dating has shown us that actually that's not
the case. And these things are being used in certain places at least. So for
example, in the Cotswolds, for a very short period of time, right at the very
start of when they were constructed. And then they're not used for burial after
that. So maybe two or three generations, for example. And so perhaps these are
places that people are constructing in the landscape and the human remains are
not the primary purpose for building them, but are almost a kind of starting
point. The way that the monument is given life is kind of imbued with energy is
by depositing some of the dead within it. And then it becomes a monument that is
part of the landscape. We know, for example, that West Canet Long Barrow, for
example, which is a very famous tomb just near Avebury was used then for many
hundreds of years, people depositing all kinds of things in there. Some burials,
but also pottery and variety of different types of earth and materials until it
was full. And that took place over the next 1000 years or so. So these are
burial monuments at the outset, but they don't necessarily continue as such
throughout the history of their youth. Do you want to go on Julia? I think the
other point that follows on from what you've just been saying is that these
people who are being buried are not, as you say, people who are being introduced
over a continuous period of time. And I think that very often we could see these
people as founders, as the people who established communities in particular
areas. So we shouldn't see these as the equivalence of country churchyards in
which people are going to be continuously buried for ever and ever. It's about
the coming into being of something new. And I think what we're seeing
particularly in that period of the start of the Neolithic is the way in which an
entire way of life is being established and being in on the ground floor, being
the people who established all of that in a particular area is tremendously
important. I suppose what's fidgeting away at the back of what I can lovingly
call my mind is that the idea of worship, the idea of the sun coming up at a
certain time and going down at a certain time and these circles particularly
having some connection with that. Am I up a country or what? There are some
stone circles that are very precisely aligned with the sun and also in the early
Bronze Age in Scotland, particularly with we think potentially the moon. So
there is an interest in orientating some of these monuments and this applies as
much to some of the timber monuments as well as the stone ones with the cosmos,
with the skies. And that must mean that the sun and the changing seasons and the
solstices in particular, solstices and equinoxes to a certain extent were
important times of the year, particularly in the late Neolithic when we have a
large amount of monuments that are being built with either precise alignments
like Newgrange or like Stonehenge or with more general alignments in that
they're orientating them to certain principle kind of directions. So that must
mean that the sun and at certain times the moon as well perhaps is an important
thing, whether it's a deity, whether it's something that's worshipped, whether
it's something that it's just important to align your monument with the
principles of the cosmos and with your wider set of beliefs, we don't know, but
it must be very integral to their religious beliefs. There'd been a lot of
speculation about that area and people do wonder about it. No progress being
made at all. There are the stones, there's the sun, that's about your lot. We
now know that there are some monuments that have very precise alignments, but
there are a lot of megalithic monuments and lots of stone circles that really
don't have any precise alignments. And you can stand in a stone circle and
suggest it lines up with lots of things, but that tends to be the case with a
circular monument with lots of standing stones. So we've got a lot more precise
detail in terms of the survey information, in terms of exactly which ones are
aligned and which ones we think they're probably not. And I think in recent
decades, really, this shift has become more looking at how these monuments sit
within the landscape and how the landscape is also connected to these
orientations. So for example, we get monuments where particular clefts in
mountain ranges nearby or particular viewpoints of distinctive hilltops and
things are deliberately showcased, as it were, from the monuments in relation to
the movement of the sun. I think that perhaps we should turn it round because in
the past, people have wanted to imagine that it's almost a scientific inquiry
into the movements of the heavenly bodies that people in the past were
interested in. I think it's far more about the way in which you synchronise
activity and you identify particular times the equinoxes, the midsummer and so
on because that's when people are gonna be gathered. That's when people are
going to be coming together at a particular monument in order to conduct rituals
and in order to engage in all these activities that, as I say, articulate
society. And some of these megaliths are decorated with art. Now, how does that
fit in? If you go down into Iberia, you find that some of the standing stones
and some of the chambered tombs are painted. But for the most part throughout
Europe, where we have megalithic art, it's engraved or pecked onto the surface
of the stones. In Brittany, some of this art is representational and we have
images of bows and arrows or of stone tools or of quadrupeds. But most of the
art, and this is particularly in the case of Britain and Ireland, is non-
representational, it's geometric. It's swirls and it's zigzags and it's
concentric circles and so on. And so it's very, very ambiguous. So we, can we
correct the ambiguity? Well, I think the ambiguity is the point of it. Is the
point. Is the point. So one of the things that people emphasise is that perhaps
it's the doing of the art that's more important than what it actually means,
because it's very often part of the process of constructing a monument. You're
actually decorating stones. And sometimes some of the art is actually hidden
away inside the monument and not visible. Also, sometimes you find that the most
complex combinations of motifs are at significant points within the monument. So
within passage tombs, it may be portals, entrances or the backs of the chambers
where the remains of the dead are being deposited. But I think that draws our
attention to the experiential quality of this art, that it's part of the
saturation of your senses as you enter these monuments when they're being used
alongside the remains of the dead, alongside portable artefacts, alongside
chanting. All of these things, I think, form a ritual symbolism. And so maybe,
as in many societies around the world today, you have symbols that have not one
but many meanings, and those meanings are elicited only in the ritual. So
perhaps it's part of a system of secret knowledge. The second mention of
chanting is going on here. Are there any remains whatsoever of music? There's at
least one site where you have a bone flute and there are some perforated cattle
bones which may be whistles. So there's suggestions that there may be various
kinds of music going on at these sites. We're coming to the end of the programme
now, but I'd like to get some idea about the community, if one can use the word,
I don't mean sarcastic here, around these, did they gather around these
monuments? Did they put this place there and say, we will build where we can see
them, we will build where we'll be near them? Was there any sense of them being
protected by, or is there a connection between the community and the circle?
Yes, I think there is. I don't think they're living there permanently. I think
they're quite mobile people in the late Neolithic. I think they're moving off at
particular times of the year, but they're coming together and it's very much
their place, their communal circle. So I think they have an affinity to that
place. They're following cattle and pig around the landscape. We have got some
smaller settlements that they're living in, but again, in a temporary fashion.
So the site where we think that they were living to construct a stonehenge at
Durrington Walls, there's a lot of small, but fairly ephemeral structures there
where people were probably living some of the year. Susan, do we have any idea
of the size of any one community? Can you give us a guide on the size of
communities? I was talking about 40 people, 400 people. What are we talking
about? It's very difficult to estimate community sizes from the settlement
evidence, just because the settlement evidence is very rare. We have masses of
evidence for these huge standing stones and these megaliths and these monuments,
but actually it's quite rare that we come across evidence for houses outside of
Orkney where they build them in stone very handily. And so we have to really
rely on the skeletal remains from these tombs to estimate population sizes, but
not everybody was being buried within the tombs. So that also we have to take
with a pinch of salt. But to give one example from recent research, the
Hazzleton North Long Barrow, which is in the Cotswolds in Gloucestershire,
there's been some recent work done on the burials from that site, looking at the
ancient DNA from those individuals. And it's been shown that they are three and
four generations of the same interrelated family and some other people. So that
suggests to us that there's a quite close-knit family relationship that relates
to who gets buried in that tomb. Now, we don't know if those people lived
together and we don't know if those people lived next to the tomb or dispersed
across the landscape, but they were certainly buried together, which suggests
that that family group was important for the identity of those people and was
important in the way that they thought about themselves as a community. With the
new techniques, do you get any idea of the lifespan of these people, for
instance? Not from DNA, but we can estimate that from the skeletal remains. You
can look at things like teeth wear and instances of arthritis and things to
estimate ages. Many people think that life was very short in this period.
Actually, we have people from- What's very short? Perhaps people say, you know,
people didn't live much past 30, but actually we do have relatively elderly
people buried in these tombs, at least in their 50s and 60s. So it's not that
life was nasty, brutish and short. People had relatively long lives. Do you want
to come in? I mean, one of the things that we can tell about burial deposits
like Hazelton North is we can look at isotopic analysis and that can actually
tell us which parts of the landscape people were living in. And in the case of
Hazelton, we know that actually people weren't spending all of their time in the
immediate area. They were actually moving around the landscape up to 40
kilometres away. And that tells us that actually people were quite mobile, but
they were still coming back and being deposited at this particular place in the
landscape. Last word from you, Julian. Well, and a consequence of that mobility
is that when we're talking about the size of populations, there may be a degree
of flux about that. It may be that you have groups of people who are coming
together seasonally and then splitting apart at other times. We're fascinated
and drawn to these monuments today. And I'm sure in the past, in prehistory,
people held them in equally, if not greater, significance. We've lost so many of
these monuments and we kind of prize the ones we have that have lasted well,
like Stonehenge, and we make them into World Heritage sites. I think that moving
stones, building things out of stone and creating these monuments was a
fundamental part of the lives of these people. And we can really only understand
them if we investigate them thoroughly. They had to do this to be the
civilization they were. Yes, it was their identity. They were the monument
builders. Well, thank you all very much. Thanks, Susan Greeney, Vicki Cummings
and Julian Thomas, and our studio engineer, Emma Harth. Next week, the Ramayana,
the ancient Hindu epic that tells the story of the legendary prince and princess
Rama and Sita. Thanks for listening. And if you listen on BBC Sounds later, you
can hear the juicy off-the-cuff bits that Melvin and his guests went on to
discuss afterwards. Highly recommended. Now, perhaps we've lost some of the
innate, instinctive intelligence that our ancestors had, but imagine how they'd
feel about the latest developments in artificial intelligence. What would a
documentary made by artificial intelligence sound like? I'm Laura Lewington, and
I'll be guiding you through ChatGPT, the AI technology that's popping up all
over the place. Can it write my script? Will it be able to transform jobs? Can
it change our lives? I'll be interviewing experts, some users, and ChatGPT
itself. We'll explore the immeasurable possibilities, the problems, and the
creativity of this new, sophisticated technology in a documentary by ChatGPT on
Radio 4 and BBC Sounds next Monday evening at 8 o'clock. This afternoon, Claire
Boulding will be tapping into her artistic side as she joins a group of local
people on a walk through the Forest of Dean, painting with feathers, writing
about the landscape, and rubbing gravestones. Ramblings is just after 3. And the
award-winning writer Peter Ross finds much to celebrate in life as he tours
Britain's graveyards. And now on Radio 4, he visits the country's oldest firm of
Muslim undertakers, where ritual and service combine to offer comfort to
grieving families. Andy Clark reads A Tomb With A View. And Al Al Fried Chicken.
In the window of the Blind Beggar, where Ronnie Kray shot and killed George
Cornell, a sign advertised a gangster bus tour led by one Mickey Goldtooth. In
this street full of life, I turned in the direction of death and went into the
mosque through a side door down to the basement. I'd been permitted to attend a
ghusl, the ritual washing of a body. The man was to be buried that afternoon.
There was something arboreal about his body. He was Nigerian and had died at the
age of 80. He lay on a steel table, thin dark hair and a grizzle of white
stubble. There was no question of shaving him for the viewing. In Islam, the
body is treated gently, reverentially, as if still alive. It's said that the
deceased retains awareness and can hear and feel. We believe that not one hair
should be touched, I'd been told. The ghusl was being carried out by Khalil and
Nurul, two employees of Haji Taslim Funerals. It's the oldest firm of Muslim
undertakers in the UK. Khalil is 20. He's a great-grandson of the founder,
Taslim Ali. Nurul, from Bangladesh, is a good bit older. He has a long black
beard and wears a woolen prayer cap. While he cleaned the body, he recited
Arabic prayers. A ghusl is an obligatory part of Islamic burial. A body must be
purified ahead of meeting Allah. Women wash women, men wash men. Nurul and
Khalil were using vegan liquid soap and lukewarm water. The washing complete,
Nurul anointed the body with attar, which is a perfume, and then it was time for
the shrouding. Men are wrapped in three sheets, women in five, including a
headscarf. Plain white cotton is used, regardless of wealth or status. Iranian
princess, Syrian refugee, London rapper. The undertaker will bury you in exactly
the same way. Speed is the important thing. There's a desire to put the body
under as quickly as possible. Only then can the spirit enter the afterlife. Haji
Taslim Funerals operates from a small office next to the mosque. From here, they
carry out more than 1,000 burials each year. In quieter moments, of which there
are few, it's possible to hear the call to prayer broadcast from the minaret.
Louder and more frequent is the ringing of the phones used by Abu Khalid as he
mans the desk. He arranges funerals in three languages, Bengali, English and a
little Urdu. He also has some Arabic. The phrase, inshallah, God willing, is
never far from his lips. Early one afternoon, as I sat at a desk near his, two
men walked into the office. They'd come to arrange the funeral of Mr Ali, their
father and brother, who died that morning. The details were settled quickly. The
man would be buried on the following day. That's how fast and simple our
funerals are, Abu told me, once they'd gone. Had the men come to see him first
thing, the relation could have had his funeral prayers at lunchtime and been on
his way to the cemetery by 1pm. Islamic law requires burial as soon as possible
after death. Cremation is forbidden. The widespread idea that it should be done
within 24 hours is cultural rather than religious, but it's taken very
seriously. This haste can make the Muslim way of death appear, to an outsider,
functional to the point of indelicacy. It's not uncommon, I witnessed this
myself, for a family to contact the undertaker while their loved one is still on
life support. Taslim Ali, the founder of Haji Taslim Funerals, was born in Assam
and arrived in Britain during the Second World War. He'd left India to escape
poverty. His family were so poor they couldn't afford to buy salt, his son
Ghulam told me. His father went to Calcutta and found work on British merchant
navy ships. He was torpedoed in the English Channel, rescued and taken to Kent.
He decided to stay in Britain when he found a job in the Daimler factory. He met
my mother in Coventry when bombs were dropping everywhere, Ghulam explained. She
married him and converted. Her name was Josephine, a Welsh coal miners' daughter
who came to be known as Mariam. They started a family, lived in Cardiff for a
time, then settled in London. To be born in one country and die in another is
the migrant's story in ten words. The Haji Taslim family embody this in their
own lives and in the service they've provided for half a century. Taslim Ali was
deeply religious. He started arranging Islamic funerals not out of a desire to
make money, but in answer to a need. In the early days of mass immigration from
Asia and North Africa, Muslims struggled for the basics. Halal meat, a place to
pray, a good death. Where were you born is a question weaponised by racists.
Where will you die has greater significance. It is, if we're lucky, a choice.
With the mass immigration of the 1960s and 70s, more and more Muslims were dying
and being buried in Britain. This, as much as starting families and businesses,
was a putting down of roots, a claiming of space. Six feet of English soil that
would be forever Islam. Few would regard it that way, though. Death in Islam is
seen as a kind of homecoming. Ghulam Taslim had made it clear. When someone
dies, we say the words, Inna lillahi wa inna ilayhi rajiyoon. Surely we belong
to Allah and to him we return. Inna lillahi wa inna ilayhi rajiyoon. I knew that
phrase. I'd heard it. I wish I hadn't. It's what Rania Ibrahim had said live on
Facebook, looking down over London from the 23rd floor of Grenfell Tower, as the
flames rose. She sounded a little breathless, from the smoke, or fear, or both.
But her faith was strong. She died there in Flat 203 on June 14th, 2017, with
her daughters, Haniya and Fatiha. She was 31, the girls three and five. She was
a beautiful soul, her sister Rasha told the Inquiry. Of the 72 people who died
in the fire, 42 were Muslim, and 34 were buried at Gardens of Peace, the Muslim
cemetery in Haynolt, Essex. Rania and her children were identified after three
months, and their funeral held on September 29th, a day of driving rain. Mohamed
Omar is a founder and board member of Gardens of Peace. He conducted the burials
of 32 of the Grenfell dead. He's in his early 60s, with a short grey beard and a
mild air. When we met, he was wearing a skull cap and a pale green robe. He had
the smoothness of a politician, and the warmth of a good priest. An
underappreciated aspect of the Grenfell story is that the grief of the families
was exacerbated due to the time it took to recover, identify and release
remains. Given the religious significance of burying quickly, the delay was
especially difficult for Muslims. The families couldn't get closure until they
had something to bury, Omar said. A mother's bones or whatever it may be, that
was the biggest challenge. Although almost every person buried at Gardens of
Peace is placed in the earth in nothing more than a shroud, the Grenfell dead
were in coffins. This was because of the condition of the bodies, a factor which
also created complications during the ghusl. Instead of the ritual washing, a
dry ablution using dust from a special stone was performed over the top of the
shrouds. If you visited the Gardens of Peace, you'd find nothing to distinguish
the Grenfell graves from the thousands of others. The idea is that all plots are
identical, just as all Muslims were created the same by God. Each is marked by a
mound of earth, to prevent anyone from stepping on the grave. On that mound,
there's a square of black stone with the name and age of the deceased and a
grave identification number. Muslims visit cemeteries because, like anyone else,
they miss the people who are buried there. But it's also regarded as properly
Islamic to go and face one's eventual fate. People often say to Abu Khalid, the
funeral director, that he's blessed to be constantly reminded of death. He's
inclined to agree. He hopes his heart never becomes immune to it. It may look
like the funeral directors are taking the dead to their graves, he told me, but
in fact, the dead are taking them and saying, you're going to end up here. When
Gardens of Peace was founded in 2002, its management estimated it would last 75
years. But after just 15, it was full. A new site opened nearby at the end of
2017. A third site has already been purchased, and they're looking for more. The
problem of how to find enough space for Britain's dead is especially acute in
the Muslim community, as they can't cremate. Muhammad Omar believes that the
current norm, where each grave is used by one individual, is not sustainable.
Will British Muslims accept the idea of graves being reused, I asked. They'll
have to, he replied, because the stark reality is that there's so much demand on
land. We were talking in the new cemetery on Five Oaks Lane. The skyscrapers of
London were visible on the horizon. Through a veil of rain, I could see the
light on top of Canary Wharf. The cemetery was muddy, and mourners wore plastic
bags around their shoes. A sign asked visitors not to leave flowers on the
graves. They had no religious value or significance, it said, and were only for
personal gratification. Nonetheless, a few mounds did have flowers on them, and
in one case, a snow globe containing a white plastic rose. Another sign asked
visitors to observe the dress code. No revealing or low-cut clothing. Skirts and
dresses should reach below the knee. No-one, as far as I could see, was flouting
this rule. But then, there were almost no women anyway. It was just after 3pm,
and a burial was taking place. A 92-year-old woman, originally from Bangladesh,
was being laid to rest. I travelled here in the hearse with her grandsons. They
called her Nanny. One prayed during the journey, the other kept his eye on
Google Maps. Gulum taslim drov. If you go to Saudi Arabia, he remarked, the only
time a woman goes to the cemetery is when she's dead. In Britain, things aren't
as hard-line, but there's still segregation. Nanny's coffin was brought close to
the graveside by men. Her shrouded body was removed by men and carried to the
grave. She was placed inside at a depth of six feet, resting on her right side,
facing Mecca. Wooden planks were arranged at an angle above her body, sheltering
it from being touched by the earth, which was pushed in by a mechanical digger.
The mourners, all male, looked on. A few women watched from around 100 feet
away. They were expected to keep back during the lowering of the body and the
burial and could go to the grave after that point. The idea is to avoid close
physical proximity of the genders and loud expressions of grief. The emotions
taken out of death in Islam, I was informed. You're told how to mourn, you're
given three days, and then you have to get over it. The men returned to their
cars. The women went no closer, but stood silent in the rain. Andy Clarke
reading A Tomb With A View by Peter Ross. The book was abridged by Anna
Magnusson and the producer is Ailey Macready. And at the same time tomorrow, the
author will visit a cemetery, taking an innovative approach to survival. Now,
I'm perhaps less qualified than many to have a view on this, but here goes. Can
a well-fitting sports bra prevent a woman's breasts from bouncing a reported
10,000 times during an hour-long run? Well, thankfully, in a few minutes, we'll
be hearing from a world-leading expert who will be joining Anita Rani to discuss
breast health and exercise. Why do breast injuries in sport appear to go
underreported? And what are the potential consequences? All this and more in
Women's Hour. After the news. On BBC iPlayer. Step right in. Perfect timing. The
East End is ever-changing. What is this? Scooter? The order has entered the
1960s. Barely eight years late. But the midwives of Nonata's house are forever
constant. You've a home here now, and purpose, and people who love you. Call the
midwife. We will be with you every step of the way. Watch on BBC iPlayer. The
East End is ever-changing.