TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-23H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 more likely on Monday. That's the forecast. This is BBC Radio 4. It's 10
o'clock. Good evening. Welcome to the world tonight with James Kimara-Sami. On
the first anniversary of the war in Ukraine, we hear from a woman whose mother
died during the Russian occupation of Bucher. Even now, after one year, every
morning when I wake up, I understand that my life never comes back. A man who
lives through the Russian occupation of Herr Son. As a man who chooses his land,
sometimes it's not just better to stay. It's about how comfortable I was that.
The Ukrainian football team celebrating a European victory and dreaming of
returning home. We believe that we will return back to continue to play, to
continue to fight and to show that we are alive and we are ready to return to
Donnians. Plus reflections on bridging the cultural divide between Russia and
the West from the American who brought Sesame Street to Moscow. It was a period
of intense chaos. Ordinary Russians felt a great deal of humiliation and I
understood that in working with them every day, side by side, for five years.
That's all after the BBC News read tonight by Chris Aldridge. President
Volodymyr Zelensky has said continued Western support could help Ukraine to
victory against Russia within a year. He was speaking on the first anniversary
of the invasion, just hours after the first tanks from allied countries arrived
in Ukraine from Poland. The G7 Group of Nations has reiterated its support by
vowing to punish any country which helps Russia evade sanctions. Our
international editor Jeremy Bowen has spent much of the year reporting from
Ukraine. In Kiev at official ceremonies marking the anniversary, President
Volodymyr Zelensky said that this will be Ukraine's year of victory. As things
stand, that is doubtful, unless Ukraine gets war-winning weapons from the US and
its NATO allies or the Russian military collapses. That hasn't happened yet
despite multiple setbacks. One big potentially game-changing development could
come if China decides to send Russia weapons. Controlling any further escalation
and containing the war in Ukraine will continue to be a big challenge for the
rest of the year. Across Ukraine, the anniversary was marked by prayers,
ceremonies and vigils. The families of dead Ukrainian soldiers were presented
with medals at an event in Kiev. In the town of Bucher, where Russians were
accused of committing atrocities before withdrawing, residents gathered at the
cemetery to remember the civilians who had lost their lives. Here, Rishi Sunak
led a minute silence while the king issued a message praising the remarkable
courage and resilience of the Ukrainian people. In Berlin, more than 10,000
people took part in a march to show their support for Ukraine. Russian state
television appears to have ignored the anniversary, but, as our Russia editor
Steve Rosenberg explains, President Putin has, in recent days, once again
justified Moscow's actions in Ukraine. Police in Northern Ireland have arrested
a fifth person after an off-duty officer was shot in County Terone. Detective
Chief Inspector John Caldwell remains in a critical condition in hospital after
being attacked outside a sports complex in Oma on Wednesday. Detectives say
they're treating the incident as a terrorist attack. Investigation is focusing
on the dissident Republican group, the new IRA. Junior doctors have announced
three consecutive days of strike action in their pay dispute starting on the
13th of March. The union, the British Medical Association, said doctors had been
left with no choice but to take action, claiming the health secretary had
refused to attend a meeting to negotiate pay. The government described the
strike action as deeply disappointing. Here's our health correspondent,
Catherine Burns. The message from the British Medical Association was clear. We
are demoralised, angry and no longer willing to work for wages that are below
inflation. The union says tens of thousands of junior doctors will stop work at
7am on Monday 13th March and won't restart until Thursday morning. This group
ranges from recent medical school graduates to doctors with up to 15 years'
experience. The strike will affect routine and emergency care, with senior
colleagues called in to fill gaps in the rotor. The government described the
decision as disappointing and said doctors have had an 8% pay rise over four
years. The number of people killed in the earthquakes which struck Turkey and
Syria earlier this month has passed 50,000. Rescue workers from the White
Helmets Group in rebel-held northwest Syria have called for more international
assistance to help people, in particular children, injured during the quakes.
Health officials in the UK have begun drawing up plans for a possible bird flu
pandemic. An 11-year-old girl has died in Cambodia after contracting the H5N1
strain of the disease. The UK Health Security Agency said that while very high
levels of transmission in wild birds presented a constant threat, there was no
evidence the virus was getting better at infecting humans. Our medical editor,
Fergus Walsh, reports. The UK Health Security Agency said very high levels of
transmission of H5N1 in wild birds presented a constant threat, but stressed
there was no evidence that the virus was getting better at infecting humans. The
agency urged people to stay away from sick wild birds they might encounter. Just
as they did with Covid, scientists have begun modelling scenarios of how a bird
flu pandemic might impact the UK, and looking at whether lateral flow devices
could be used to test for H5N1 in humans. One of the smaller unions involved in
the long-running rail dispute has voted to accept a settlement deal with train
companies. The Transport Salarids Staffs Association, or TSSA, said its 3,000
members had accepted an offer, including a two-year pay rise worth 9%. The SNP
has confirmed that three candidates are taking part in a contest to succeed
Nicola Sturgeon as party leader and Scotland's first minister. Kate Forbes,
Humza Yousuf and Ash Regan all received the required number of nominations. Ms
Regan officially launched her campaign this morning. Sir Bernard Ingham, who was
press secretary to Margaret Thatcher for almost the entire time she was prime
minister, has died after a short illness. He was 90. He started his career as a
journalist working in newspapers from the age of 16 before joining the civil
service. His son described him as a formidable operator in the political and
whitehall jungles, as well as a dedicated family man. Speaking in 1995 on Radio
4's Desert Island Discs, Sir Bernard reflected on what it was like to work with
Mrs Thatcher. I think that it was the fact that here I had a prime minister who
had a clear philosophy, knew what she wanted to do, had worked out the
implications and wasn't going to change her mind. I mean that made me blessed
among press secretaries as I told all my colleagues when I retired. The jersey
worn by the Welsh rugby union player Sir Gareth Edwards when he scored what's
widely thought of as one of the sport's greatest ever tries has sold at auction
for a world record Â£240,000. Sir Gareth wore the black and white striped
barbarian shirt in the 1973 match against New Zealand. The identity of the new
owner is yet to be revealed. Thanks Chris. You're listening to The World Tonight
with James Kimara-Sami. A sombre ceremony in Kiev on a sombre anniversary, one
year on from Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine. President Zelensky began
the day by presenting medals to soldiers and to relatives of the many thousands
of fallen Ukrainian troops. He told them the country was in an existential fight
and he struck his usual defiant tone during a long and wide-ranging news
conference later and a day after the UN General Assembly passed a symbolic
motion calling for an end to the war, the Ukrainian leader called for a global
peace summit. Our task is to engage absolutely everyone and to show the whole
world the need to respect territorial integrity, the UN Charter, the right to
live and I believe the more countries that we engage the more support we will
have. We're giving over tonight's programme to this anniversary and just before
we came on air I asked our Chief International Correspondent Liz Dusett who's in
Kiev how it's being marked there. It's odd isn't it to mark the anniversary of
an event which has caused such enormous losses in Ukraine, laid in entire cities
and villages to waste, caused enormous loss of life both among Ukrainian and
Russian forces. But for Ukraine this one-year mark is also the the marking of a
year of survival and you'll remember Jamie at the start of this war a year to
the day many military analysts predicted that when Russian tanks rolled over the
border, when Russian warplanes were in the sky, when they were heading towards
Kiev, that it would simply be a matter of days perhaps three days and Kiev would
fall, President Zelensky would be gone and President Putin would prevail. So in
some ways the fact that the war still goes on is a reminder that this hasn't
gone the way Russia expected but of course it does raise the question of where
does it go from here. President Zelensky gave a very long news conference today.
What kind of message is because presumably there were quite a few was he giving
to the assembled journalists? This was classic President Zelensky. He looked
really relaxed you wouldn't know that he was the leader of a country. He's been
leading his rallying Ukrainians in this war. He seemed determined to take every
single question from the Mexicans to the Japanese to the British journalists
from around the world emphasizing how he has become one of the big stories of
this war and it went from his rallying cry saying victory will inevitably await
us those were his words if his allies and I quote him respect their promises and
deadlines in other words if the NATO western nations keep their promises to keep
that ammunition and weapons flowing we will be able to get the victory that he
believes and many Ukrainians say it's a long shot but they say it will happen
this year but there was also of course it always happens some journalist asked
for a selfie this time it was journalists from Azerbaijan and that caused some
laughter. He was asked about his most emotional worst moment of the war he
referred to Buche where of course this is where once Russian forces retreated at
the end of March it unveiled a whole catalog of war crimes and he was at the
very end the last question was about his family and he spoke with emotion about
his wife Zelensky who has played her own part in this war his children his son
and daughter he doesn't get to see very often it's really a reminder Jamie as we
know that in wars there's always the war on the ground and then the war to
control the battle for the narrative and undeniably that is a battle that
President Zelensky has won so far never missing a moment to seize the moment.
Lees do set in key of where much was going on so how was the day marked in
Russia? Here's our Russia editor Steve Rosenberg in Moscow. Very very different
here I mean I was watching the TV news bulletins today and of course they were
talking about the situation in Ukraine and the special military operation as
it's still referred to here but they didn't really focus on the fact that this
is the one year anniversary of it they sort of glossed over that probably
because this operation did not succeed in its initial objective that is to
secure a swift victory for the Kremlin that's what Vladimir Putin had wanted one
year ago and had expected that within days or weeks maximum he thought this
operation would be wrapped up and Ukraine would be forced back into Russia's
orbit and it simply didn't work out like that. And presumably little or no
coverage of the vote at the United Nations General Assembly where they
overwhelmingly voted for an end to the war in Russia to leave Ukraine? Well some
coverage of that of course Russia has criticized the vote it said it's an anti-
Russia vote Russia basically claims that the international community is against
it it says it's unfair and it tries to point the finger back at the West at the
United States at Europe and to claim that everyone is ganging up against it but
the fact is that one year ago Russia invaded Ukraine and despite attempts by the
Kremlin to sort of deflect attention from this and to claim that Russia is not
the aggressor here that actually it's the West which is ganging up against
Russia and that Russia is an innocent party here that simply isn't the case. I
note within that context with some interest then that the Kremlin puts out a
statement tonight to say that a NATO leader has actually been speaking to
President Putin tonight President Erdogan. Well I mean we know that the
presidents of Turkey and Russia speak quite a lot I mean they maintain quite a
good relationship sometimes it's a difficult relationship but over the last year
since the Russian invasion they've been talking a lot so that's not a surprise
it will be interesting to see if there are at some point peace talks or return
to peace talks whether Turkey can play a constructive role here. Steve Rosenberg
our Russia editor more on that a bit later on in the program but all this week
here on the world tonight we've been hearing about the lives of people who've
died in the war in Ukraine the four-year-old boy who drowned trying to escape
the fighting in the north of the country the Russian fashion journalist turned
activist who was killed in Kiev on her first war reporting assignment the
student of history who died in battle. Our final interview is about one of the
many civilians killed when Russian troops occupied Bucher a town near Kiev whose
horrors became one of the defining moments of the war. Here in Bucher I've just
been taken down to the basement of a house where in front of me I saw five dead
bodies five men they had their hands bound behind their backs some of them were
shot in the head they were wearing civilian clothes it's unclear what happened
to them but what officials are telling me that this house was taken over by the
Russian military and they believe these were people who were taken hostage by
the Russians and killed by them. Yogita Limay reporting from Bucher last April
well one of the most striking photographs from Bucher featured a dead woman's
hand with brightly painted fingernails including one with a heart on it the
woman's name was Irina Filkinap she was 52 and an aspiring makeup blogger I've
been hearing more about her from her 26 year old daughter Olia Sharyuk. Always
when she decides to do something she does it and she gives this energy for other
people. I remember the time when she she said me she won't drive the car and I
said mom no because you even don't have the documents for driving and she said
me okay deal and after three or four months she gave me these documents and she
said okay because you don't believe in me now you must pay me one percent for
this car. Right so she never learned to drive before and then suddenly there she
was what in her in her 50s or late 40s she suddenly decided I'm going to learn
to drive and she did it. Yes she was 51 years old and she said life is so short
and you must keep this possibility as much you can and I feel her in me like I
feel this the same behaviors she do now I do. I want to take you back to the
start of the war Olia I know this is difficult you left Ukraine didn't you she
she encouraged you to leave. Yeah because we I'm so sorry we speak before the
war with her we speak about the war about what can happen if we're studying and
she say me that more dangerous for me it can be that Russian military came on
our house and they can rape you if I remember this works so she say me you must
to go. What did you think when you saw what was happening back in Ukraine you
stayed in touch with your mom what what sort of conversations were you having at
the beginning of the war. When war is starting she was working and we tried to
find some person who can get her on the Poland but she say no everything is okay
I'm with people here and after a few days she called me and she say that people
who was with her they left. Do you remember the last conversation you had with
her what what you spoke about? She called me when she was half an hour before
the home and I say her that I feel it's not safe for you don't go there don't do
it and she say me you know your mom can do everything in this world nothing
gonna happen with me because you love me and I love you we will meet together
and I start crying like like a baby because I don't understand what I must say I
just say no and she say me just imagine on the summer we will go together to the
trip and we will be safe we will meet soon and I say no it's not possible
because I feel something strange I feel something bad will happen with you and
after she say just remember that mama love you for all your life and she say
okay call you back because it's hard to to drive the bicycle. How did you find
out Olia that she had died? After she don't call me back I try to find her on
Instagram I take the picture and I text the message that I lost my mom and
everybody who have a mom they start sharing with this like they feel like they
lost their mom too and a lot of people know about this the next day and some
military Ukrainian military he text me and he say that he was shot and I say no
because you don't know my mom and he starts to explain me how it was and after
he sent me the the video Ukrainian military they record the moment when my mom
was driving in the bicycle and after they shot her. That must have been well I
can't even imagine what that must have been like to see that Olia. Even now
after after one year every morning when I wake up I understand that my life
never comes back because in the morning you know when you have the dream and the
night you feel safe you you dreaming about your home about your previous life
but every time when you wake up every time you feel this pain because you
understand it will never come back. On her birthday when I go to sleep I just I
just say to God if you love me if you if you're still here with me help me to
find her buddy because I can't live with this and on this day when I wake up
some person they send me a video with her on the street it was so awful because
it was my mom but it was not my mom. And I mean what happened in in Bucher your
mother one of the victims is this something that you want to get justice for for
what happened to her is that something you are thinking about. I think evil came
to your house and I think Bucher it was so awful because every people they look
TV they read the article about Bucher but they can put off this article they can
switch off the TV and after they forget about this and never people who lost
someone on the Bucher they don't think about politics they don't think about the
game about money about everything they just need to understand what they do
wrong in this life that they lost everything. How would you like people to
remember your mother? Love love like in the picture you all the see this heart
on the nails and I think it's it's really important to understand that my mom
loves so much that it's so powerful in her heart that she can give you the the
powerful leave even if you don't want to leave. So if you have a problem in your
life if you don't know what to do just listen to your heart and you have this
power. Olya Sharuk remembering her mother Irina Filkina who died in Bucher very
powerful photograph from that time and a powerful testimony there as well. Now
last night the UN General Assembly overwhelmingly condemned the Russian invasion
of Ukraine and called for an end to the fighting in a symbolic vote although
several countries abstained including India, China, South Africa. This evening
in a sign that Moscow wants to project a degree of diplomatic normality the
Kremlin has said President Putin has spoken to the Turkish president Recep
Tayyip Erdogan about energy supplies and exports of Ukrainian grain from Black
Sea ports. So what kind of talking should be taking place to try to end the war?
Nairi Woods is professor of economic governance at Oxford University and Mikhail
Kasyanov was Prime Minister of Russia from 2000 to 2004 under Vladimir Putin.
He's now a Putin critic in exile. Does he think it's possible to negotiate with
the Russian leader? He wants to negotiate but Mr Putin wants to negotiate with
this situation he has now. That means Ukraine should be surrendered and accept
his terms and conditions. That is the only way at the moment Mr Putin
demonstrates his readiness. So you believe he wants to negotiate but you think
what it is not the time for Ukraine and its allies to negotiate? Absolutely not
because there is no signal from Mr Putin that he wants a real negotiations. He
wants territorial concessions, he wants victory. That is his dream. Nairi Woods
what is your view? I think when we look at the other side of the coin and we
look at the European Union and the United States what they have to do now is to
start including involving and listening to other countries across the world.
They've focused so much on unifying with each other against Russia that they now
need to focus on the rest of the world. What might that involve? I think it
involves some quite realistic look at why the rest of the world is not with them
for example when it comes to sanctions. It means looking realistically at the
fact that their security policy looks like a policy that they make between
themselves without consulting any of the rest. That leaves the rest of the world
feeling not more secure that their future is in the hands of the United States
and European Union but less secure. Mikhail Kasyanov when we look at the vote at
the UN yesterday for example we see these major countries the likes of South
Africa, India, China of course as well abstaining not voting to condemn the war
not saying that it was time for there to be peace. That is something that needs
to be taken into account isn't it? What do you think should be done? Yeah it
should be taken into account because those countries would like to draw some
kind of privileges for themselves in their trading and their economic relations
with Russia especially China. For China the strategic goal to get Russia more
dependent on the Chinese economy but in this peace plan which China presented
yesterday there is no demand to withdraw Putin's troops. Who, Nairi Woods do you
think then can play the role of a broker in all of this? We did see some brief
negotiations that were brokered by Turkey. Turkey also involved in getting ships
leaving from the southern ports of Ukraine as well of course. Is that the sort
of country that could play a positive role in some form of negotiation do you
think? Well I think it's too early to be using a broker but we need already to
have organized where it is that conversations can take place and under what
auspices but I think the first and foremost thing has to be if you set your goal
of holding the sovereignty of a country you will get the world behind you. Sadly
the rhetoric very quickly slipped into let's weaken Russia. Now you might say
that's one and the same thing actually it's not if you're India or South Africa
or Brazil because you think what you hear is when they're finished weakening
Russia they might want to come and weaken us for other reasons. So the west is
going to need a much more serious strategy in respect to those countries instead
of empty exhortations that they must join in the priorities of Europe and the
United States. Mikhail Kasyanov what about a strategy as regards the man that
you worked alongside when you were Prime Minister Vladimir Putin. Is there a
resolution to this that doesn't involve him losing power do you think? If we
wish to have a sustainable peace it means Putin's defeat on the battlefield that
would create a problem inside Russia and internal changes could start. I think
dismissing of Putin's regime that is the main goal because there is no chance to
negotiate with Putin something serious and to have trust that means the danger
and fear of aggression will continue to take place. I think the hard thing is
with whom in Russia should we be speaking because it feels sometimes as though
the conversation says if Putin were gone all problems would be resolved
obviously not. So with whom in Russia should we be speaking whether secretly or
in the future how do we prepare for a post-Putin Russia and I don't have an
answer to that. In terms of duration it's probably invidious to try and predict
whether we're going to still be here this time next year but what are your
thoughts about how this might evolve? Mikhail Kasyanov first of all. I think the
year 2023 could be crucial. We see Ukraine getting more and more military
support and it could be a turning point and I think could bring to Putin's
defeat. Nairi Woods, all the talk is as Mikhail Kasyanov has just alluded to
about arming Ukraine and to what extent fighter jets should be supplied from the
west. Is that necessary or does it concern you that it's drowning out the kind
of reaching out to other countries that you would like to see in order to secure
peace down the line? I think if you want sanctions to work you absolutely have
to have all other countries involved. I think we're now in a war of attrition
game where how long Putin can go on and what kinds of coercive means he can use
to keep conscripting soldiers etc on the one side and on the other. The unity of
what some would call the western alliance and their ability to provide
ammunition fast enough and there are clearly already some shortages in their own
supply lines but also their ability to maintain a unified front in their own
countries. Already we're seeing cracks emerge in the United States and of course
in Germany and across Europe so I think it's hard to see that this war which is
so devastating to communities in an ongoing way and the effects of which are
ricocheting around the world it's really hard to see that it will come to an end
anytime soon. We have there from Professor Nairi Woods and former Russian Prime
Minister Mikhail Kasyanov. Let's return to Ukraine itself now and hear from
someone that we've spoken to several times since the war began. Alexei lives in
Herzon, it's a southern city that was occupied by Russian troops for several
months but recaptured by Ukrainian forces in November. It's been quite
overwhelming since this morning and every corner everyone is showing Ukrainian
flags. Freedom Square is full of people and the music and dancing is on. It's
free now and it's so different. That was Alexei speaking to us on the day
Russian forces were driven out of Herzon. It was the first time he had not had
to use a pseudonym Jimmy. Although as he told me earlier today the Russian
retreat to the other side of the river has not meant the shelling has ended and
he was worried what the anniversary of the war would bring. We went into our
night a little bit worried about how it could happen, knowing how Russians used
these sacred dates in favor of hurting civilians. They did attack Herzon but
nothing really out of regular, which is every two or three hours shelling inside
of the city. So it's horrible but we've got already accustomed. How has life
changed since the Ukrainian army retook the city? Lots of people left. You could
see the difference between that week after deliberation. Streets were full. You
saw how many people were hiding in their apartments. With deliberation everyone
stormed out. Now most of those people have left already. You actually don't see
a lot of people in the downtown. You stayed of course throughout the Russian
occupation. We had to speak to you using a pseudonym at that point. Do you feel
freer now? Many of us say the bombardments are not as horrible as the
occupation. The occupation was kind of a humiliating thing where you don't have
the choice to leave. You don't have the ability to stand up against someone who
is entering your door at night. And the bombardments are quite frequent but it's
something that doesn't restrict you. You can leave. You can stay. It's up to
you. Alex, I understand your child and wife are in America. You haven't had the
chance to see them since the war began? Yes, I talk to my son almost every day
and he uses to call me when it's five o'clock my time and I'm a bit sleepy but
still I get contact with him and they're in safety. And as a man who chooses his
land sometimes it's not just better to stay. It's about how comfortable are you
with that? You clearly feel you've made the right decision. It's really hard to
decide what's the right thing to do. I saw many guys leaving Ukraine and paying
bribes on the border just to be able to leave but anything in their action feels
kind of awkward and I'm not following that path. Alexei Hirsan. Now from someone
who didn't want to leave the country to a group of Ukrainian men who have been
abroad and are in a very good mood. That is the sound of FC Shakhtar Donetsk's
changing room last night after the Ukrainian football team qualified for the
last 16 of the Europa League winning a penalty shootout away to the French club
Rennes. Well, they haven't been able to play in their home stadium in eastern
Ukraine since 2014 when Russian-backed forces entered the eastern Donbass
region. They're currently based in Lviv in western Ukraine. From there the
club's CEO Sergei Palkin told me about last night's victory. Dramatic, very
dramatic game was. When the game started it was nightmare because they wanted to
win and they do everything to destroy us for the first 15-20 minutes but our
boys put everything on the pitch and finally we have result and we resolve this
result because our players show character, our players fight to the end. And
what a time to win the first anniversary of the war. Does that make it even more
special? Yes, this game was a very, very special game and the coach of our team,
Igor Ivic, said that we need to fight on the pitch like our soldiers now fight
protecting our countries. We need to show top game because of them. Although of
course for your team the Russian invasion happened nine years ago. 2014 is when
you were forced to move, wasn't it? So it's been a long time that you have lived
and played football in very different circumstances. Yes, you're right. We have
many, many years playing out of our home city, out of our home fans, our
stadium. But from that moment our fans and cities become all population of
Ukraine, you know. We played in the world, we played in hierarchy, we played in
Kiev and we are showing everybody that we can survive in this circumstances.
You're back in Lviv now. What was the journey like coming back? We arrived in
Zheshov in Poland. We have taken three hours and after that we have taken a bus
and spent five hours in the bus. Now we are in Lviv and the team from tomorrow
we prepare for our Ukrainian championship. That goes on. You don't get any rest?
No, I mean from a physical and moral point of view it's very difficult to live
in circumstances. For you just to understand if we win something in Europe for
us it costs much, much more than for teams with whom we are playing. From a
moral, from psychological, from logistic, from physical point of view it's very,
very hard because every day we receive some kind of messages about war, what's
happening, how many people killed. It's difficult to compete in this kind of
circumstances. And I guess the way your team is performing is more important
than ever for morale and for people watching back at home. Yes, you're right.
But I would like to emphasize that we are very, very thankful to European
countries, to England, to USA, because they support all us in this very hard
times. When you believe and feel that somebody important support you, you start
to believe in yourself 100%. Do you believe that you will go back to your home
city, the home stadium in Donetsk? I can tell you that everybody believes in
this one. It's our dream from the beginning. When we left in 2014 we believe
that we will return back, to continue to play, to continue to fight and to show
that we are alive and we are ready to return to Donetsk. The CEO of Shakhtar
Donetsk football team Sergei Palkin there. Now, President Putin continues to
argue that Russia is under attack from NATO supplied weapons as well as from
Western values. For him it's a war of cultures as well as armies. Of course, in
the years that followed the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia embraced
aspects of Western culture and that included the educational puppets or muppets
from Sesame Street or Ule Cezam as the 1992 Russian version was called. Well,
that shows executive producer, the American Natasha Lance Rogov has written a
book about her experiences of working in Russia called Muppets in Moscow and
earlier she came into the studio to talk about the current culture war between
Russia and the West and her own experience of trying to bridge the gap 30 years
ago. The Soviet Empire had just collapsed. Parts of this enormous nation was
splitting off and becoming independent countries like Ukraine, Armenia and
Georgia and it was into this environment that we were trying to create this new
children's television show. There's no better way to understand a society than
to ask people about what they want for their children and that's exactly what we
were trying to do with Ule Cezam which means Sesame Street in Russian. We were
trying to introduce the muppets as ambassadors of idealistic values, tolerance,
freedom of expression. And how receptive were the Russians you were dealing with
to those ideas? In the beginning it was very difficult because you were talking
about change after 70 years of communism. When we first introduced the idea of
the muppets to our creative colleagues in Moscow, they looked at these soft foam
puppets that looked so different from their own traditional puppets and the head
writer said to us, these don't look Russian. Our children will never be
receptive to these Russians. We often encountered what I called the cultural
superiority card. In terms of Russian culture you're hearing the same words come
out of Putin's mouth now. But what happened over time is as we work together
their opinions changed. You know they themselves started opening up and seeing
how things like the puppets could be Russian but in a new way. What about the
storylines? Did they become more Russian? Did they incorporate some of these
cultural norms and expectations? The scripts were written by writers that were
local and yes they were distinctly post-Soviet in nature. For example, the
concepts of what is valuable was different. But that was at a time when they
were just working out what free markets meant and it was a very Russian form of
capitalism that was springing up then. So was that being reflected in the show?
The 1990s is used over and over again by Putin as a narrative you know to
justify his own authoritarianism and it was a period of intense chaos,
instability. You had much of the west flooding into what was the former Soviet
Union and many people were partnering with oligarchs and making a lot of money.
Are there lessons then from the way you worked with Russians at that time, as
you say, a time of chaos, a time that has come to be seen as the justification
by Putin for the way he has dealt with the western world? I feel like one of the
lessons from working there for so long and learning how to compromise is
understanding that you can't expect a society to mirror your own. Russia will be
a very different country. It was then in the 1990s and I think it's true today
that in the transition for where we will go once this war ends and this war will
end because all wars end. And another lesson is to remember that the soft power
kinds of actions that we take that foster democracy is absolutely important at
moments like this because the same young people today that are fighting for
their sovereignty and independence in Ukraine grew up on our tv show. I want to
hear a little bit more about the show and the Muppets and perhaps you can tell
us a bit more about the specific Russian Muppets and who they were. The full
body puppet is Zellie Boba and he's a little bit taller than Big Bird. He's
based on a Russian folklore character Domovoi. Zellie Boba, how did you get to
the stage? I got to the stage. I'm going to play a little bit of crazy. I'm
going to play a little bit of crazy. This character is originally drawn like an
old man. We thought he should be more childlike. And the kids, what was the
reaction like? The first day that the show premiered, the kids all had to sit on
the floor in front of the stage and when Zellie Boba came out, they just started
shrieking. Can you imagine a time in the near future when a Russophile American
goes out to Russia and creates a children's program? I'm still very hopeful.
I've been having conversations with various journalists and some of them are
extremely dark and I understand why, particularly those that are on the ground
in Ukraine. But I lived through the collapse of the Soviet Empire. No one
anticipated that this monolithic state would suddenly implode, but it did. I'm
in touch with my colleagues. So from the first day, I was talking with many of
them who were protesting the war. They were on Facebook and many of them were
actively protesting in the streets. A number of them had to leave within 24
hours after Putin passed the law against speaking out against the war. But many
of them are also in Russia still and those who are Ukrainian, who are living in
Russia, also felt like they had to move to smaller towns. So we made something
beautiful that helped children laugh and learn and embrace new ways of seeing
the world for many, many years. So I'm hopeful and the answer is yes, I can
imagine being there again and that's all I really hope for. I am not that
ashamed to say that you're not that angry. Natasha Lance Rogov, if you want to
hear more about the Muppets in Moscow, she's speaking at the Jewish Book
Festival at King's Cross on Sunday. And our closing headline tonight, President
Zelensky says he believes that continued western support for Ukraine will mean
victory over Russia is inevitable, as he marked one year since Russia's full-
scale invasion of his country. The G7 Group of Nations has reiterated its
support by vowing to punish any country which helps Russia evade sanctions.
Events have taken place around the world to commemorate the anniversary with a
minute silence held in the UK and thousands taking part in a march in Berlin to
demonstrate their support for Kiev. That is The World Tonight. This is James
Kamara-Sami. For now from me and everyone on the programme, good night and have
a good weekend. You too James. Studio direction was by Graham White. The editor
was Jonathan Fenton Fisher. Now on BBC Radio 4, one of the jewels in the BBC's
crown. Dealing it was just the start. We're looking for six robbers and three
tonnes of gold. Every ring, every watch. If you're looking for the gold, it's
all around you. The Gold Watch on BBC iPlayer. Next night here on Radio 4, it's
the final part of Alexander Pushkin's Eugene Onyegin. Years have passed since
Onyegin rejected Tatyana and since his fateful duel with Lenski. After years of
travelling, he's returned to St Petersburg. In a crowded ballroom, he notices a
beautiful woman who seems strangely familiar. Can it be true? Eugene reflected.
Can that be she? It seems. And yet, from those backwards. And he directed a
curious and keen long yet for several minutes in succession. Upon the lady, his
expression called up a face from long ago. But tell me Prince, you wouldn't know
who's standing there in conversation beside the Spanish envoy, pray? That lady
in the red beret. You have been out of circulation, but I'll present you now
with joy. Who is she though? My wife, old boy. You're married, really? On my
honour. To whom, how long? Some two years since. The Laren girl. You mean
Tatyana? She knows you. We were neighbours, Prince. Well then come on, we'll go
and meet her. And so the Prince led up to greet her, his kinsman and his friend
Eugene. The Princess looked at him serene. However much the situation disturbed
her soul and caused her pain, however great her shock or strain, she gave no
hint of agitation. Her manner stayed the same outside, her bow was calm and
dignified. It's true, the lady didn't shiver or blush or suddenly turn white or
even let an eyebrow quiver or press her lips together tight. Although Eugene
with care inspected this placid lady, he detected no trace of Tanya from the
past. And when he tried to speak at last, he found he couldn't. She enquired
when he'd arrived and if of late he'd been back home at his estate, then gave
her spouse a look so tired he took her arm. She moved away and left Eugene in
mute dismay. Was this the Tanya he once scolded? In that forsaken, distant place
where first our novels plot unfolded? The one to whom when face to face in such
a burst of moral fire, he'd lectured gravely on desire? The girl whose letter he
still kept in which a maiden heart had wept, where all was shown, all
unprotected, was this that girl? Or did he dream? That little girl whose warm
esteem and humble lot he'd once rejected? Could she now have been so bold? So
unconcerned with him? So cold? Alas, it's true. Eugene's demented. In love with
Tanya like a boy, he spends each day and night tormented by thoughts of love, by
dreams of joy. Ignoring Reason's condemnation, each day he rides to take a
station outside her glassed-in entryway, then follows her about all day. He's
happy just to be around her, to help her with her shawl or furs, to touch a
torrid hand to hers, to part the footman who surround her in liveryed ranks
wheree she calls, or fetch her kerchief when it falls. O'Niegan sits and writes
to Tatiana. I know you'll feel a deep distress at this unwanted revelation. What
bitter scorn and condemnation your haughty glance may well express. What aims?
What hope is to be made? What hopes do I envision in opening my soul to you?
What wicked and deserved derision perhaps I give occasion to? When first I met
you and detected a warmth in you quite unexpected, I dared not trust in love
again. I didn't yield to sweet temptation, and had, it's true, no inclination to
lose my hateful freedom then. What's more, poor guiltless Lensky perished. And
his sad fate drew us apart. From all that I had ever cherished I tore away my
grieving heart. Estranged from men and discontented, I thought, in freedom,
peace of mind, a substitute for joy I'd find, how wrong I've been, and how
tormented. But no, each moment of my days to see you and pursue you madly, to
catch your smile and search your gaze, with loving eyes that seek you gladly, to
melt with pain before your face, to hear your voice, to try to capture, with all
my soul, your perfect grace, to swoon and pass away. What rapture! I fear that
in this meek petition your solemn gaze may only spy the cunning of a base
ambition, and I can hear your stern reply. But if you knew the anguish in it, to
thirst with love in every part, to burn, and with the mind each minute, to calm
the tumult in one's heart, to long to clasp in adoration, your knees, and
sobbing at your feet, pour out confessions, lamentation, O all that I might then
entreat, and meantime feigning resignation, to arm my gaze and speech with lies,
to look at you with cheerful eyes, and hold a placid conversation. But let it
be. It's now too late for me to struggle at this hour. The die is cast. I'm in
your power, and I surrender to my fate. No answer came. Eugene elected to write
again, and then once more, with no reply. He drives dejected to some soiree, and
by the door sees her at once. Her harshness stuns him. Without a word the lady
shuns him. My God, how stern that haughty brow, what wintry frost surrounds her
now. Her lips express determination to keep her fury in control. Onyegon stares
with all his soul, but wears distress, commiseration, and where the tear stains,
not a trace. There's wrath alone upon that face. The days flew by. The winter
season dissolved amid the balmy air. He didn't die, or lose his reason, or turn
a poet in despair. With spring he felt rejuvenated. The cell in which he'd
hibernated so marmot-like through winter's night. The hearth, the double panes,
shut tight. He quit one sparkling morn and sprinted along the neighbour's bank
by sleigh. On hacked-out bluish ice that lay beside the road, the sunlight
glinted. The rutted snow had turned to slush. But where in such a headlong rush
has my Eugene directly hastened? You've guessed already. Yes, indeed, the moody
fellow still unchastened has flown to Tarnias in his need. He enters like a dead
man, striding through empty hall, then passes, gliding through grand salon, and
on, all bare. He opens up a door. What's there that strikes him with such awful
pleading? The princess sits alone in sight, quite unadorned, her face gone
white. Above some letter that she's reading, and cheek in hand as down she
peers, she softly sheds a flood of tears. O'Niegan, I was then much youngerâI
dare say better looking, tooâand loved you with a girlish hunger. But what did I
then find in you? What answer came? Just stern rejection. A little maiden's meek
affection to you, I'm sure, was trite and old. Oh, God! my blood can still turn
cold when I recall how you reacted. Your frigid glance, that sermonette! But I
can't blame you or forget how nobly, in a sense you acted, how right toward me
that awful day. I'm grateful now, in every way. Back then, far off from vain
commotion in our backwoods, as you'll allow, you had no use for my devotion. So
why do you pursue me now? Why mark me out for your attention? Is it perhaps my
new ascension to circles that you find more swank, or that I now have wealth and
rank, or that my husband, maimed in battle, is held in high esteem at court? To
me, O'Niegan, all these splendours, this weary, tinseled life of mine, this
homage that the great world tenders, my stylish house where princes dine, are
empty. I'd as soon be trading this tattered life of masquerading, this world of
glitter, fumes, and noise, for just my books, the simple joys of our old home,
its walks and flowers, for all those haunts that I once knew, where first,
O'Niegan, I saw you. And happiness was ours so nearly, it came so close. But now
my fate has been decreed. I may have merely been foolish when I failed to wait,
but mother, with her lamentation, implored me, and in resignation, all future
seemed alike in woe, I married. Now I beg you, go. I faith in you, and do not
tremble. I know that in your heart reside both honour and a manly pride. I love
you. Why should I dissemble? But I am now another's wife, and I'll be faithful
all my life. She left him then, Eugene, forsaken, stood seared as if by heaven's
fire. How deep his stricken heart is shaken, with what a tempest of desire. A
sudden clink of spurs rings loudly as Tanya's husband enters proudly, and here,
at this unhappy turn for my poor hero, we'll adjourn and leave him, reader, at
his station, for long, forever. In his train, we've roamed the world down one
slim lane for long enough. Congratulations on reaching land at last. Hurray! And
long since time, I'm sure you'd say. Whatever, reader, your reaction, and
whether you be foe or friend, I hope we part in satisfaction, as comrades now.
Whatever end you may have sought in these reflections, tumultuous fond
recollections, relief from labours for a time, live images or wit in rhyme, or
maybe merely faulty grammar, God grant that in my careless art, for fun, for
dreaming, for the heart, for raising journalistic clamour, you've found at least
a crumb or two. And so let's part. Farewell. Adieu. Roshan Stone concluding our
reading of Eugene Onyegin by Alexander Pushkin. It was translated from the
Russian by James E. Phelan and produced by Mary Ward Lowry. After the news, the
BBC...