TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-20H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 starts next Tuesday morning at 11 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at 7
o'clock. A couple who went missing with their newborn baby several weeks ago and
were arrested in Brighton yesterday are now being questioned on suspicion of
gross negligence manslaughter. A search covering more than 90 square miles is
continuing for the baby in the Sussex Downs. Our correspondent Nick Johnson is
there. Throughout the day police have remained focused on this large wooded area
to the north of the city in the hope of finding the baby safe and well. In
addition to being arrested on suspicion of child neglect Constance Martin and
Mark Gordon have now been additionally arrested on suspicion of gross negligence
manslaughter. Officers from both the Metropolitan Police and Sussex Police hope
the public will provide a breakthrough and have asked people between Brighton
and Newhaven to remain vigilant. The Northern Ireland Minister Steve Baker says
Rishi Sunak's new post-Brexit trade deal is as good as it's going to get. The
Prime Minister has met the 1922 Committee of Backbench Tory MPs to try to get
support for the Windsor framework. Labour has already said it will back the
deal. The RMT will join the Aslef Union in strike action on the London
Underground to coincide with the budget next month. Staff will walk out on the
15th of March with the RMT planning a national rail strike the following day.
New research suggests the price of food has risen by more than 17% in the last
year. The analytical group Kantar says price rises have added around Â£800 to
annual shopping bills if customers don't switch to cheaper alternatives.
Sainsbury's has announced plans to close two Argos depots in the next three
years which could affect more than 1,400 jobs. The company said the closures in
Essex and Greater Manchester would make the business more efficient. Unions said
there was no economic justification for the decision. A woman who earned more
than a million pounds from the NHS while using a fake medical degree has been
jailed for seven years. Zolia Alamee from Burnley worked as a psychiatrist for
more than two decades using the forged documents. The General Medical Council
has apologised. BBC News. This is BBC Radio 4. Does Chelsea know what she's
volunteering herself for? Well, we'll find out when we head to Ambridge in just
a moment. After that Samira Ahmed talks to Tracy and Oberman about playing
Shylock in a new adaptation of The Merchant of Venice and Michael B. Jordan
about starring and directing the new boxing film Trade 3. You can hear more on
this evening's front row coming up at a quarter past seven. And looking ahead,
how do our immune systems defeat viruses? That's the question put to Professor
Danny Altman on this evening's The Live Scientific with Jim Al-Khalili at half
past nine here on Radio 4. BBC Sounds. Seven years ago I was filming East London
Mosque when the story broke the three schoolgirls from the area had gone
missing. They were heading to Syria to join the Islamic State group. Breaking
news this morning, three British schoolgirls are reportedly missing. Shamina
Begum was the only one of the girls to emerge from the ashes of the so-called
caliphate. I've retraced her steps from the UK through Turkey and into Syria to
find people who knew her and to investigate the truth of her story. What do you
think people think of you? As a danger, as a risk, as a potential risk. From BBC
Radio 4, the Shamina Begum story, series 2 of I'm Not a Monster. Listen on BBC
Sounds. Freddy has his eyes on Brad in The Archers. Brad, old boy! B-Dog, the
Bradster! Hello. How's things? How's it going? Alright. I've been thinking a lot
about you. Have you? Mm-hmm. In a professional capacity, I mean. I was only just
saying to someone how much more confident you are compared to when you started
here. Really? Definitely! 100%. Can't say I'd noticed. Sorry, Freddy, can I? Oh
yes, sorry. Need to lock it up. Sure, of course. Diligent, attention to detail,
excellent. Just don't want it nicked. No, no. I was thinking, there must be lots
of other ways Lower Loxley could use your talents. You're not sacking me from
the Orangery, are you? Oh no, no, no, no. This would be in addition to that.
What sort of thing do you mean? Well, have you ever thought of becoming one of
our tour guides, for instance? Me? Yeah, I think you'd be ideal. No. You're a
quick learner. Yeah, but... You smashed your GCSEs, didn't you? Obviously got a
great brain in that head of yours. I did alright, yeah, but I'm more maths and
science, not the sort of thing I'd have to learn to show people around this
place. Oh, we'd give you lots of training. You'd pick it up in no time. What
grade did you get for history? Eight. You see, that's a lot better than I did.
No, Freddy, I'm sorry. Learning it all is one thing, but there's no way I could
explain it to a lot of people. I get embarrassed saying things out loud in
class. That's what the training program's for. Morning, campers. And anyway, it
wouldn't work for me. The tour guides, they're all... You two look serious. What
are you talking about? Freddy wants me to train as one of his tour guides. What?
Them dudes with the blazers? Yeah, it's totally not my thing, Chels. You're too
right. Don't know what you were thinking, Freddy. Brad would rather run naked
down Borchester High Street than mouth off in front of a bunch of strangers.
That's what I was telling him. Well, sort of. It's a real shame, though. No
worries. You just picked the wrong horror bin. The wrong... Yeah, I'd be up for
it. No props. You? Of course. That wasn't quite what I was... How does this
training work, then? How many times have you done that now? Feels like
thousands. I've got deliveries later, so... Spraying the van before you take it
up to the packhouse? Yep. You working at the Laurels today? Yeah, I'm on my way.
When do they let you loose on the customers? Residents, Josh. Whatever.
Yesterday. Oh, right. You see Auntie Chris? I didn't really have a chance, to be
honest, apart from a quick hello. Okay. So how was it? Well, hard work, Ovs.
Sure. And I've still got a lot to learn. What sort of things? You know, how to
do things the most efficient way. I was pretty slow yesterday. It is only your
first week, Ben. How best to handle the residents. Moving them around, you mean?
Well, not that. More relating to them as people. What are they like? They're
such a mixed bunch. Some are really twinkly, on the ball, like Auntie Chris.
Sort of person you can have a joke with. Uh-huh. Lots of them are pretty quiet.
Very grateful for what you're doing. Others? Well, not so much. Got some awkward
squad, have you? Yeah, there's this one guy in particular who's really winding
me up yesterday. Well, props to you, mate. Couldn't see myself doing it. No,
it's not for everyone. This job can be a pain, but at least the hens don't
answer back. And, well... What? Well, you know, all the personal stuff. Helping
them wash and everything. I'd be hopeless. No, I'm fine with that sort of thing.
If someone's got a need and I can help them with it, that's what the job's all
about, isn't it? Good on ya. The actual worst thing is the phone. The phone?
Yeah, we've all got them. The hands-on stuff. And they go off all the time,
really loud. Yeah? Yeah, you can see on the screen what room's calling, or which
shared area, like the lounge or something. But that's all that you know, and
someone has to answer right away. You mean it rings all of you? Yeah, because it
might be a life-or-death emergency. Heavy stuff. But some of them ring again and
again, over and over, and others, it might just be that they want a cup of tea
or something. Right. You don't know until you speak to them. So you're being
interrupted all the time? Yeah, and you've got to manage all that while you're
trying to work through your list and get all of your regular tasks done. You are
alright, aren't you? Remember, no one's making you do this. Yeah, I'll get used
to it. Yeah, of course you will. So, big day's not far away. What? You're 21st.
Two weeks? Two weeks tomorrow. Party! No, Josh. What do you mean? It's your
21st, it's got to be epic. I've been through this with mum and dad. I really
don't want any big celebration. Just some cake and a few presents will be fine.
At home, sure. Keep it civilised for the olds. But surely you'll be going out
with your mates in the evening. Honestly, I don't want it to be a thing. I had a
big party for my 18th. I just want to keep this one low-key. Are you sure that's
really what you want? Honestly, yes. That'll do me fine. Fair enough then. Your
birthday, your rules. But you'll still let me buy a drink, though. Something
decadent. Half a Shandy? Decaf skinny latte? Yeah, I guess we could manage that.
And I'm gonna get you a special present. Josh, no, there's no... Silence,
minion. Your elder brother has spoken. Do you mean to say you were gonna ask
Brad and not me? I, um... So that's a yes, then? I just didn't think it would be
your sort of thing, Chelsea. Why's that then? Well, you'd have to learn an awful
lot about the history of Lower Loxley for a start. Names, dates, facts... Yeah,
that's what the training's all about, though, innit? Well, partly, but you've
seen our tour groups. Some of them are quite elderly. So? Well, I mean, they
come with certain expectations. What do you mean, expectations? Well, just that
things will be done in a certain way. They like to take their time walking
round. You're more of a fast person. I think you might find it frustrating.
Actually, Freddie, I like old people, don't I, Brad? She does, as it happens.
Yeah, one of my bezi mates is Jim Lloyd, and you don't get much more historic
than him. No, but... And I'm great with all sorts. Ask any of my hairdressing
clients, they'll tell you. This is different. Is it really, though? These tour
groups, they're just the same people as come in the orangery, aren't they? Well,
yes, I suppose there is some overlap. Yeah, and I've been handling them for,
what, how long is it, Brad? Nine months, 16 days. Which is way longer than Brad
has. By two months, 12 days. How do you do that? Dunno, just can. And I could
totally make all the boring bits of Lower Loxley sound interesting. Ah, now you
see, Chelsea, that's actually the problem. If you think Lower Loxley is boring,
then it really wouldn't be the role for you. You think I'm thick, don't you? No.
And common? Absolutely not. It's just a case of tone and fit. There you are,
then. What? I'm perfectly toned and everyone says I'm well fit. So you can put
my name down. I'll do it. Huh, you again, is it? It is, yeah. Ben. I remember. I
need to help you back into bed so you can have an afternoon nap, is that right?
That's what it says on your little list, is it? Look, I know I'm new to this,
but I am doing my best. I'm sorry I was slow yesterday, but everyone's got to
start somewhere, wouldn't you agree? Yeah, yeah, fair enough. I promise you I
will get quicker. I'm a hard worker. In fact, today I worked through my break to
catch up. And I'll soon get to know what you need and when. I know. You've got a
job to do. You might just need to bear with me a bit while I find my feet. What
you're saying is, don't be such a grumpy old git. I wouldn't put it exactly like
that. Don't you worry. I know I've got a bit of a gob on me. I gave you a hard
time about that exercise class, didn't I? And the rest. You didn't mean any harm
by it. No, quite the opposite. But I did hard manual work all my life and now I
just want to sit on my backside and watch the telly. I do understand. What was
it that you did... Oh, sorry, I better... Oh. Someone else picked it up? Yeah.
So what did you used to do for a living? Farm worker. Really? I come from a
farming family. Do you? Yeah, Brookfield, not far from here. Phil Archer's
place? Yeah, that's right. He was my grandad. Well, you might know my nephew,
Terry Hodge. In Edgeley, Paradise Farm? That's the one. He's in the same lamb
co-op as my mum and dad, Hassett Hills. Well, that side of the family got all
the money and all the land, so I just, well, drove tractors and shoveled muck
for 50 years. Right. Fair play to Terry, though. He's topping up the council
funding so I can stay in this fancy place. That's good of him. Yeah. He's looked
after his uncle, Sykesy. Sorry, uncle... Sykesy. Can't stand being called
William. Never have done, never will do. So, would you prefer... Yeah, yeah.
Call me Sykesy. Okay, great. So, let's get you back into that bed, then, Sykesy.
I'll just move the bedclothes out the way. Oh, sorry, I'd better... Fill your
boots. Hello, this is Ben. What can I... Sorry, could you say that again? I'm
really sorry, I can't understand what you're saying. Better go there, Ben. Are
you sure? I'll be back as soon as I'm done. Don't worry about me. I can keep in
me chair if needs be. Just go, lad. You think I'd be good at it, don't you? I'm
really just here to deliver eggs, Chelsea. No, no, no, no, but go on. What do
you reckon? What was it again? Me being a tour guide. What, here at Lower
Loxley? No, at the Tower of London, you narner. Of course here. Well, I suppose
if Freddie thinks you'd be okay at it... Oh, yeah. He practically begged me to
sign up. In that case, I'm sure you could do anything you put your mind to.
Yeah, totally, Josh. You just wait. I'll show him. Of course, they'll have to do
something about the uniform, but I've got plenty of ideas to zhuzh it up. Are
you still talking about that tour guide stuff? Yeah. Why not? I'm just really
surprised, that's all. I'm just trying to better myself. I don't get why you'd
want to do the job, though, given that it's unpaid. You what? There's no money
in it. That's one of the reasons I wasn't interested. No, that can't be right.
It is. You mean, what all those people putting in all those hours? Yes. Prancing
around in them polyester jackets? Yes. For nothing? No money, any road. I don't
believe it. No, Brad's right. Bert Fry was a guide here for years, and he never
got a penny in pay. What is wrong with people? They get the odd thank you gift,
and there's a social a couple of times a year, but it's a voluntary role. You
might have got a clue from Freddie's new job title. What is his new job title?
Volunteer Coordinator. I never knew that. I thought it'd be some type of
promotion. I wondered why you were so keen. Why do they do it then?
Satisfaction? Being part of a team. Helping to support something historical.
Gets them out of the house. What a sad bunch of losers. Can you imagine doing
that just for fun? So you'll be telling Freddie he won't be available after all?
No way. What? After I practically had to throw myself at him to get him to say
yes. I thought you said he begged you. He'd think I was a right bozo. So? He
obviously reckoned I weren't capable. Well, I'm going to prove him wrong. Let
Tony and Lillian have something important to discuss when we return to Rambridge
tomorrow night at seven. Now here's Rachel Stonehouse with news about tonight's
File on 4 at eight. Four months ago, a 24-year-old professional rugby union
player called Levi Davis vanished without trace in Barcelona. The former X
Factor star was on the brink of a new career as a singer and voicemails he left
for a close friend in the hours leading up to his disappearance suggest he was
in good spirits. He hasn't been seen or heard from since. File on 4 traces the
last known movements of Levi and hears from the friends and family who are
struggling to understand what has happened to him. That's File on 4, looking for
Levi, with me, Rachel Stonehouse, after the news. Now on BBC Radio 4, it's time
for Front Row with Samira Ahmed. Hello. Tonight, Tracey-Ann Oberman on playing
Shylock and setting the Merchant of Venice in London in the 1930s. As Oldham
Council votes to take money from Arts Council England, but definitely not for
the Coliseum. What happens to the theatre there now? And from Killmonger in
Black Panther to the eponymous star and director of boxing sequel Creed 3,
Michael B. Jordan tells me about the demands of the physical training that we
saw on screen for real. I did pull a plane. I did. I had to challenge myself. It
was something that I really wanted to see if I could do. I'm not going to say I
pulled it back every time, but I definitely, definitely pulled the plane. It's a
part of that, you know, that movie cheese that you want, you know, it's a movie,
you know, you want to see your hero doing something very heroic. More from
Michael B. Jordan a little later. But first, Tracey-Ann Oberman has long been a
strong and fearless performer on stage and screen, from Harold Pinter and most
recently Noises Off in the West End to her comic roles in Friday Night Dinner
and Toast of London. She's also a prominent campaigner against anti-Semitism in
theatre and politics, and has been on the receiving end of plenty of social
media trolling as a result. She has also paid damages for falsely accusing an
academic of anti-Semitism on social media. Her experiences as a young actress
featured in the Royal Court verbatim play Jews in Their Own Words. Her latest
role as Shylock, the Jewish moneylender in The Merchant of Venice, feels like
the culmination of a lifelong ambition to reassess Shakespeare's most
controversial villain. Set in the run-up to the Battle of Cable Street in 1936,
when Oswald Mosley's fascists tried to march through London's East End,
Oberman's Shylock is a woman whose daughter Jessica is a grammar school girl,
seduced by one of a cohort of aristocratic Mosleyites, and draws on her own
memories of the powerful matriarchs in her own family who fled the pogroms in
Belarus. I went to the first preview at Watford Palace Theatre yesterday and
asked Tracey-Ann Oberman, after the performance, about why she had such passion
for this play. I've always wondered, even from quite a young age of reading this
play and studying it at school, what would happen to the play if you turned it
into a single mother and her daughter? That was always the starting point for
me. I thought, what does it change in the Shylock-Jessica relationship and what
it means when your daughter runs off and leaves you and takes everything away?
And I thought about all the matriarchs that I'd grown up with in my family who
had had to be so tough and strong emigrating to England from the Pale of
Settlement. Tell me about these matriarchs. Well, yeah, I was honouring, I
always thought about my great-grandmother in this role of Shylock, Annie Donov.
She came over at 14 from Belarus. They were in a little village called Mohylev
on the Pale of Settlement's complete Anatevka, Fiddler on the Roof territory.
But what Fiddler on the Roof doesn't show is the absolute horrific violence that
they lived with under the Cossacks and Tsar Nicholas. And when she was 14, there
was a particularly bad spate of pogroms where she nearly saw her father being
beheaded. I think she was nearly raped. I mean, there was a lot of violence. And
they sent her to England to go and work at Auntie Yetta's factory in the East
End for a penny a week. You could only come if you had a job. She was also very
politically active, as all of those young communists, I guess they were. They
were the bund. So basically, my great-grandmother, my grandmother Faye, I had
another great-auntie called Machine Gun Molly, who was apparently terrifying.
The men were all terrified of her. And I had another great-great-aunt called
Sarah Portugal, who wore a slash of red lipstick and I think smoked a pipe or a
cigar. These women were widows. They ran their businesses in the East End with a
hand of iron. They'd come over to England, where to be a strong, tough,
opinionated, filmmaking matriarch was an anathema to the British upper middle
classes and upper classes. They wanted their women to be decorative. And so
that's who I thought of when I thought of a female Shylock. You had an
interesting experience at school. And I've been struck when I've interviewed
directors who've worked on The Merchant of Venice before, a lot of Jewish women
have had that experience of doing the play in school and the whole class
reacting or even turning around to look at the Jewish girl in the class. What
was your experience? Yeah, absolutely. We read it and I think I was playing
Shylock. We were having to read it out loud for a week. And then everybody in
the playground afterwards were rubbing their hands together going, my duck, it's
my daughter, my duck, it's my daughter in a Jewish voice and sort of laughing.
And it was really uncomfortable. And, you know, this is one of the reasons I
wanted to do this play and reclaim it and to do a very good education pack to go
alongside it is don't take it out of the syllabus because you're nervous or
worried about teaching it, but teach it properly. Explain where the blood libel
came from. Shakespeare was writing at a time of extreme anti-Semitism and the
idea of Jews wanting blood, wanting a pound of flesh. This goes all the way back
to medieval times when William the Conqueror bought in his Jews to be his
moneylenders. And remember, when Jews were bought over here, they weren't
allowed to join the guilds. You couldn't earn it. The only thing you could be to
earn, to maybe make some money was to be a moneylender. And the king used you to
lend his money, but also to be his debt collector. And for the hatred that
people felt about these Jews collecting the debt on the king's behalf, a king
who was very unpopular in Edward, they started to put these tropes out that the
Jews want blood, they want blood, they're shapeshifters, they murder Jewish,
non-Jewish children and take their, they take their blood to make their matzah.
There was even a rumour that because Jews were, Jewish men were circumcised that
somehow they menstruated. So this idea of Jews and blood is so embedded in the
British psyche. And it's deeply uncomfortable. And I just want it to be taught
properly in schools, teach it, but explain it through the prism of anti-
Semitism. You mentioned accents. And what's really striking from the moment your
Charlotte comes on stage and speaks is you speak with a strong accent against
all these kind of cut glass English Mosleyite fascists. Tell me about your
decision to do that. I based it on my Bubba's, my Bubba Ali's East End Yiddish
accent with a little bit of Hebrew, but this very strong kind of Eastern Middle
European accent. So I wanted to honour that. And also, as you say, to set it
against Oswald Mosley's, and we, you know, we have to remember, thank goodness
Edward VIII abdicated, because had he not abdicated, we would have had a king
who was great friends with Mosley and was a supporter of Hitler. You know, the
aristocracy loved Mosley. They loved the anti-Semitism. The idea of these Jews
taking something away from the ordinary British person was sort of ran through
the aristocracy like a stick of rock. There's an amazing moment where, you know,
in between scenes, you have a sense of the building momentum leading up to the
riots around Cable Street. And one of the aristos kind of comes on singing this
horrific anti-Semitic version of Land of Hope and Glory. You printed the
original lyrics in the programme. I had no idea that it was real. It was written
by an MP on the back of an envelope. Land of Dope and Jewry, isn't it? And he
rewrote the song Land of Hope and Jewry with horrible anti-Semitic lyrics that
we found and we've put in the play. I mean, people have to remember that Oswald
Mosley got married to Diana Mitford at Goebbels's house with Hitler as a
witness. Hitler gave him the playbook of how to whip up anti-Semitism and hatred
towards Jews in order to win around the average British person. And so when he
marched on the Battle of Cable Street, specifically against the Jew, the
international Jew, the untrustworthy Jew, the money grabbing Jew, the disloyal
Jew, he had done for weeks before, almost like mini Kristallnacht. They'd try to
burn synagogues, they'd smash windows, they'd leaflet it, they'd put up posters.
And when you look at those posters, they're terrifying. It absolutely is sort of
proper Third Reich, you know, the Jew, the Jew, the Jew. And he was hoping that
when he marched onto Cable Street from the four corners, he was going to bring
all of the working classes as his allies. But what the thing that I was brought
up with and why for me this is a civil rights moment, which I hope we do honour
in the play, is that my bubba and my grandmother and great uncle Alf, they told
me that the dockers stood with them, the Irish neighbours stood with them, the
small Afro-Caribbean community stood with them, the English working class
community, the unionists, they all stood together and they said, if you come for
one, you come for all. And because of that, because they did all stand together,
the law was changed. Moseley had his own little paramilitary militia that he
marched with and you weren't allowed to have a private militia after that. There
is something about your Shylock which is unashamedly drawing on a well of female
rage. She is not a fillet to be disliked and she's not afraid of her anger.
Yeah, I think that absolute female rage is there, that rage of a widow who has
fought tooth and nail, clawed herself out of the dirt, clawed herself into a new
country, clawed to make a life as a widow, having lost children and she's got
this one daughter that she's going to put through education to give a better
life to, to have a better life than her and when all that is destroyed by these
ridiculous upper class fascists. Because you see at the beginning she's like a
schoolgirl with her satchel and her plait but then she elopes. Yeah, she's sort
of groomed by this Bullingdon boy. And again, another interesting element was we
really wanted to have an Asian Lorenzo because we thought he's also an outsider.
He's rich and he comes from a sort of... Well we see him in a blazer, like a
public school blazer which of course has all kinds of resonances. Exactly, so
he's like the public school boy that they don't really accept him but he's rich
and he's sort of got the class but he's not quite one of them. So he's sort of
in and sort of out and then to have him run off with a Jewish girl, the young
Jewish girl, it just says so much. You mentioned the significance of making
Shylock female as well as Jewish. So obviously when she spits in her hand early
on to sign the deal with Antonio and he obviously cannot bear the idea of
touching her hand. But of course there's a whole sexualised hatred that goes
with that anti-Semitism. It adds an extra chilling element, doesn't it? You're
very glamorous. You know when you turn up at the court scene you're wearing this
beautiful hat with, you know, kind of diamante hat pin and so that sense of this
elegant woman being humiliated is... I found it quite difficult to watch. Did
you? Yeah, very difficult. Yes. And my experience of standing up to anti-
Semitism online and in life was that I found a real intersection between
misogyny and anti-Semitism. In fact, misogyny and racism. Often immigrant
families have very strong women. You know, it all starts and it begins and ends
at home. The women are strong. Tell me about it. You know, immigrant families
have strong women and if you're a racist you will find those women repulsive and
if you're a misogynist you will find those women repulsive because we don't shut
up. We are not cowards into corners. We often speak our minds and we often
affect change. I mean, you know, I found that myself or Rachel Riley or Luciana
Berger were saying things that were our lived experience alongside David
Baddiel, David Schneider or whoever, but we got the most vicious, nasty, sexual,
personal, almost fetishistic responses. So when we moved it into the play, the
idea that she's called dog the whole time, you called me cur, you kicked me,
spat on my hair, you called me dog, is it possible a dog can lend 3,000 ducats?
All this language worked so well and Raymond Coulthard who plays our Antonio and
he's done so much Shakespeare, he said it was really the first time that you had
a gender swap that he felt didn't affect the play at all. It was almost like it
could have always been a woman. We didn't have to change anything. It made it
more pointed, I suppose, what the play really brought out and you've said in
interviews that you feel Sherlock is still a villain, but I have to say our
sympathies, my sympathies were far more with the way that you played Sherlock,
especially in that courtroom scene where the one thing she clings onto is the
law says that I get my pound of flesh and she's lined up against these men
who've come in their fascist uniforms, there's a Union Jack, he's a member of
the City Guild or something, isn't he, the presiding judge, this whole sense of
a world from which she's excluded and then to find the law is twisted against
her, which smacks so much of the history of the British Empire, which is how
laws were always being changed, weren't they? I'm so glad you got that. That is
absolutely 100% it. The law works for the powerful. The audience gasped at the
point when the law having been twisted against her and she won't even get her
money back is they're also going to take away her property and the audience
gasped and followed up by an even louder gasp when then they also force her to
be converted to Christianity. There's something and I felt having read things
like Vikram Seth's Two Lives about his Jewish aunt, when Jewish people in Nazi
occupied Europe lost their possessions bit by bit, it was fundamentally tied up
with their status as human beings. I felt that was what really came through.
When you have no home and you have no land and you're a welcome or unwelcome
guest in every country that you go to, everything you have really has to fit
into a suitcase. So this idea that when Jessica runs away and leaves and she
says, this is Charlotte's daughter, runs away and Shylock is saying, she's taken
all the jewellery, she's taken all the gold. She's not saying all the jewellery
and the gold just because it's money. It's because that's how I can escape. So
the Battle of Cable Street is the background to this. It's building up to it. We
know in the original play that Shylock's being punished and he's going to be
converted. The Jonathan Price Globe production famously showed the forced
conversion with Jessica singing a kind of Jewish song of mourning. You've made a
very different choice and I don't want you to spoil anything if you don't want
to, but tell us about how you thought about the ending of the play. It always
bothered me that you never, the last time you see Shylock in the play is when
they say, are you content? You're going to lose all your money, you're going to
lose your livelihood, you're going to lose your home, you've lost your daughter
and this is all going to be taken away from you. Are you content? And the last
words you hear Shylock say is, I am content and you never see him or her again.
I can't help but think of it as a her. It was important to me that you did see
her again because in that play, Shakespeare's very cleverly, then you go
straight on to Belmont with all these stupid aristocrats who've destroyed this
Jewish character and they've all got these ridiculous marriages and they lie to
each other and they're sort of frothing around in Belmont. Meanwhile, they've
destroyed somebody's life and clearly won't really accept Jessica. So it was
important for me that you see Shylock all the way through that scene and with
the battle of Cable Street looming over it, with those fascists about to march
and Antonio, who is our Mosley acolyte, the biggest of all Mosley acolytes, is
sort of leaving Belmont to go and join that military march. So I don't want to
give any spoilers, but let's say our Shylock has a political awakening and she
feels, while she's felt alone, by becoming part of a group standing against
fascism, she feels part of something and more powerful. It feels like this has
been a lifetime project for you in some way, even if it's only the last few
years you've been working on it. Oh Samira, this really, really has. And for me,
you know, I started off at the Royal Shakespeare Company and I think Shakespeare
is incredible, you know, the greatest writer. But in the last few years, being
able to do what, you know, I've just finished doing Noises Off in the West End,
which has been wonderful and I loved every minute of it. But, you know, this
work and the work I just did at the Royal Court with Jonathan Friedland, you
know, I'm being able to, my activism, my politics and my artistry has been able
to come together in this project and it means so much to me. And I hope that it
leaves a legacy of making people re-look at England's relationship with fascism,
because it came back round again in the 60s and the 70s and we need to look at
it again now. And also to re-look at our very deeply ingrained anti-Semitism. So
don't run away, teachers, from The Merchant of Venice. Use our teachers pack to
know how to teach it. Tracey-Anne Oberman, The Merchant of Venice, 1936, is at
Watford Palace Theatre till March 11th and then touring, including to Home in
Manchester and the RSC's Swan Theatre in Stratford-upon-Avon. The saga of Oldham
Coliseum took another turn last night. Oldham Council voted to accept an offer
of Â£1.845m from Arts Council England, conditional on it going towards
development of a new theatre in the town. That amount is exactly what the
Coliseum had applied for over three years and been rejected, leading it to
announce recently that they would be going dark from the end of March. A
vociferous campaign by supporters of Oldham Coliseum to try to overturn the ACE
decision has been growing and a week ago, the performance union Equity held a
protest meeting in the town with prominent actors and theatre makers such as
Maxine Peake, one of those who spoke passionately with actor Paul Hilton. I did
school play here when I was 15. I found my calling. This lit the touch paper,
this very stage. It was at that point, 15 years old, I made the decision that I
want to be an actor. Now, what will happen to 15, 14, 13 year olds in the next
three years if they don't have this space? Isn't it cultural vandalism to just
take it away from them? In their formative years when they need a place to
express, to learn about empathy, to learn about communication and to see it
taken away. For the young people, that's the reason I'm here. For the next
generation. We need them to reverse that decision so we can at least keep the
space. Paul Hilton, one of the voices of the Save Oldham Coliseum campaign. So
what does last night's council decision mean? I'm joined now on the line by
Charlotte Green, who's a local democracy reporter for the Manchester Evening
News and the Oldham Chronicle. Charlotte, you have been following the story. Can
you remind us first, why Arts Council England cut all funding and dropped Oldham
Coliseum from there as a national portfolio organisation? So we found out that
they had been unsuccessful in applying for funding as part of the next three
year portfolio. So this would be up till 2026, back in November. And at that
point, it was quite murky as to why that decision had been made. It didn't seem
particularly kind of logical, considering that Oldham had been such a staple of
that portfolio for so long. And then it has emerged since, as the campaign's
been building and as the discussions have been going, and there's been so much
pushback that the Arts Council came out and said that they felt like they could
not give more money to Oldham Coliseum, that the organisation was too high risk.
And that the financial plan and the governance were too high risk and there had
been issues over several years. The Coliseum building had had a lot of money
spent on it, hadn't it? Why is the council now talking about a brand new theatre
building? So the council spent Â£2 million on the current theatre, which is on
Fairbottom Street, just in the town centre, back in 2012. But even the Coliseum
theatre itself broadly described that as a facelift. It was to kind of sort out
a backlog of issues that had been in the building, because it is a historic
building, but it's not Grade II listed or anything like that. So that work was
designed to give it a 10 year extension. But after that, it was sort of accepted
by everybody that it would then be kind of no longer fit for purpose. It's not
the best building for accessibility, like the bar area is very small. So that
kind of front of house provision isn't really there. And the council said it's
been costing them Â£20,000 a year just to kind of keep up with like health and
safety regulations. So they wanted to put forward a new theatre and they have
done so several times. This is the third plan that's come forward. This would be
a Â£24.5 million theatre, partly in another historic building elsewhere in the
town centre with a new extension. Yeah, this is the old post office and the old
Quaker Friends Meeting House, isn't it, with a new extension. Who's going to pay
for it? You said it's going to cost Â£24 million, this new theatre. Yeah, so Â£6
million of that is going to come from a successful bid that the council made to
the Towns Fund, which is a government funding pot. But the remainder, so the
vast bulk of it, will be coming from the council's own capital resources. Â£18
million. You mentioned that everyone understood that the extra years bought by
the refurb of Oldham Coliseum was only going to last a certain amount of time.
But you say that, there's obviously a huge campaign to try and save the
Coliseum. Does last night's decision by Oldham Council mean hopes for saving the
building of the Coliseum are now over? I think so. I think the Coliseum had sort
of indicated in their interim chief executive and artistic director Chris Lawson
had said that they understood that the lifespan of the building was limited and
that they knew it was going to come to an end. But what they thought, and I
think the Coliseum had thought, was that previous plans would have come to
fruition earlier. So there wouldn't be this big gap where they'd be left
essentially homeless before moving into another sort of host venue. But now
they've got three years where they're talking about being like a sort of roving
company, but without a funding stream to do that. I think the actual building
itself, people have a very, very romantic and nostalgic view of it because so
many people went to see pantomimes there when they were children or got taken to
school with family members. People like Bernard Cribbins and Ian McKellen began
careers there, didn't they? And so many famous people have sort of trod those
boards. But even when you go in there, it does feel dated. The building on the
outside has a sort of very worn look and a very worn feel. And unfortunately, it
doesn't have any kind of listing or any kind of protection in planning policy.
So there is no impetus to carry on refurbishing it or restoring it. I think from
the Council point of view, it is sort of just a bit of a money sink at this
point. Right, gosh. So ACE, Arts Council England, originally said that this Â£1.8
million that Oldham had hoped to get, the Coliseum had hoped to get for three
years, that money would still be ring fenced to providing performing arts for
the community. I wonder, is it now? I mean, how much is going to go to be spent
on arts happening in Oldham over the next three years? So I would say, and I've
been covering this and speaking to people sort of since the beginning, since
November when it was first announced, it is very confusing about how that money
will be spent. On the one hand, the Arts Council insists that it's going to be
used to better improve the performances and culture available to people in
Oldham. But on the other hand, the Council, and so there was a Cabinet meeting
last night, and they said it was being stipulated that the funding must be used,
stipulated by the Arts Council, that it must be used to consult and look at the
development and delivery of a new theatre and also develop appropriate
leadership and governance structure for that new theatre. That sounds like it's
going to disappear into kind of governance consultancy spending. It doesn't
sound like the people of Oldham are going to see that. Have you got any sense of
what the thinking is in Oldham about, I know the funding decision was only last
night, but what's the feeling, especially if, as you say, the Coliseum itself is
a building that a lot of people feel really can't go on? I think people in
Oldham feel like they've, I mean, they're being hit from every side. They've got
the cost of living crisis, they've got energy bills going through the roof. And
then when you have something that's just been in their lives, you know, a lot of
people who are quite old now would have been going to that building when they
were children. And I think it is a real blow to people, everyone I've spoken to,
even if they said they hadn't been there since, you know, since they were
children or for 10 years. When I asked them, how do you feel about it? They were
just like, this is just another thing we're losing. This is another way that
Oldham's being hit harder than other places. And a lot of people made the point
that just because Oldham is one of these, you know, incredibly deprived areas in
England, that doesn't mean it should be losing its arts. That means more effort
should be being made to retain arts in places like Oldham. Let's just read a
little bit of what, we asked Oldham Council to join us, we should say, but no
one was available. Arts Council England got back to us today to say that the
council will now have to submit a proposal for a three year programme of
cultural activity. This money's been retained for the Oldham borough so that
more people will have the opportunity to enjoy and take part in arts and
culture. It's public money. So as you'd expect, there will be need to be agreed
outcomes and outputs. And the grant will be monitored and reviewed against these
outcomes and a set of milestones across three years, which sounds like it's
supposed to be used for arts happenings rather than consultancy. As for the
Coliseum, ACE put out this statement in the past week about the situation. And
they've said, as you said yourself Charlotte, the Coliseum Limited had been
facing financial and government challenges for some time. And as guardians of
public money, we could not invest in an organisation which we assess to be such
a high risk. Their funding continues till the end of March, after which we've
agreed additional support of nearly Â£360,000 to help them with decisions about
the future. Are decisions about the future redundancies? Yeah, so 70 staff are
currently in consultation about being made redundant. And can I ask, what are
the Save Oldham Coliseum campaign saying? Well, following last night's meeting,
at which Equity attended, and they are mobilising the campaign really on behalf
of actors and residents and people who work there. And they asked nine questions
and they got nine answers. They said those answers were not necessarily
satisfactory on a number of levels. And the campaign continues. There is
actually a North Area Board meeting of Arts Council, which is the local board
that decides funding decisions in the North. 4,000 people have written letters
to them asking them to reverse the decision. And I've been told that a
councillor who's on the board, who's actually a councillor in Rochdale, has been
convinced to speak in favour of the Coliseum. So we will see whether anything
changes from that. But at the moment, it just seems like a lot of doors are
closing on both the production company and its ability to survive and on the
actual sort of historic theatre itself, as the Coliseum's people would recognise
it. Charlotte Green, thank you so much for bringing us up to speed on this
really difficult situation. We will, of course, continue to follow the story of
what's going on with Oldham Coliseum and the town's arts provision on Front Row.
Thank you again. Now, the second sequel to a hit film is a tricky business, but
Michael B. Jordan's charismatic presence as Adonis Creed, the son of Rocky's big
boxing rival, has proved quite a success. For Creed III, he's back, not just as
the heavyweight boxer, but also making his directing debut. Quite an achievement
for the star, perhaps best known as Eric Killmonger in the first Black Panther
film. All his films have been successful partnerships with the writer-director
Ryan Coogler, who co-wrote the story for Creed III. Now, Adonis owns his own gym
and, after much success, has retired from fighting to enjoy family life, until a
stranger appears from his past. Hey, my man. Can I help you? Let me get an
autograph. No, I ain't signing no autographs. Would you get off my car? Oh,
holy. You don't remember me, huh? Come a long way from bumming rides from your
mom. Damn. Boy, you had me. Damien. Yeah, just got back to the hood. Stopped by
the old gym. Yeah, we upgraded a couple years ago. Let's see. Damn, it's, uh...
It's been a minute. Been a minute. Michael B. Jordan as Adonis Creed and
Jonathan Majors as Damien Anderson in Creed III. When we met, I asked Michael B.
Jordan how he developed the seed of the story, Creed being haunted by the return
of a childhood friend. We wanted to, you know, how could we challenge Adonis and
make this movie very personal? You know, for myself, you know, for, you know,
the idea of Adonis Creed, having all the things that he wanted to have, you
know, he's very successful. He has the family. He checked off all the boxes, all
the things that he really wanted. But why doesn't he feel a little
uncomfortable, a little unsettled? You know, what are these things? How can we
challenge him in a real way and rock his world? And sometimes you have to kind
of go to the past. You know, you have to go to this personal place, things that
you might have kept secret, things you kept to yourself and you might have
forgotten about. We bring that back to the forefront. I think all of us, you
know, this idea of imposter syndrome or, you know, survivor's guilt is something
that, you know, myself that I've struggled with, something that, you know, I
know Ryan has struggled with being black and successful and young, you know, and
making out of the circumstances that we make it out of, you know, that is
something that is a common thread of, you know, amongst us. And that's something
that we want to kind of pour into the story and make it real and honest about
this, you know, this young black athlete that's at the top of the game. What are
some of the things that he's really going to be going through? And we just tried
to make it as personal as possible. And that came in the form of a childhood
friend that shared a traumatic experience. And through that traumatic
experience, you know, one went this way, the other one went that way. And then
we just, you know, we started developing and the story, you know, started to
evolve from there. There's a terrific scene quite early on when Damien, this
childhood friend, comes to him and they go for lunch in a diner. The camera kind
of is moving around them. And there's a moment where Adonis offers him money and
then realises it was a big mistake. That scene seems to encapsulate two things.
One, your directing is in motion, but also there's a kind of fight already in
motion, isn't there? It's a lot of fight in motion. You know, what we were
trying to do there was, you know, earlier on in the movie, you know, when Damien
wins, he splits his money with his best friend, with his brother, you know, they
share everything. And when we get, you know, present day, we pick back up,
Adonis is almost naturally, you know, oh man, I have this, you don't have that.
I share because we're brothers, you know. But at the same time, Damien's not
looking at it that way in the circumstances. So the idea behind friendship and
miscommunication, and sometimes you have the best intent and that's not received
that way. And how that can fester and grow and create a larger space between two
people is something that we want to explore and show both sides of how one
person was taking it versus the other. So it wasn't really like necessarily a
fight, but we just want to show the complexities between friendships and
brotherhood and how two men and two people can kind of come together or grow
apart. Yeah. There's a kernel of something very dark inside Damien, which has
obviously been growing through his time in jail. And it's really striking how
Adonis in a sense is almost naive about seeing that darkness emerge in someone
he thought he knew like a brother. I thought there was almost something sort of
superhero archetype about confronting this alternative version of what he could
have been, who's consumed by darkness. And Adonis is very much, you know, a
creature of the light, isn't he? Were you conscious of trying to use superhero
ideas at some level? Not superhero ideas. I guess there's like common threads
between superhero tropes, you know, but the idea behind Damien wasn't really
consumed by darkness. He went through a lot of traumatic experiences. He watched
somebody have the life that he thought he was supposed to have. And that envy,
that not jealousy, but that anger started to grow and fester. So the idea
between Adonis wanting to see the good in people, wanting to see the good times
because he blocked out all the negative times, because he almost forgot about
the things that happened, which is why we kind of slowly sprinkled that in
throughout the film. Damien is the perfect antagonist for Adonis because you
said he does represent all the things that Adonis could have been. And Adonis
represents all the things that Damien should have been. And I think there's a
natural conflict in between those two things. So, you know, there's a, you know,
my love for superhero films and, you know, and fantasy and all that good stuff.
There's naturally, naturally, you're going to feel that because I kind of shot
it that way. Well, yeah, it's kind of big and beautiful. Part of what's very
interesting about how you've directed this film is the unashamed glamour of the
world that he lives in, even though emotion and his family is at the heart of
it. You know, we see him playing with his daughter with this amazing view at the
apartment, the infinity pool, his wife's studio. It felt important to show that
he does have the trappings of this wealth, even though he's obviously not
obsessed by them. Tell me about shooting that very beautiful world. Yeah, I
wanted to, you know, I didn't want the stereotypical boxer that got everything
with the flashy diamond chains and the jewellery and the cars and, you know what
I'm saying, the girls and the shades on all the time and all that stuff. Like,
we've seen that a million times. I wanted an honest portrayal of who Adonis is,
who we grew and evolved him to be throughout this franchise. Like, Adonis was
never that. He came from nothing, you know, and he got blessed with a lot, but
still had to work for the things that he has. So he's still a working man. He
comes from working class. So I wanted to have all the things that you think
everybody would want and everybody would want to have and see, and he should be
happy, but he's still not happy. And he still has a hole that he needs to fill
somewhere. That was, that's interesting. You know, I think that's depth, that's
layers. And that's what I wanted to show Adonis to have. The fight scenes in
this are really interestingly shot. So one, there's a practical issue of how you
direct when you're in the action, but also how you decided, where you decided to
draw the line on violence. There's a particular scene that Damien has when he
secures a kind of big success in the ring as a professional and Adonis' daughter
is watching and it gets so nasty that the mother gets her to turn away and
escorts her off. And it suddenly made me think, my God, this is a really violent
world. How did you feel about the violence? Given that Adonis is portrayed as
such a loving family man who listens to his wife and daughter and cares about
them deeply. I just wanted to show the complexity of parenthood. You know, I
think parenthood was like, it was really, really important to me of how we
parent. You know, Adonis has one perspective. He has one, you know, he has his
outlook based off of how he was raised, how he grew up, you know, the things
that he's went through when he was younger and how he chooses to parent. Bianca
has hers. And I wanted to show the two of them having conflict and having a
disagreement, not having the same outlook on how to raise Amara and how, you
know, when they come to the sport of boxing, it came to something that was so
comfortable and familiar to Adonis and showing Amara going through her struggles
of, you know, not knowing how to express herself the right way, you know, and
that's what, you know, and in that moment, you know, you know, that was the
opportunity to show violence in the ring. But then also what is our daughter
actually absorbing, you know, you know, and taking in as a child and one
thinking, oh, you know, not really paying attention, but Bianca and her
perspective is like, no, you know, you got it. I got to get her out of here
because I already know that she's having some issues in school. She's fighting a
little bit of violence. So maybe this is not the best thing for, you know, as us
parents, as parents do, you know, they try to protect their children from, you
know, certain things that might influence them in a non-positive way. And yeah,
I thought that was important. So how I feel about violence, you know, I mean,
I'm grown. Yeah. But how do you feel about the audience seeing that violence?
How much do you want to show in the film? I wanted that fight to be
uncomfortable. I was, you know, from the first fight, you know, I had three
fights, you know, that I like show and I want to show all sides of boxing. You
know, I saw the chest moves, the smarts, the intelligence of boxing in the first
one, wrap that up with Conlon. The second fight I wanted to show it violence.
You know, I wanted to be uncomfortable. I wanted people to squirm in their
seats. I wanted to show... Were you playing a bit dirty? A little bit dirty. You
know what I'm saying? I mean, that's, Damien's coming from an environment where
he had to fight for his life. You know, he has a little bit, you know, he's
rough around the edges. He's desperate. He has a certain tenacity that Felix
wasn't prepared for. But then also I want to show injuries that we haven't shown
before in boxing. You know, we have the ninth movie, everybody had a black eye,
can't see it, closed up eye, broke nose, you know what I'm saying? Swollen
cheeks, all that good stuff. We have those things before. I had to think outside
the box to make these things feel different. So that second fight felt different
that way. The third fight is a combination of the emotional, the grit, the
violence and the, you know, and it's very, very, very personal. So it's a
combination of the first two fights put together. How did you direct when you
were in so many of these key scenes? I mean, you just do it. You know, I think
there's a overthinking of how I'm going to do this before I actually started
doing it. But, you know, I can direct while I act. Like, you know, if I want you
to look that way, all I have to do is step that way and you'll look that way. I
don't have to cut. I don't have to do anything. I can make subtle adjustments by
me performing and acting that will get the performances that I need from the
other side. So it's almost like stage acting, it's theatrical. You lead and
they'll follow. A little bit, yes. I think in some situations there's that. Then
there's the boxing where, you know, that's its own set of rules and boundaries
that I have within the ring. Just limitations with my hands, with my voice
because of the mouthpiece and things of that nature and just being out of
breath. But it's a, once you prep and you know what you're trying to get and
everybody's on the same page, you know, that's why preparation is so key when it
comes to directing. Speaking of preparation, no one would come to see another
Creed film without looking forward to the sequence around training. And it's
beautifully shot. There's a bit where you're actually pulling a plane. I know
that you take your training very seriously. Did you actually pull a plane? I did
pull a plane. I did. I had to challenge myself. It was something that I really
wanted to see if I could do. I'm not going to say I pulled it back every time,
but I definitely, definitely pulled the plane. It's a part of that, you know,
that movie cheese that you want, you know, it's a movie, you know, you want to
see your hero doing something very heroic and like almost unrealistic. But it
was something that, you know, it was a crazy idea that I had and I just wanted
to, you know, see if we could do it. Sylvester Stallone is still involved, I
think, at a producer level or producer level somewhere in this film. How have
you talked to him about developing Creed as you've taken it into the third film?
I mean, he's a producer on this project and, you know, the DNA of like Rocky
and, you know, and Sly is always going to be throughout all these franchises.
But we thought it was really, really important to really like lock down on
Adonis and his story and his family, which is, you know, I wanted to feel like
an origin story and a trilogy and a sequel all in one. When you learn things
about your character that, you know, that you thought you had figured out and
you really didn't. So that was the idea behind this one. And the inclusivity,
which is a statement about your production company, but also, you know, Bianca,
his wife, is dealing with losing her hearing. Their daughter is deaf. You know,
we see you using sign language. It's done very lightly, but it was obviously
very important to send to that. Tell me about that decision. I think it was a
natural evolution, you know, in the first film, you know, you see Bianca and
Adonis. Adonis falls in love with, you know, a woman who's losing her hearing,
you know, and then, you know, the second film, they have a child who potentially
could be deaf. And then the third film, you know, she's deaf and we have an ASL
family. That's just a natural progression of what our franchise was. And for me
and, you know, Ryan, you know, inclusion and diversity is extremely important to
us. And that's just, I mean, we don't really think that much about it. We just,
we just, yeah, it's natural to us. You know, that's what we do. Well, I've got
to ask them a final question. The last time I met you was Just Mercy, which was
an amazing film about justice, about a real life campaigner. It feels like every
project you do is chosen with real purpose. And that's something that Ryan
Coogler has always done from his first feature with you, Fruitvale Station. Tell
me about what motivates you and what you have lined up. It feels like you've
probably already have decided what's next. I wish I knew exactly what was next
right now. This movie has taken so much of my like mental and my energy and just
like my, you know, my focus. I've only been able to kind of focus on this, on
this movie. You know, what I stand for and what I'm about, whether it's in front
of the camera I'm producing or behind the camera now, you know, it's going to,
it's going to say something somewhere, you know, whether it's, you know, I
always take the approach of hide the medicine in the food. You know, that's kind
of been my thing. That's why, you know, art and cinema and music and, you know,
you know, just universal languages, you know, amongst people, I'm trying to find
ways to bring people together, you know, and get people to understand another
perspective and not just their own. I think so, however I can. And if a story
speaks to me or something that I feel like a light needs to be shined on, you
know, that's, that's kind of what I'm gonna do. So Michael B. Jordan, Creed 3 is
in cinemas on Friday, certificate 12A. Tomorrow, a St. David's Day edition of
Front Row from Cardiff featuring new opera Blaze of Glory set in a 50s mining
community. Join Hugh Stevens, 715. Front Row was presented by Samira Ahmed and
the producer was Elian Glazer with studio engineer Tim Heffer. On File on 4 next
this evening, an investigation into the disappearance of the rugby player Levi
Davis. On Radio 4. Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. The
Lord's Prayer is shared by Christians around the world. On earth as it is in
heaven. In this year's Lent Talks, six people reflect on the words of this
prayer. As we forgive those who trespass against us. Sharing stories of
forgiveness, fatherhood and finding heaven on earth. For thine is the kingdom.
Lent Talks on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Begins tomorrow evening.