TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-13H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 begins next Wednesday evening at 8.45 BBC News at midday. Police in Northern
Ireland investigating the shooting of an off-duty police officer are focusing
their attention on the dissident Republican group the new IRA. Detective Chief
Inspector John Caldwell is in a critical condition in hospital after being
attacked at a sports centre in Omar in County Tyrone. Three men have been
arrested. Our Ireland correspondent Emma Vardy is at the scene. John Caldwell
has been the lead officer on a number of high profile cases in Northern Ireland
including investigations into dissident Republicans and criminal gangs. The
shooting happened at a sports complex in Omar at around 8 o'clock last night as
he was putting footballs into the boot of the car. Mr. Caldwell managed to run a
short distance before falling to the ground. The two gunmen continued to fire at
him. Police are linking dissident Republican paramilitaries with the attack. It
has been condemned by local political leaders as despicable and cowardly. The
Northern Ireland Secretary Chris Heaton Harris has also condemned the attack and
called it a significant and serious event. It was a cowardly and callous attack
that happened last night. Everybody in the policing community and actually the
community of Omar is completely shocked by this because society has moved on in
Northern Ireland. There is no place for violence like this. The Labour leader,
Sir Keir Starmer, in a speech in Manchester has revealed what he's called his
five missions setting out his party's objectives should it come to power at the
next election. Secure the highest sustained growth in the G7. Growth that makes
everyone, not just a few, better off. Build an NHS fit for the future by
reforming health and care services to speed up treatment. Make Britain's streets
safe. Break down the barriers to opportunity at every stage for every child. And
five, we will make Britain a clean energy superpower. Sir Keir said the pledges
would be aimed at tackling fundamental long term issues as opposed to what he
called the sticking plaster politics of the Conservative government. At the
beginning of the year Rishi Sunak set out his own five promises, including a
focus on growing the economy. The number of asylum seekers waiting for a
decision on their case in the UK has risen to record levels with around 166,000
people in the backlog. Almost 110,000 have been waiting for longer than six
months. Doctors at a hospital in London have published guidance on how to treat
the severe side effects of inhaling nitrous oxide after a surge in people
admitted with symptoms over the past year. They are warning that laughing gas
can cause permanent damage to nerves in the spinal cord. Dr. Alistair Noyce, who
is a neurology professor at Queen Mary University, says there are a number of
symptoms to be aware of. In people that are using nitrous oxide recreationally,
symptoms such as loss of sensation or altered sensation in the legs or feet or
hands, difficulty walking, falls, potentially inability to walk at all, and also
bladder and bowel complaints. These are the symptoms most commonly reported by
the patients that we see. The European Commission is asking its employees to
remove the Chinese short video-sharing app TikTok from their corporate phones.
The EU's industry chief Thierry Breton told a news conference the EU is very
focused on cyber security but gave no further details. TikTok called the
decision misguided. The football commentator John Motsen has died at the age of
77. Known to fans as Mottie, he covered ten World Cups and European
Championships as well as 29 FA Cup Finals during a 50-year career with the BBC.
He worked on his final match in 2018. John Motsen was known for having a
memorable turn of phrase. And there it is, the crazy gang have beaten the
Culture Club. It's dramatic, it's delightful, it's Denmark who are the European
champions. John Motsen, who has died at the age of 77, BBC News. Now on Radio 4
it's time for You and Yours with Winford Robinson. Good afternoon, thank you for
having me. Yes, I don't feel it. I felt compelled to do so. I feel that
generally when you're fortunate enough to be successful, there's an obligation
to be of service. And for me, that obligation was more apparent because I was in
spaces where I felt I was unrepresented. And I'd come across people that would
ask me, how did you do it? And they're in itself presenting the opportunity to
fill in the gap, showing people how, empowering people and giving them the
opportunity so they feel they could compete and not be as insecure as they might
have done without necessarily having that skill set. So the gap that you were
trying to fill it was for what, information? No, so the gap I was filling was
under-representation and widening participation. So in law, people from poorer
social economic backgrounds and minoritised groups are often at a disadvantage
because there is a knowledge gap, a resource gap, a network gap. And there is a
culture of soft skills and etiquette that they aren't necessarily taught when
they're going through the schooling system that those from traditional
backgrounds are. And what I decided to do was to create an organisation that
provided opportunities, events and programmes that gave people that access to
participate and pursue a career in law. As the organisation has developed, we
have widened the work that we do and it attempts to make the law more accessible
in all of its facets. Tell me how you got it off the ground then. There you
were, you were 27. The first thing I did is I went back to all my old schools.
So the first thing I did was I went back to my old schools and I shared my
story. I spoke to all of the students and the staff and told them about my
journey into law, told them about the difficulties that I faced and that I was
there to help if anybody was interested in pursuing a career in law. What
happened after that was that a lot of students were inspired to say they wanted
to help me. And that's how the team started to form because in its first
iteration, the organisation was just called Urban Lawyer in the singular. And it
became apparent to me that if I wanted to fill the gap and help as many people
as possible, I could only do that with a team. And then the organisation became
pluralised and it became Urban Lawyers. Do you employ anybody now on the
charity? No. So our next objective is to have employed staff. We're fortunate
enough that all of the volunteers are legal professionals that have full time
paid jobs. There are a number of students who are going through the training,
but at this stage, no. Tell me then practically how you helped because, gosh,
that is one big gap you were trying to fill. I mean, let's list that again. I
said, was it information, but it's much more than that. No, it's much more than
that. But the best way to do it is perhaps through an illustration of some of
the projects that we do. So, for example, we have a project with the fashion
brand Manolo Blonik, which is called the In-Law Program. And that program works
with kids in year 10 and year 11 and develops their soft skills. So we'll give
them skills on branding, presentation. They'll also be given workshops around CV
and interviewing. So people will come in, give them mock interviews, give them
tips and advice. They then have an immersion day where they get to go into a
solicitor's firm, get to speak to all members of staff. So not only the
solicitors, but everybody involved in the operational process of the business.
They do the same thing with the barristers chambers, and then they get to see
how lawyers work within the framework of a business too. And that's a seven
module program. And that targets schools that aren't necessarily doing as well
as others in poor areas. So that's one example. The second example is that we'll
work with law firms. So we have an event in two weeks time with a law firm
called Deck Arts. And they're keen at identifying students from non-traditional
backgrounds who wouldn't necessarily have the opportunity to obtain a training
contract. For those listening that are not familiar with the phrase, a training
contract is what's required for you to qualify as a solicitor. It's akin to an
apprenticeship that you need to formally complete the process of training. So
we're going to have an event with about 100 young people who have gone to non-
Russell Group universities, state schools who wouldn't necessarily feel that
they'd have an opportunity to be at a law firm. And they'll get the tips and
advice that they will need so they can apply in future and have the confidence
to feel that they can pursue a career in law. Just tell me back to the thing
that you said that is sponsored by Manolo Blanek. So do they pay for all of
that? For that project? Yeah. They contribute to some of it. And Deck Arts, do
they just put the other project on? Do they fund that? They funded that. You're
a big name now in the legal world. For urban lawyers, I suppose, primarily,
you've got an MBE for services to the community and to disadvantaged
communities. You're on the Sunday Times' alternative rich list of people who
have enriched other people's lives. Now, you don't just do urban lawyers, you
also do other voluntary work, other community roles. Your patron, for example,
of the Hackney Law Centre. Are you also a successful barrister? I'd like to
think so. Where do you find the time? I'd like to think so. I like to say to
people there's no such thing as balance, there's just work life choices and work
life consequences. So sometimes there are instances where there are things that
I'd love to do with the charity, but I don't have the capacity to do it because
I have to work. And then there may be moments where I'm unable to work because I
have to focus on the charity. So it's not a scenario where I'm balancing
everything at the same time and doing a great job at everything at the same
time. Unfortunately, no, there are work life choices and consequences. And it
means that at certain junctures in my life, I have to prioritise one over the
other. You're a criminal lawyer, aren't you? Yes. OK, we ask all our gapfinders
this. Looking back at what has happened with urban lawyers since you set it up,
what would you do differently? Has there been a big mistake? I think the biggest
mistake that I've made with urban lawyers, and it's bizarre because it depends
on how you perceive it, is perhaps having it volunteer based for so long and not
seeking funding and having employed members of staff because it'd make it much
easier. It is something that I am exploring this year actively to assist with
the growth of the organisation. But had I done that sooner, perhaps the impact
that we would have had would have been greater. It's 12 minutes past 12. You're
listening to You and Yours Gapfinders on BBC Radio 4. I'm Winifred Robinson.
Coming up after this programme is Slice Bread, presented by Greg Foote, and it
looks at the claims that are made about different products. Today it's about
hair conditioners and heat protectors. Are they worth buying? If you miss it,
Slice Bread is on BBC Sounds, and so are all the episodes of You and Yours,
including Gapfinders. On this programme, our Gapfinder today is Tunde Okawale.
He's the founder of a charity, urban lawyers, that helps young people from poor
and ethnic minority backgrounds into the legal profession. Tunde, let's talk
about your own background then. You're the oldest of four children. You grew up
on a council estate in East London. Your parents were immigrants. What was your
childhood like? Amazing. So I'd like to say that I was very fortunate in the
sense that although we didn't necessarily have the most money, my family were
very loving. They still are. They are responsible for my success and keeping me
grounded today. And most importantly, they had high expectations of me. So even
when I entered areas, spaces where there was a soft bigotry of low expectations,
my family reminded me that I was capable of achieving great things, and they
still to this day pushed me to fulfil my potential. You use that phrase soft
bigotry, and you have talked about that being what holds people from
disadvantaged backgrounds back. What exactly do you mean by that, soft bigotry?
Well, the soft bigotry of low expectations in the context that I'm using it
refers to micro aggressions, intensitivities, where people knowingly or
unconsciously impose limiting beliefs on people from poorer backgrounds and
minoritised groups, purely based on their own misguided belief that those
individuals are not capable of achieving certain things. To give me an example
of how that's happened to you. So growing up in school, a lot of the young black
males were encouraged to pursue careers in sport. I initially wanted to be a
professional athlete. I didn't have any aspirations to pursue a career in law.
And I'm not sure whether or not that thought or desire was something that I had,
or one that was passively programmed to me. And it's something that we see to
this day where people are encouraged to pursue careers. I'm not being
disparaging towards careers in sport or entertainment, but there are so many
opportunities and people shouldn't necessarily be guided softly through
misguided intentions. That they should pursue one career over another based on
someone's belief that someone is not capable or able to do something. Do you
think it's that when you go to a school in a poor area, none of the children
know anyone who's a barrister, none of the teachers maybe know anyone who has
ever been a barrister. So people choose or suggest careers that they have seen
and understand? I wouldn't use that as an excuse. It might be an explanation for
the behaviour, but it doesn't justify it. Because just because you don't know
anyone that's done anything doesn't mean that you should then transpose that
limiting belief onto people that you're supposed to be inspiring to be the next
and best generation. I'll give an example. We have a programme that we're
launching at the end of the year where we are sending barristers into schools
for that very reason. So there's a barristers chambers that we're working with
called 4PB. They do predominantly family law. Their barristers will be going
into schools in and around London for the remainder of the year, trying to
dispel that myth just in case there are teachers reinforcing this soft bigotry
of low expectations. What teachers should be doing and what schools should be
doing is seeking opportunities and ways to raise the aspirations of the students
that attend there. The very purpose of the whole educational system should be
empowering young people and not necessarily limiting what their opportunities
are. There should be these as what this is what's available for you. And if we
can't assist, let's find someone who can. Were you clever at school? Define
clever. OK. Did you get good exam results? Did you get good enough exam results
to get into a Russell Group University? I didn't know, but I wouldn't
necessarily attribute it to being clever. At the time where I was doing my
undergraduate studies, I was undertaking a number of part time jobs and I didn't
necessarily allocate as much time to my studies as I should have done. And that
is a common occurrence for a lot of people from non-traditional backgrounds.
They have a number of competing commitments and responsibilities, which means
that they can't necessarily give themselves fully to their academic studies.
Now, it's not easy to become a barrister. It isn't even easy to find out how you
become a barrister. So how did you manage it then without a first from a top
flight university, without any connections, without any bank of mum and dad to
help you out? It was very difficult. I ask myself that same question sometimes.
I was fortunate at every stage of my career and even now to find at least one
person that believed in me and saw that I could actually do it. So the first
person that believed in me was a lecturer at university called Edwin Schwartz
and him giving me that belief was enough because he then directed me to someone
else who might be able to assist me. And I feel that one of the things that
people who don't necessarily have the grades or have the background need to do
is be very clear about where it is that they want to go. And I use this analogy
in a sense of success in journeys generally. If I was to get out of a train
station and ask a stranger, where's the nearest building, the stranger would
look at me a bit bizarre, but a lot of people approach their careers and life in
that way where they want to go somewhere, but they're not necessarily clear
about where exactly is they want to go. If you're pursuing a career in law, the
more specific you are, the easier it is for you to find someone who can direct
you and show you how to get there or for you to create your own map and navigate
your own way to get there. So that's how I did it. And in terms of law, I just
asked, I asked for help. I got my first work experience by asking a colleague in
Sainsbury's if they knew anyone that worked in law. And funny enough, their
friend's dad was a barrister and he gave me my first opportunity. Gosh, that was
as random as that. Well, I'd say more intentional because it was something that
I'd been doing for a long time and he was the only person that said yes. No,
what I mean is there was no structured. Sorry, what had I imagined? I imagined
that maybe you had done your pupilage with some kind of a bursary from one of
the big chambers. No. I mean, random in the sense that you just asked a friend
who happened to know someone whose dad was a barrister. No, no, no. So that gave
me my work experience. So after I had work experience, you still have to apply
for pupilage, which I did. So I applied for pupilage. I had multiple rejections.
I only had one interview. Once I got that interview, I did a good enough job for
them to give me a chance. So the only reason I made the reference to my friend's
dad is that he gave me my first work experience for me to get into the
profession. And you need work experience as part of the application process for
you to get in because you need to provide evidence that you know what a
barrister does and that you are well informed about what it takes to be a
barrister. I'm told that a lot of the law firms just throw off the pile of
applicants, anyone who didn't get a first. Do they still do that? No, I think
that if that was the case in the past, law firms and barrister chambers are
moving towards finding the best talent. And they are finding different and
alternative ways. And I'd like to say that as a result of organisations like
Urban Lawyers, we're not the only organisation that is in the past. We're not
the only organisation that contributes to the problem. And law firms, and
barrister chambers now are actively trying to find the best talent. A lot of
work still needs to be done, but there still does need to be recognition that
some progress has been made. Well, we ask all our gapfinders to nominate someone
who has their back. And you chose your friend, Daniel Ashville-Luisi. Now, he is
a star in his own right. He's an entrepreneur. He owns a construction, waste
management and concrete supply company, Ashville Inc. He has his own YouTube
channel with 200,000 subscribers. His weekly videos get hundreds of thousands of
views worldwide. And they are very funny. And Daniel, we've been watching them
all morning. They're quite addictive. I've seldom enjoyed my research so much.
So tell me, how did you and Tunde meet? Hi, firstly, thanks for having me. Oh,
you're welcome. Tunde and I met through a mutual friend who was friends with
Tunde and I believe Tunde had also done some work with him. And I'd like to
point out that when Tunde and I met, he at first he didn't like me. Why not?
What didn't he like about you? We didn't actually have an interaction and I was
running around with a lot of energy. And I always say Tunde is the best dressed
man I know. And I walked in. I walked into the place where we were going to be
recording and I saw how well dressed he was and he was a barrister. So with my
tomfoolery, I just kind of carried on with it. And I just assumed that he didn't
want to be involved. But after that, we went to an event together and actually
sat down and had a conversation. And I'm happy to say now he's one of my best
friends and closest advisors. So how close are you? How much do you see of each
other? How often do you talk? We tend to talk every day or every other day.
Really? Yeah, but we have very busy schedules so we can't often meet in person.
So we call it the download. So we do a download and reboot. So we call. One of
us goes first. We talk about everything that's happening. One will make a couple
of comments and suggestions and then we'll vice versa. Then we'll change and
we'll do it the other way, which I find very helpful. Why do you think Tunde
chose you as the person who has his back? I think that we inspire each other. I
look at how hard Tunde works and we have special things between us that people
don't understand. We have this thing where we like to catch each other out in
the morning. If one can message the other one and the other one isn't awake yet,
that means that you're slipping. So we'll be WhatsApping each other at 4.55. You
would sleep. And he'll message me back and say, don't be silly. What's the best
piece of advice you have ever given to Tunde? Well, I'd say, well, I believe
it's the best piece of advice, but I'm not sure it is the best piece of advice.
I believe the best piece of advice I've given to Tunde is that he should be a
judge. I believe he has the capability and as a close friend of mine, I would
love to see him as a judge. And I think he'd be a fantastic judge, but he has so
many options in his life and he has so many different routes. He can go down.
He's focusing on so many areas. I'm not sure if that's the path that he's going
to take at the moment. What would you say is the best piece of advice he's ever
given you, Daniel? The best piece of advice he's ever given me. Wow. Smarten up,
obviously, in your dress. Yes, yes, yes. Dress a little bit smarter. Dress
accordingly. And once again, it's probably something that people are going to
say, that sounds a bit strange. But Tunde has a way of taking situations and
breaking them down and making and giving them to you so you understand them and
they're relevant to you. So I'm a massive Marvel fan and I was having a bit of
problems in my business. I was having a few problems with my mental health and
Tunde sat me down and he said to me, Daniel, imagine yourself as Thanos. You
haven't collected all your stones. You had your stones and you've lost them. We
need to get back your stones one by one so we can fully charge you back up to
your previous power. Is that a classical illusion, Thanos? Yeah, it's one of the
it's a superhero. OK, sorry. In order to be a full power, he has different
stones he has to collect. OK, I went and they broke it down to me like that. I
said, you're right. I mean, in my head, I started to break down. I need to do
this. I need to do this. I need to do this. And I'm happy to say it made a
massive difference to my life, my mental health, my physical health, everything.
And I can't thank him enough. We always ask the person who has the person's
back, you know, what they worry about if they think of them. You know, if you
think about Tunde, you think about having his back, you think about protecting
him. What worries you about him, anything? I would say what worries me about him
is the same thing that would probably worry him about me. We have a lot of jests
that, well, I'm never sleeping, I could note, but we're messaging each other at
ridiculous hours of the morning and the night. And I've never found a time when
Tunde is actually sleeping or resting and having downtime and like me, vice
versa. So he has all the capability in the world and he's going to achieve
fantastic things. But I just worry sometimes about how much is on his plate and
that possibly he may need some downtime sometimes. But then he would turn around
and say the exact same thing to me and I would say not required. So, you know,
Daniel Ashford, Luisi, thank you so, so much for coming on. And Tunde, at the
start, I asked our audience if they had any questions for you and they do have
some questions. Well, there's some fan mail coming in. I'll just give you an
example. David Long in Suffolk says, today's Gap Finder is the most
inspirational person I have ever heard on your programme. There's a question
from Keith Meaton. He says, do you Tunde think it's harder for poorer and
disabled people to get justice, solicit his fees are high and it's become harder
to get legal aid? Yes, I think unfortunately it is harder for them to get
justice. But it shouldn't discourage them from seeking it. Unfortunately, we
haven't created enough opportunities and initiatives to remedy that. But you
know, you may have inspired me and given me an idea to think of a new project.
Tunde, we ask all our Gap Finders this one as well. I asked you about your
biggest failure, biggest regret with urban lawyers and you said not having paid
staff sooner. What would you say has been your biggest success with it? My
biggest success with urban lawyers is urban lawyers. Like being it is going to
be its 13th year in September. The fact that it's still running despite all of
the various changes in the legal system and in the world generally. I think the
biggest success is it's still running and that the people make it successful.
Although I'm here as the founder and the brainchild of it, without the
volunteers and the people that give up their time and that support the
organisation, it wouldn't exist. Your own website says that you've helped 7000
young students get on the career ladder into law. I need to update that. It's
more than that. Thanks for the reminder. How many would you say? How many more?
I'd say at least double that easily. Okay, so you've been going for 12 years.
7000 we worked at would have been just under 600 a year. So it's over a thousand
a year. There are an awful lot of great charities that struggle to keep going
because the money is never secure, is it? Are you financially secure? If you're
offering me more money, I will take it happily. Urban lawyers, I wouldn't say
financially secure because we get drips and drabs in from organisations that
want to work with us and that choose to fund us. But the reason why we've been
so successful is that we don't rely on it. So a lot of the events and
initiatives we've done haven't had any funding. And that's been part of the
reason why it's been able to go on for so long, because we haven't been reliant
solely on funding and sourcing funding. So although I've complained about it, in
some ways it's been beneficial to us. Being in the legal profession, surrounded
by barristers, some people say that rich people don't give money away. It's poor
people who give their money away. Rich people give their time away. Is that
true? No, I think that we should avoid broad generalisations about rich and
poor. I just feel that some people are very generous and some people are not.
Some of them happen to be rich and some of them happen to be poor. I don't think
that, you know, if you found like 10 poor people, they're all going to
necessarily be more generous than 10 wealthy people. I feel that people tend to
be generous towards things that they're passionate about and that they can
identify with. And I tend to find that and a lot of times people thought, oh my
God, you're not generous. But if someone can't identify with a cause or they
don't necessarily feel passionate about it, then they're unlikely to support it.
We've just got a few seconds left. So just a few sentences. Is there another gap
you'd like to fill, another thing you're desperate to do? Yes, but I need to
finish my work of Urban Lawyers first. OK, that's for another programme. Tunde
Oke Mwale, founder of Urban Lawyers. Thank you so much for coming on. Thank you.
Today's producer was Tara Holmes. The studio manager was Jonathan Esp. Slice
breads coming up next. Greg Foote rinses out the claims around hair conditioners
and heat protection products. Can they deliver smoother, shinier hair? And can
you prevent heat damage with styling? So find out next. Hi, Greg. So I was
washing my hair after your fabulous shampoo episode and I wanted to know what is
the actual point of conditioner? What does it do to your hair? You get all sorts
of different things promised on the different bottles like volumising or
softness. But do they actually do anything? And there are lots of leave in
conditioners and leave in treatments. So are they better than the ones that you
would use in the shower and then rinse off? Thank you. And to add something else
into this investigation, here's Franziska Wettstein from Switzerland. Hi, Greg.
I was wondering, could you also maybe look into heat protection products? I was
wondering about those bodies actually in them. Do they give our hair any
protection against heat at all? And if so, is there a difference depending on
what sort of product you use, like, for example, a cream or a spray? Thanks for
looking into that. And I look forward to hearing what you found out. So two
types of hair product under the microscope today. Conditioners look to normally
cost around two to four pounds a bottle. The leave in ones seem to be double
that, though. And heat protection sprays and creams I saw on sale for around
seven to eight pounds. They did, however, see a conditioner and a heat
protection oil each on sale for almost 30 quid. Are they worth it? Well, let's
find out. I'm going to call up the same two experts from the shampoo episode,
starting with a trichologist from the Fulham Scalp and Hair Clinic, Eleanor
Richardson. Hello. Good to see you again. You're back in the storeroom. I'm back
in the storeroom. Amazing. So when we spoke last time, we were speaking about
shampoo. This time it's all about conditioner. You told me last time that the
hair grows out of the hair follicles that are in our scalp, that it's down to
genetics. How it grows, the shape and the curl of the hair. Shampoo's job is to
clean that hair. What's conditioner used for? So conditioners have been brought
in to basically help our hair last for as long as possible in the best condition
possible. The action of conditioner is to deposit onto the hair. So very
different from shampoo's. Shampoo's are all about lifting off, removing debris,
dirt, oil. But conditioners, their role is to deposit on conditioning agents.
And they are there to help smooth down that outer layer of the hair shaft, that
cuticle layer that we talked about before. Yeah. Yeah. You explained those
really nicely as well. You said they're like slates on a roof and that those
slates can open up. A bit, say if your hair is curly or if those cuticles become
damaged, moisture can be lost. Conditioning agents deposit really well and fill
in the gaps where we've had little bits of damage or cracks to the cuticle. And
that essentially allows us to have the smoothest outer layer of the cuticle
possible, which isn't losing moisture, but also isn't causing things like
friction and therefore tangles. So if different types of hair are more prone to
losing moisture, for example, curly hair, do you need different types of
conditioner for those different types of hair? I would say yes. The difference
you're kind of looking for is a richer amount of conditioning agents in the
hair. But as a result of that, you may find that the hair has got more slip to
it, which a lot of people will be looking for. If, however, we used it on a
European head of hair, which is quite fine, quite thin, you're going to find the
hair feeling quite greasy very quickly. So it isn't a case of the more
conditioning agents in your conditioner, the better. Too many conditioning
agents means that the volume that we see visually is reduced a little bit. So
hair lies flatter, smoother, slipped. Because listener Katie wants to know about
some of these claims that conditioner are making on the bottle and one of them
is volumizing. But it sounds like if you use too much, it's going to be the
opposite. So a volumizing conditioner will probably be a conditioner that
actually doesn't contain too many conditioning agents in it to begin with. So
what about those other claims? Can conditioner leave your hair shinier? Can it
leave it softer? How is it doing that? It just sounds like it's covering the
hair follicle and everything's slipping around easier. I mean, you pretty bang
on the money there, Greg. So let's break it down. Straight hair that has been
undamaged and has a really smooth cuticle layer on the outside of it is going to
reflect like the best and is going to look shiny, probably without much effort,
to be honest. The curlier the hair, the less easily it's going to reflect light
well. And so to a degree, you're going to have some hair types that are never
going to look shiny. And to try and persuade them that a product can make it
shiny is to persuade an awful lot. Now, how much should we use? Because in the
shampoo episode, it sounded like we should all use less shampoo, was your
advice. And how long should it be on the hair for? For most people, if they've
got any bit of sort of color damage, any bit of heat damage, or they're using
color and heat regularly, they want to be applying the conditioner to the areas
that have been damaged, right? Or have had that exposure. So if you've got color
from the roots all the way down to the tips, I would be conditioning the whole
of the head of hair. If you have only had no color to the hair, you rarely use
heat. For the hairs quite long, you've got old hair, mainly towards the ends of
your hair, that have just had generally more wear and tear. So they're going to
need a bit more help. So I would say focus mid length downwards. But with any
conditioner, you should be able to sort of put it all over the hair, be able to
rinse it off, and it not cause any damage. But if you want to save money on your
product, put it where it's needed. Put it where it's needed, exactly. Something
else that listener Katie wants to know is whether the leave in ones work better
than those that you rinse straight off in the shower. One of the leave in
products even says, stop rinsing the goodness off. Should you do that? Should
you stop rinsing the goodness off? If a product has been designed to be rinsed
off, rinse it off. But would you get more benefit from a leave in conditioner
because it can be in contact for longer than a rinse off conditioner? Not
necessarily. If your hair is particularly damaged and you're noticing that it is
prone to dryness, to tangling, to breakage, that's when actually a leave in
conditioner can really provide some extra support on the in between days when
you haven't washed your hair. Equally, if your hair is prone to frizz, so it's
prone to taking in moisture, leave in conditioners can provide a little bit of
basically a film coverage to reduce the chance of that moisture coming into
contact. So they reduce the chance of frizz occurring. Okay, so for people with
those types of hair, it sounds like you'd recommend a leave in conditioner over
a rinse off one. I'd be working with both of them. So I'd still be conditioning
on my wash day, but I'd be topping up with a leave in. One product made what I
think is a fair point. They say using their leave in conditioner rather than a
rinse off one saves a lot of water. I guess, but a lot of people use them in
conjunction, right? So they're not necessarily discounting a wash day by using
leave in conditioner. So I don't know. It's a nice idea. Now, listener Francisco
wants to know about heat protection products. You've mentioned heat being
problematic. In fact, last time you said it was the number one thing that
damages our hair, especially those cuticles, our first line of defense. Tell me
more about what he actually does and tell me about this heat protection
products. What are they? What do they do? So with heat being applied to the
hair, you are temporarily breaking some bonds in that cortical layer, that
middle layer in the middle of the hair shaft. Equally, if we're using heat, we
are also putting a lot of pressure on that outer cuticle scale as well. Imagine
any material, if you apply a lot of heat to it, it's going to start to struggle.
It's a natural material ultimately. So we're not heat proof. We do catch fire.
And so will hair quite literally. It will start to burn if that heat is too
high. So I believe that's why these heat protection products have been
developed. The big kind of confusion, I think, with these products is that
they're providing ultimate protection from heat. But in reality, what we see is
that heat protection products tend to just reduce the amount of damage that
occurs. It doesn't reduce the damage 100%. So are they like oven gloves? You
don't burn when you grab that baking tray, but you still feel some heat. And if
that heat is going to cause damage, you're going to get minimal damage rather
than maximum damage. Exactly. So the quality of the heat protectant is going to
dictate how much protection you actually have. But remember, we're humans as
well. So we have to apply that heat protection. And if you're not applying it
evenly and it's not spread throughout the areas that heat is applied, you're
still going to get damage. And on the flip side, you want some of that heat in
order to style your hair. Yeah. If you want to change how your natural hair
texture is when you're styling it. And your advice, I'm sure, would be don't use
the heat to go with the natural style. Love your natural textures, everyone,
everyone. Eleanor, thanks so much. Great to chat again. Thank you very much,
Greg. Nice one. Cheers. Bye. Lots of the conditioners make a big deal of the
ingredients that they've got inside. So to find out what they are and what
purpose they each hold, I'm going to chat again with Professor of Pharmaceutical
Analysis within the School of Applied Sciences at Huddersfield University,
Professor Laura Waters. Hi, Laura. Nice to see you again. Hi, Greg. How are you
doing? Very well. Last time we chatted, you kindly told me about the surfactants
inside shampoo that help wash away dirt and grease on our hair. I've just spoken
to Eleanor, who told me that rather than doing a removal job like shampoo does,
conditioners are all about depositing conditioning agents on our hair. What are
they, please? When you wash hair, it tends to deprotonate, which basically means
it ends up negatively charged and that causes the tangles. So one of the
products in conditioners has a positive charge, which attaches to the hair. So
overall, it neutralizes that charge, it removes the issue, and so it stops it
tangling up. Wow. So what is it that's causing the softness then? These
compounds also have sort of another end to them and the other end of the
molecule. It's more like an oil, which overall act like a smoothing oily surface
with the oily end pointing outwards. That's what you can feel and that's what
you see. I've seen various oils mentioned on ingredients lists. Any benefits
from the likes of argan oil or jojoba oil? So in some of the more expensive
conditioners, you tend to find more quirky oils. But at the end of the day, if
you have any kind of oil, it's going to work just as well. The oil will act to
smooth the surface of the hair and it will keep the moisture in, it will stop
the moisture evaporating, so it will stop your hair drying out. A popular claim
on these conditioners, Laura, is that they can strengthen and repair your hair.
When I discussed that claim for shampoos, I heard that hair is essentially a
long strand of dead cells filled with the protein keratin. It's dead. There's no
blood flow. So it can't regenerate and repair. Is there anything different in
conditioners then to enable that? You do find that sometimes you have proteins
added in there. And some people believe that the proteins, if you put them onto
the surface, can sort of fix the keratin and make it stronger, which some people
claim can repair damage. I'm not so sure. There's enough evidence out there to
prove that. And what about the claims then that ingredients can penetrate to the
core of the hair and that that's where it does that strengthening and that
repairing? Is there any scientific evidence for claims like that? So hair is
sort of designed to not let chemicals in. In a way, it's a bit of a barrier,
like your skin. It's not easy for things to permeate through. So the concept
that something can permeate all the way through to the middle of your hair, I
think, is optimistic. It would be very, very difficult for it to in the one or
two minutes that people tend to leave conditioner on for it to penetrate very
far at all. What about with the leave-in products, though? Listener Katie wants
to know if they work better than the washout conditioners. If they're there for
longer, could they get deeper? Could they do more? I still don't think that they
would have the ability to get too far in because you're not putting that much of
the product onto your hair. You're only putting a thin layer. They're way more
expensive per volume than the washout conditioners, most are around 10 times the
price. Are the leave-ins more effective? I wouldn't say so, no. So if you
already have great hair, which is in good condition, then whether you use a
simple conditioner or a leave-in conditioner is not going to make that much
difference. It's for people who really need that extra conditioning, who don't
mind the leave-in product weighing down the hair. Those are the kinds of people
that should go for the leave-in products. Working down my list of conditioner
ingredients and their claims, what are your thoughts on antioxidants and biotin?
That's B7, right? Okay, yeah. Antioxidants will be in there to help the
longevity of the product. The biotin is a really interesting one. So in recent
years, there's been research that says if you increase biotin in your diet, that
will help improve the growth of your nails, the growth of your hair, the
thickness of your hair, things like that. It normally takes a month or two
within the diet before you'll start to see an improvement, but people do see
improvements. But the question is, if you're putting it on it, does it do the
same thing? Whether you get the same benefits from putting it into a product
that you put on your hair, I'm not entirely convinced myself that you would
still get that. I'd love to chat about heat protection products for listener,
Francisca. They look to have a lot of the same ingredients as conditioners, but
they promise to do something quite different. What is inside these creams and
these sprays to protect our hair from heat? They can be things such as polymers
or silicones, anything like that, really, which is going to add the layer on the
surface. They tend to have low thermal conductivity, which basically means
they're insulating. Something else they tend to do is they tend to dissipate the
heat more evenly along the hair shaft. Eleanor was concerned that you're
unlikely to get full coverage along that whole length of the hair. So some of
your hair is still going to be exposed to high heat. How much protection can
these products really give? That's a really good point. So you'd have to put
quite a lot on to ensure every single part of every single hair is going to be
protected. And you've also got to think of it a bit like when you use sunscreen,
that it doesn't stop the damage from the sun. It just increases the amount of
time that you can spend in the sun before the damage occurs. And it's the same
with your hair. Is there any difference in effectiveness between a cream and a
spray? Not as far as I know, and not that it has been shown scientifically. I
think it's personal preference, really. I suppose you could argue that the
sprays, because the particles are smaller, they're going to more evenly coat the
surface of the hair than a cream. If you have lots of crazy hair like mine, you
might find it quite hard with a cream to manage to get product in all of the
hair. So the sprays tend to be better for that kind of thing. But with
sunscreen, I tend to be able to know where the cream has gone better than I do a
spray. Final question then, Laura. It comes in two parts to this SBBS. Are
conditioners that are promising to detangle your hair, make it shinier, make it
smoother, are they worth it? Are they the best thing since sliced bread or
marketing BS? They're absolutely worth it. Some of the very, very expensive
conditioners, I would say, are no better than the average price conditioner. So
you don't need to spend a fortune. But scientifically, yes, they do change the
surface of your hair. They do help detangle your hair, which is going to make it
so much easier when you're trying to brush your hair, style your hair. They make
it look better. They make it feel better. When we chatted last time, you said
your choice of conditioner is much more important than your choice of shampoo.
So what should someone be looking out for when choosing a conditioner? It's
really hard because unless you're a chemist and know exactly what all of the
different chemicals on the back of the bottle actually mean, it is really hard.
And even then, you don't necessarily know how much of each oil is going to be in
the product. So it's a bit of a trial and error thing. I'd say it's definitely
worth using conditioner. And part two of the final question, heat protection
sprays and creams. Are they SB or BS? If you're going to be using heat on your
hair for styling, then you really do need to do something to try and minimize
the damage. So anything you can do to try and prevent that damage, I'd say, is
worth investing in. And even if you use a product to protect your hair, if you
use too high a temperature or if you apply that temperature for too long, it's
still not going to work. They all have limitations. You want to use the smallest
amount of heat that you can at the lowest temperature for the shortest amount of
time to do the least damage to your hair. Or just don't use heat. Or don't use
heat. Laura, thanks so much. Thanks, Greg. It's been great to talk to you. Bye.
Bye. And here's Trichologist Eleanor Richardson's take on the SBBS question. On
to the big final double question then. Conditioners that promise to volumize or
make your hair softer or shinier, are they worth it? Are they the best thing
since sliced bread or are they marketing BS? If your hair is longer or you put
it through quite a lot, you need to be using a conditioner because just sheer
wear and tear, heat, chemicals, color, all are going to take their toll on your
wonderful hair shafts. And you want them looking great and you want them
lasting. You want to decide when you cut your hair, not your hair breaking off
on its own. I don't use conditioner. This hair is too short, right? You could
use conditioner if you're wanting more shine with your hair. If you're noticing
that there's a bit too much frizz, certainly it doesn't matter necessarily about
length. It is going to matter more about does the hair need it as much. Well,
that's what I was wondering. Is this fully aesthetic? Does my hair actually need
conditioner? No. If you're really not doing much to your hair, so there's no
heat damage going on now and then it gets a brush through, but it's having a
good old clean regularly. Do you need conditioner? No, your hair is going to be
fine. And heat protection products that are promising to prevent heat damage,
are they SB or BS? I would say we're more on the BS side for heat protection
products, just in terms of their claims. They're claiming a lot. And truly,
there's a lot of human error that can creep into that, that can make it pretty
useless or certainly not eliminate the damage completely. Right, let's call up
listeners Katie and Francisca. Hello, both. Hi. Hello. Katie, you're in Kenya,
Francisca, you're in Switzerland. That's right. What an international call, hey?
Amazing. Great to have you both here. Right, let me try to summarize what I've
been discovering over the last week. So, Katie, you asked, what is the point of
conditioner? What does it actually do to your hair, right? Yes. It's all about
depositing what are called conditioning agents onto your hair, and they do a few
different things. So, I'm not sure if either of you feel that your hair gets
frizzy or tangled. Yeah, definitely. Yes, me too. So, some of that can be caused
by damaged hair. But some of it can be caused by, essentially, static negative
charge, like when you rub a balloon against your hair. Have you done that? Yeah,
of course. Not regularly. It's not part of my daily habit. So, conditioners
contain molecules that get attracted to the negative charge. They, essentially,
cancel it out, and that can reduce your tangles and your frizz. The other end of
those molecules are oily, and they point out, they kind of stick out from your
hair, and they make it silky smooth to touch. Ah. Lots of the claims of the
conditioners is that they'll make it shiny, or that they'll offer you
protection. So, how does that work? So, those oils, they can help smooth down
the outer cuticle tiles, essentially, that protect your hair. And that can have
a couple of benefits. So, one, flattening those cuticles means that there's less
chance of moisture getting into or out of your hair, and that can protect your
hair. Okay. And the flatter those cuticles are, the more light can bounce off
them. So, the conditions can make your hair shinier, which is, of course, what
we see. Yeah, okay. But one place where the evidence doesn't appear to be very
strong is with their claims of strengthening or repairing. They might fill the
cracks on the surface of the cuticles, but the experts that I spoke to doubt
that they're going to permeate very deeply down into the hair shaft. I think a
great analogy is thinking of it like a sculpture, and you could put polyfiller
on the outside, which would kind of smooth it down and make it kind of look
better, and you could potentially kind of go in and build a bit of scaffolding
around it or kind of make the structure a bit stronger inside, but you're not
going to do anything to the concrete itself. But do you have to keep the product
in your hair? So, this is the one you want to know about, whether leave-in
products work better than the ones you just rinse off in the shower. Exactly.
Not necessarily. Leaving them on there rather than washing them off, that could
leave a kind of a protective film, and that could continue to stop that moisture
effect, so that could protect your hair from daily wear and tear. Okay. The
advice was to not just use leave-in or wash out, but if your hair needs it, use
both. Okay, thank you. You also asked about volumizing. Yes. I kind of fill the
juries out on that one, because if you have light hair, then actually depositing
conditioning agents onto it could weigh your hair down. Yeah, yeah, I can really
see how that would happen. When I asked the experts whether it was SB or BS,
they were both like, SB, because it does do these things, you know, it can help
detangle and defrizz. It can smooth. It can protect. It can make it shinier. You
know, it could potentially strengthen it. It's not going to repair in the way
that we want it to repair, because hair is dead. But I was like, do I need to
use it? And they said, well, you don't need to. It's essentially aesthetics. Oh,
okay. So, if you don't have hair that's prone to moisture loss or gain, if it's
not regularly damaged, then for just wear and tear, you don't need to have
conditioner, or you could just use it on the tips where there is that wear and
tear, essentially. So, what do you think, Katie? Does conditioner get the thumbs
up, or are you going to ditch it? No, definite thumbs up after all of that.
That's a great one to take away and invest in some more conditioner. And it is a
step I've skipped. So, perhaps I need to show my hair a bit more love with a bit
more conditioner time in the shower. Francisca, you've been sat there listening
to this. Do you use conditioner? Will you continue to use it? Of course,
regularly. Of course. And I will conditioner, of course. You asked about heat
protection products. The number one threat to our hair, I was told. Do you put a
lot of heat on your hair? Yeah, I blow dry and I straighten my hair, so a lot of
heat there. So, can it offer protection against heat? The answer is yes. The
silicones and the polymers inside can help insulate the hair from the heat. But
there are two things that you need to consider here. Firstly, you're not going
to be able to cover every hair fully in product. So, you can't protect your hair
100%. Probably not. And then secondly, with the bits that are covered in
product, it doesn't prevent 100% of that heat getting to the hair. Oh, I see. If
there is heat involved, it's definitely recommended to use a heat protection
product. The preference would be to not use heat on your hair, it sounds like.
Well, it's not an option, is it? But I was wondering whether there's a
difference depending on what sort of product you use, like a cream or a spray.
One of the experts said, well, look, spray particles are smaller, so they could
coat the surface of the hair more evenly than a cream. I see. So, that's really
it on the heat protection products. It's awesome. I'll continue using them. And
I'm so glad that I can protect my hair at least somewhat. Somewhat. I think that
somewhat is the key there, isn't it? You've just got to go into it kind of eyes
wide open, try to use less heat if you can, be wary of it, use these products
but don't expect them to give you full coverage protection. But if not using
heat is not an option, then that might also be where the conditioner comes in,
to make sure you're kind of protecting it and looking after it, you know, after
you've been damaging it with the heat. Exactly, yeah. Thank you both. Thanks for
getting in touch. Really appreciate it. Yeah, thank you. Pleasure. Thanks both.
Bye. See you. That is it from me this week. Next week, I'm going to have a lie
down. To investigate mattresses, memory foam, coil sprung, gel, what's the
difference? And with them costing anything from £200 to £2,000, does spending
more get you a better night's sleep? I'll be finding out. See you. Sliced Bread
was presented by Greg Foote. The producer was Kate Holdsworth. The World at One
is next on Radio 4. Sarah Montague standing by for that. But first, let's join
Elizabeth Rizzini at the BBC Weather Centre for the latest this lunchtime. Hi,
Elizabeth. Hello, thank you, Ron. Well, for most of us today, it's a much more
settled day of weather following yesterday's rain. But the exception to that is
across northwest Scotland, where we've got outbreaks of rain just moving
southwards through the rest of the afternoon, southwards and eastwards, really.
It's clouding over in eastern Scotland and in northern Ireland, but still some
brighter spells hanging on, with a brisk northwesterly wind here, gales
developing later on through the day across the northern isles and Shetlands.
Towards southern England, the West Country, central southern England and
southeast England, then it's cloudy, some outbreaks of drizzle earlier on, but
that cloud retreats southwards for the rest of the afternoon, so we will start
to see something a bit brighter develop here, some brighter spells, even a bit
of sunshine emerging for many. But that leaves us, of course, with a lovely
slice of sunshine for much of the rest of us, the central sways, of the UK,
particularly northwest England, the Midlands and Wales, where it's likely to
continue and also turn brighter for parts of east Anglia too. Temperatures
generally round about the seasonal average between seven and nine degrees
Celsius, double figures locally across Scotland and northern England, but we do
have a bit of wind shield factor in as well. Overnight tonight, everything
including the cloud, the outbreaks of petering rain just pushes its way
southwards. The skies will stay clearest for longest across southern counties of
England, and it's here where we may well see a touch of frost into tomorrow
morning. Elsewhere from the Midlands northwards, then we are expecting it to be
frost free. Tomorrow, our cold front sinks southwards, it introduces more cloud
into southern England and Wales, sunny spells developing for most of northern
England and Scotland, also northern Ireland. We could just see one or two
showers here maybe, but plenty of dry weather, always a chance too that some of
those showers could turn a bit wintry, especially over the hills of Scotland
tomorrow, but there will tend to be fairly light in nature. It's quite windy
towards eastern coastal areas tomorrow, with gusts of wind of around 30 to 40
miles per hour, a little bit less windy further west. Temperatures generally a
little higher, between eight and 11 degrees Celsius, but of course, you'll have
to factor in a bit of added wind chill. It's largely dry over the weekend.
Elizabeth, thanks very much. Elizabeth Ritsini at the BBC Weather Centre. As we
approach the anniversary of Russia's invasion of Ukraine, Jim Nachty has been
asking what the future might hold. The world looks to the battlefields of
Ukraine and asks how and when will it end? Both sides speak of all-out victory.
We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third-
party services and platforms, and the BBC stream you are currently listening to
will stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart
speaker and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're
listening to the BBC live stream, please contact the manufacturer. If you're
listening on web or mobile, the website is available to stream on BBC Sounds.