TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-08H35M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 But you can't do it. Yeah, definitely I cannot do that anymore because I do
understand that everything can be happened there and I don't want a risk. It's
dangerous. Definitely, definitely from different perspectives. He shows me the
border where the odd lorry comes through the barriers, a fraction of the trade,
a fraction of the traffic that occurred before the war. Years ago for your
parents, would they have come and gone between Russia and Estonia all the time?
Yeah, it was actually this way and it was many, many decades ago it was even a
big business here. For us it was much more easier to buy some cigarettes and
alcohol there or gasoline and then for them it is much more cheaper to buy some
Tommy Hilfiger clothes here, for example, some European brands. Down by the
river, despite the bitter cold, the thick snow, some people are going for an
evening promenade. I stop a few just underneath that friendship bridge to ask
them how their lives have changed since the war between Russia just over the
river and Ukraine. I know my friends have a problem maybe with their family but
because they are Russian and different generation, yes? So older people who are
Russian have more sympathy with with Moscow. Yes. And is that a painful division
between people who think of themselves as Estonian and people who think of
themselves as Russian? I heard yes. Estonian Russians, because they are treated
badly, that they are Russians and all Russians are now bad people. Has it
changed your life in any way here in this city? Okay, so his family members in
Russia, they said that he is a traitor. Because he is a citizen of Estonia. They
say you're a traitor? Yes. Is it painful to be called a traitor by your friends,
your family? It's not very nice feeling. Would your mother, would your father
tend to see something from a Russian perspective when it comes to this war? We
were arguing quite a lot with my parents for the first days when my mother was
saying me that this is propaganda of Ukraine, that there is no Russian soldiers
at all in Ukraine and so on. Do you see Russia as a threat? Well Putin has
started to talk about the Narva sometimes. He talked about this city and he went
right back to Peter the Great. The rhetorics were the same as about the Crimea,
that it was a land of Russia. And he mentioned Narva and when he is mentioning
Narva in a way of the war of what is happening right now in Ukraine, of course
everybody is starting to shake like and think okay what will be the next step?
Will he come to Narva? Welcome aboard the express train to Tallinn. This train
stops only a few feet giving you the blackberry. Probably the most remarkable
day in my two years here was standing on Independence Square in Tallinn during
the Independence Day parade. Colonel Dye Bevan is commander of the UK
contribution to what's called NATO's enhanced forward presence. And he was
standing there next to 10,000 Estonians and they had one eye on what was going
on in the parade with all the Allied soldiers alongside the Estonian Defence
Forces marching in front of the president and their other eye was on their
telephones watching the news of the Russian invasion of Ukraine and it was an
extraordinary moment. Back at home Russia can feel a very very long way away.
For you commanding troops here in Estonia and in Poland do you feel like you're
on the front line? Absolutely so Estonia is only about 300 kilometers from east
to west so we are in you know weapons effects range of many of the Russian
weapons so if you speak to an Estonian they very much feel that they are on
Europe and NATO's eastern flank. The base in Tapper is only a couple of hours
away from the Russian border so we are very very much you know on that front
line and that pervades across the entirety of our mentality. I've come to the
headquarters of the Estonian Defence Forces here in the center of Tallinn to
meet the commander of their forces General Vejko Velopama commander of the
Estonian Defence Division. Do you feel as a country that you are on permanent
standby for the possibility at least of an attack? Absolutely there is no
question about it we have just one single existential threat and this threat is
called Russia. Is that because you as an Estonian maybe all Estonians still
remember the history still remember what their mother's father's grandparents
went through when this country was occupied by Russia? Yes again absolutely so
there are vivid memories of Soviet occupation and of course Soviet occupation so
to say 1980s was nowhere similar to what happened in 1940s and 1950s we all
understand that there is no desire to go back and I think this memory is passed
to to a younger generation. In the Estonian capital Tallinn the invasion of
Ukraine was not some war in a distant country of which they knew little it was
everything they'd warned of everything they feared everything they had already
experienced this is a country that was occupied by Soviet forces for decades
it's a country which every family from the Prime Minister down has stories to
tell of the hardship the persecution often the death of their own families at
the hands of those Russian forces and so it was that on February the 24th 2022
the day of the invasion but also the day in which Estonia celebrates its
independence people focused on what had been and what might still reoccur. At
this year's Estonian Independence Day celebrations the head of NATO will be in
attendance to head two of the European Commission I'll be speaking to the
Estonian Prime Minister at 10 past 8 she everyone else in this region right
across the world are waiting for the words of President Putin in his State of
the Union speech in Moscow this morning remember that a couple of days before
the invasion of Ukraine was a major speech by President Putin Steve Rosenberg
will be monitoring that for us he's our Russia editor and joins us now what
might we expect Steve well I can tell you what won't be in the speech I mean
based on things that President Putin has said comments that he's made in recent
weeks there won't be any hint of remorse or regrets or any admission that he the
president of Russia made a mistake a giant miscalculation when he launched what
he still calls the special military operation contrition Putin doesn't do that
instead what we're much more likely to hear again I think is the Kremlin leader
trying to justify the invasion it's another opportunity for Vladimir Putin to
repeat the the Kremlin narrative the false narrative according to which it was
Ukraine it was America it was NATO that started this war and that Russia is the
victim Russia is under attack from the collective West which is out to destroy
it and that helps the Kremlin explain to the Russian people why even after a
year it has been unable to complete this special operation something curious
going on here Steve it seems to me the strident rhetoric by both sides Biden
here in Warsaw going to declare that this is a battle between democracy and
autocracy president Putin to justify his actions and yet they talk did they buy
the hotline in order to say our man's gonna be in Kiev don't bomb is this a
relationship like the Cold War they both know they don't want to tread over a
line yes I mean I don't think that Vladimir Putin wants a world war he doesn't
want to go to war directly with NATO and therefore there was some communication
before President Biden arrived in Kiev interestingly the same media here in
Russia has been very dismissive of the Biden visit and he's been mocking in its
tone for example this morning's comes from Olskaya Pravda newspaper which is
very pro Kremlin it claims that the US president only went to Kiev to help
himself get reelected and it it likens Biden and Zelensky to a headmaster
sitting with his pupil and look at the headline in the government paper they see
skig as yet today inspector Joe who's come to demand results from Ukraine from
all the weapons it has supplied that that's the general tone here and the story
was buried very low down in the the main Russian TV bulletins last night Steve
Rosenberg in Moscow thank you quarter to eight let's have a look at the papers
and here after the discovery of Nicola bully's body was confirmed her images
again on many of the front pages this morning and there's a piece inside the
Guardian from Josh Halliday the north of England correspondent that really lays
bare what the people of her home village of st. Michael's as well as her family
went through in the 23 days before her going missing in the body being found he
writes that even on Sunday afternoon ghoulish day-trippers were seen smiling and
taking selfies at the Riverside bench where the mystery began on Friday the 27th
of January the village was overrun with crime tourists and tick tockers posting
macabre updates to their thousands of followers ambushing local people filming
the area with drones trampling over gardens amethyst snoose sleuths sorry
snooping around at night when police were less visible the owner of the local
petrol station was asked for directions to Nicola's bench by someone who drove
80 miles from Carlyle with her children she no longer lets outsiders use the
customer toilet after it was smashed up last week and there are also details
about some of the online gatherings and web chats that happened where people
shared all sorts of conspiracy theories about the disappearance including a
participant who said he was a military veteran hinting that he had been keeping
watch on the family home to monitor their movements we will be talking more
about this in it and indeed about newspaper and broadcaster coverage of the
story after eight o'clock images of Joe Biden on the front pages of most Polish
newspapers huge anticipation here in Warsaw of the speech that he's going to
deliver later today with parallels being drawn between that and the historic
speech by JFK president Kennedy by the Berlin Wall in the British papers inside
there is some skepticism about what lies beneath the symbolism John Bolton no
friend of Joe Biden's of course a former US National Security adviser worked for
Donald Trump and presidents Bush in the past says a list of weapon systems is
not a strategy we need an articulable strategy he says to deal with the NATO
public so growing tired of yet another endless war inside the Times Michael
Binion notes the importance of the present presence in Moscow of one of
president G's closest advisers the headline on the piece Biden and G are
treading softly to contain the conflict in Ukraine and Binion observes that the
US is not at war with Russia however closely it may be involved in arming and
helping Ukraine the time is now 13 minutes to eight time for thought for the day
and our speaker this morning in the studio here is the Reverend Dr. Giles Fraser
vicar of St. Anne's Church in Q morning Giles good morning to you perhaps I
ought to preface my remarks this morning with a trigger warning I'm going to be
using the F word yes today is Mardi Gras which in French means fat Tuesday it's
the day we stock up on carbohydrates like pancakes before the beginning of Lent
but fat apparently is a word we should no longer be using in a public place
sensitivity readers have edited out such words from role dials children's books
or gustus gloop is no longer enormously fat now he's simply enormous which may
or not be any thinner the argument of course is that our moral sensitivities
change and so inevitably does what we deem acceptable or unacceptable but I
still find it hard to appreciate the logic dials references to wonky noses
remain unexpunged despite being an obviously anti-semitic trope used by a
notoriously anti-semitic writer where's the consistency heaven knows of course
what sensitivity readers would make of the Bible it's a collection of books
replete with lots of nasty bits perhaps not so much about fat shaming but there
is murder and incest and all kinds of horrific violence but I do think the nasty
bits are really rather important to include not obviously as an encouragement to
behave in such a way but as an acknowledgement that we live in a world in which
such things exist and furthermore that if God is going to be of any use to us
then he has to manifest himself in the midst of a world in which terror is real
a sanitized Bible is no good to anyone the real problem I think is not so much
about what books say but more about how we've learned or not learned to read
them texts shape our mental world of course they do but one of the most
important aspects of education is to develop techniques of reading that both
enter into the imaginative world of the text but also place us at some degree of
critical distance from it we interrogate them just as they interrogate us indeed
in my view sensitivity readers and religious fundamentalists share an unlikely
similarity they both imagine texts that overwhelm us that demand our compliance
over and against which we are helpless by contrast serious religious traditions
have long taught people how to read and I don't just mean the simple phonics of
the thing but how to have a critical conversation with the text whether it be
the rabbis continuously studying Talmud or monks engaging with the beauty of
illustrated manuscripts words open up the world in all its glory and darkness
not close it down my question with sensitivity readers is not so much about
whether they disrespect the text it's rather more about whether they disrespect
the reader that was thought for the day with the Reverend dr. Giles Fraser it is
now ten to eight with the installation of prepayment meters across Great Britain
currently suspended after the Times investigation into contractors for British
gas and their actions the energy regulator off Jim is announcing details today
of its investigation into the company British gas and also a review of the rules
around prepayment meters and Jonathan Brady who's the chief executive of off Jim
is here in the studio morning John morning when you saw last year the figures on
court applications for warrants to install prepayment meters shooting up what
did you think was going on so look we have been working on the issue of
vulnerability actually including the installation of prepayment meters since the
middle of last year when we began to see big changes and if you look across the
country and look at what's happening to families right now the situation is
despite huge government support there are many many families who simply cannot
afford to pay their energy bill now I've spoken to many of those families and
the thing I would say to the companies is when the families in that situation
that is incredibly distressing and before we get to the rules and regulations
around what should happen those families need to be treated with compassion and
professionalism so what we've been concerned about I just want to do the figures
so there were 367 thousand one hundred and forty applications yes last year
almost all of them were approved by the courts did you think then when you
looked at those figures that all of those households were within the criteria on
vulnerability so what we said to the companies really clearly is you should be
following the criteria that we have and we said to the companies we're not not
only on prepayment meters we looked across the board on how they're treating
vulnerable families so we reviewed all of the industry and we said to them
before someone even gets there you need to make sure you're identifying their
vulnerabilities you're making sure you work with them really closely to get them
on an affordable repayment plan if that's possible and we reiterated the rules
to the companies late last year to tell them exactly what they should be doing
you couldn't have done that thoroughly enough could you because if you had if
you had really put sufficient pressure on the companies and what we discovered
through the Times investigation the way that bailiffs were acting would have
come to a stop well clearly something has gone wrong in British Gas and what
we're announcing today is a comprehensive independent wide-ranging review into
what's happened there and we're also as we announced in January of this year
before the Times investigation carrying out an investigation across the industry
to check whether those rules have been followed now to be clear if we find that
those rules haven't been followed those companies will be forced to make the
dress and that's highly likely to mean they will have to put that meter right
they will have to pay compensation and if it's systematic there will be fines
for those companies you had concerns last year you asked questions you did not
however suspend the installation of prepayment meters until after the Times
reported what they did so the installation of prepayment meters is protected in
law so following the Times investigation we said to the industry we simply
cannot continue in the way we are now but it's a temporary suspension while we
look at the rules and we look at the behavior of the suppliers involved but the
one thing I do want to say to the companies is these processes will take time
we're a regulator we have to base what we do on evidence but don't wait for the
off-gen process if you know people have had a prepayment meter inappropriately
install fix it now that means going back to that customer asking them whether
they want to continue on that meeting if they don't change that meter and offer
them compensation inappropriate but we are going to investigate but companies
don't need to wait for us to be left your own devices you wouldn't have known
what we what we do now through the Times we know you were were you asking for
example whether any of the companies had contractors who were incentivizing the
installment of these meters so we looked at all the systems and the processes of
the companies we also laid out the rules really clear to the companies and
earlier this year before the Times investigation we launched an investigation
across the market and said to the companies we are going to come and look at
everything I think we've been very clear with the industry what we expect and
we've been very clear that we are going to follow up and find out what they've
been you were slow then because it was only when the Times investigation came
out that that we had this very significant change which was the suspension of
meters we launched we launched the investigation into the industry before that
but yes the Times investigation uncovered behavior that we you know on the face
of it without prejudicing our investigation seems unacceptable did you that's
when we said to the industry when we did that did you consider your position
Gordon Brown thinks you should have considered your position because you failed
as a regulator and there were people who were he knows from his constituency who
turning to loan sharks because they were so in debt over their energy bills well
Michelle we are going through the biggest energy crisis I think we've ever had
in our history we have faced a series of challenges including some of the
challenges that customers are facing today now behind all of this when a family
is in the situation you described it's incredibly distressing but underpinning
that is the fact that many people in this country simply cannot afford to pay
their bills so alongside all of this work around prepayment meters we want to
work with government the industry and consumer groups on how we resolve that and
we've said quite publicly we should all be investigating urgently a social
tariff which basically says for a subset of people who are struggling to pay
their bills we ought to be offering them lower tariffs and managing what is
ultimately the root cause of the problem that Gordon Brown heightened it but
more immediately in April people's wills are going to go up by 20% roughly
correct so you know we don't make predictions but looking at the prices we see
before us is likely that the price cap level will remain above where the price
guarantee goes and that does mean if nothing changes that the price guarantee
will go up to £3,000 a year now there is some good news though gas prices in the
wholesale market are falling dramatically and so if that stays the same and if
there's one thing I've learned in the last two years it's not to make firm
predictions but let's say the market stays the same as it is today we will
expect the price cap to come down significantly in summer what now the other
aspect I'd like to mention is we are beginning to see signs that there may well
be fixed price deals coming back into the market and all I'd say to customers is
when those deals come into the market please do take care don't just look at the
price today in the price cap look at how prices are changing in the future so
perhaps be careful not to sign on to one before the summer so my advice for
everyone is just do your homework everyone has different preferences some people
like to fix because they they like the insurance they like the confidence that
gives them but make sure you're looking at not just what the price is today but
how that price might change over time there are brilliant agencies out there
there are great people to give you advice on how to do that I'd go and engage
with them before making any decisions Jonathan really evolved Jim thank you
thank you three minutes to eight here's the weather with Sarah Keith Lucas
thanks Nick we've still got temperatures well above average for late February in
fact yesterday we saw highs up to 17 degrees in Suffolk could see something
perhaps similar to that for some Eastern areas again today particularly I think
for Eastern Scotland where we see the lion's share of the sunshine but a fair
amount of cloud around for most of us largely dry but will be some drizzly rain
in the north and the west so for southeast England Eastern England the Midlands
Northeast England and Eastern Scotland largely dry through the day sunny spells
coming through particularly for the likes of Aberdeenshire and temperatures
generally 12 to 14 could be up to about 16 for the east of Scotland but
southwest England Wales northwest England southwest Scotland and northern
Ireland it's going to stay quite gray and drizzly through the day northern
Scotland lastly and here outbreaks of rain on and off could be quite heavy at
times through this morning but still mild with temperatures in the west
generally around about 10 to 12 degrees today Sarah thank you very much later
this morning more of our series on Ukrainians who've come here because of the
war I could not imagine that I would stay here for such a long time Olga is one
of the thousands of Ukrainians offered sanctuary in British homes after the
outbreak of war every day I listened to news from Ukraine and I hope to hear
some good news a year on and facing an uncertain future here she's going on a
search for answers to the question where next I am happy to be more independent
now I'm ready Ukrainians in Britain where next this morning at 11 on radio 4 and
BBC sounds and in the next hour we'll be asking where next for the war with
Ukraine I've been speaking to the woman dubbed Europe's new Iron Lady Estonia's
Prime Minister we'll be talking to to one of the leading cabinet candidates to
replace Nicholas Sturgeon as the