TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-21H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 or open BBC sounds click the music tab and scroll to find Kate Bush's artist
icons collection BBC news at eight o'clock police have been searching for a
missing baby have confirmed they found a body a huge search operation had been
mounted for both the child and its parents Constance Martin and Mark Gordon
after they disappeared in early January the parents were arrested in Brighton
earlier this week on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter detective
superintendent Lewis Bassford from the Metropolitan Police made the announcement
at a news conference this evening it is my very sad duty to update this
afternoon police officers searching a wooded area close to where Constance and
Mark Gordon were arrested discovered the remains of a baby a post-mortem
examination will be held in due course a crime scene is in place and work at the
location is expected to continue for some time the former health secretary Matt
Hancock has strenuously rejected claims by the Daily Telegraph that he ignored
expert advice on Covid testing in care homes in April 2020 the paper has had
access to thousands of Mr Hancock's whatsapp messages but the former minister
maintains they've been edited to create a false story the parents of a disabled
teenager who died following prolonged neglect at the family home in mid-Wales
have been jailed Kaylee Titford from Newtown was 16 and 22 stone when she died
in October 2020 her father who was found guilty of gross negligence manslaughter
was sentenced to seven and a half years in prison the teenager's mother Sarah
Lloyd Jones who admitted the same charge was jailed for six years the Met Office
says England had its driest February in 30 years an average of just 15.3
millimeters of rain fell during the month teams in Turkey clearing the rubble of
buildings devastated by major earthquakes say they found a dog alive in debris
in Hatay 23 days after the tremors first struck the husky called Alex had lost
weight but was otherwise healthy more than 50,000 people lost their lives in the
disaster in southern Turkey and northern Syria BBC News BBC Radio 4's 2023 Lent
talks begin tonight each talk is a reflection on the words of the Lord's Prayer
tonight the rapper Governor B meditates on our father losing his own father and
becoming one himself Lent talks start at a quarter to nine now time for the
moral maze live as usual here's Michael Burke good evening the Free Church of
Scotland takes religion seriously the idea that hymns could be sung at its
services was so controversial an entire congregation and several of its
ministers resigned when this frivolity as they saw it was narrowly approved the
church's views on gay marriage and sex let alone having children out of wedlock
are traditional they disapprove tonight the we freeze most famous daughter Kate
Forbes is fighting for her political life she's taking part in the first
hustings in the race to be the SNP's leader and thus first minister of Scotland
she was many thought a front-runner until she was asked about her religion she
didn't duck the questions she thought such things as same-sex marriage were
wrong but she backed the law as it stood and upheld people's right to do things
she didn't personally approve of no matter the internet was inflamed key
supporters deserted her many thought she'd have no option but to withdraw from
the contest if not from politics altogether is this simply a case of the old
religion colliding with what some see as the new religion of human rights a
professed faith used to be seen as an advantage for a politician a sign of their
moral compass now it looks to be a potential barrier to office what's changed
and is it for the better that's our moral maze tonight the panel and mckelvoy
columnist and editor with the politico news and commentary group the historian
tim stanley ash sarkar from navarra media and the nation's second favorite vicar
giles fraser what who's the first no no no giles does your does your dog collar
make you sympathetic towards kate forbes i i suppose it does and i i i remember
that and that's kennedy's speech about the finger of suspicion being pointed at
him because of his um catholicism and i don't i don't i feel there's something
of that that's being pointed at her because of her faith but nonetheless what i
really don't like is politicians who retreat behind this idea that you can have
a sort of private religious faith and it doesn't issue in any any sort of
political um action and i think that's nonsense and i think tonight we're going
to come across the line attributed to queen elizabeth the first one she said she
didn't intend to make windows into men's souls ie she was prepared to put up
with quite a lot of of fudging where religion and beliefs about the state or
politics coincided to which i think winston churchill then reposted nobody
intended to make doors into the same cells and i think there is something
difficult about saying your religion overrides any other test that might
ordinarily be put to you in the political realm ash ash um i actually wish that
the political um furore swirling around kate forbes was about the role of
religion and politics because i don't think it's actually that at all i think
the reason why it's become such a hot button issue is because a load of right-
wing papers thought that she would just be their woman when it came to trans
rights and the gender recognition act but it turns out she's got a whole load of
other views about uh sexuality and gay marriage and unwed mothers which then
makes them feel that she's political kryptonite and that's why it's a big deal
tim tim stanley i am very sympathetic to kate forbes because i see this race as
a test of whether or not a traditional christian can still win an election and
the wider debate is not just the balance between church and state it's a power
struggle between those whose politics is shaped by religion and those who want a
britain that is aggressively secular even atheist panel thanks very much indeed
our first witness is ellie gomasol who's president of the national union of
students in scotland the pro-independence activist and a trans woman and she's
on the line from glasgow now um ellie gomasol what what in your view would be
the consequences if kate forbes wins and becomes first minister uh and how would
you feel about it well i'd be incredibly worried if kate forbes did become first
minister because although she has she said that that you know she would respect
the law as it currently stands in the same week she also said that if there were
to be a vote on gay marriage for instance tomorrow that she would vote against
it that to me says that she doesn't respect me as an lgbt plus member of the
community in scotland that says to me that that that my rights um are
potentially under threat uh with her leading our government i think that's an
incredibly worrying situation for me and and many other people in scotland
whether they're lgbt whether they're people who need access to abortions for
instance understood tim starling ellie but crucially there isn't going to be a
vote on whether or not same-sex marriage should be legal uh so if there isn't
going to be a vote and if she said she's not going to change any laws then why
are you worried about her well i think first of all that actually we don't know
that there won't definitely won't be a vote on same-sex marriage for instance in
in this term of parliament in the way the scottish parliament works you know any
member could propose that as okay should be one vote among many it's not going
to pass it's not an issue well let's let's take a look at other issues that are
coming up in the scottish parliament over the next few months let's take a look
at the buffer zones bill for instance which is being proposed by uh jillian
mckay msp uh around access to to abortion um that is a very hot topic uh in
scotland at the moment it's something that the scottish government you know is
committed and kate forbes has said that she believes women should be able to
access abortion services without facing harassment she she has but i i think
that there's lots of uh uh other issues that that could come up over the term of
hypotheticals here and i'm sorry can you understand why as a religious person
this sounds suspiciously to me like a test act like this is this is you saying
that these things could come up and because they could come up and we all know
what she privately thinks i can't trust her well yes i mean ultimately that that
is the case can you understand how for me as an lgbt plus person how hearing
that the potential leader of our country doesn't respect my right to to get
married uh my my right to to live is the gender that i am do you understand how
that makes me feel but in a democracy we have to accept that we might not agree
with each other or even like each other but we have to put up with each other
don't we well that's that's very true i think we and i think that point around
the fact that we live in a democracy is a very important one because kate forbes
was elected on a manifesto around uh for instance promoting uh inclusive
education uh lgbt plus inclusive education and school she was elected on a
number of very socially progressive manifesto commitments and i think that it's
important that if she becomes the next first minister she stands by those one
thing i i really dislike about uh whenever we discuss trans or gay issues is
that there's always this sense of an interrogation of gay or trans people in
their private life can you see how from religious point of view it feels like
that's being done to her that every aspect of her belief in her private life in
her family is being interrogated in this really unpleasant inquisitorial way
well i actually don't i don't think that this is about her religious belief or
her religious faith i think this is about her political opinions which i'm sure
you'd agree are incredibly important when we're talking about the potential next
first minister of scotland it might well be that those political opinions have
been formed as a result of her faith but it's the political opinions that matter
and regardless of where those come from i think it's incredibly important that
we're able to scrutinize those and hold our politicians to account and mckinley
if i were a person of faith getting involved with politics and particularly
looking at what we've learned from the cate forbes affair i might think the best
thing is just not to be very honest at all to fudge to kind of weasel to
equivocate isn't that the danger of when we ask people to declare everything in
very stark colors that we don't allow for the fact that some people will
constantly have paradoxical views and still be very very good and useful
politicians i think it is very important that the politicians are able to be
honest i was grateful to to kate forbes for being open and upfront about her
views although of course in the past couple of weeks she said multiple things
which are contradictory to each other which gives me much less faith there but i
think that you know you you can look at a vast number of uh politicians for whom
their faith their religion is deeply important to them i i think that this isn't
about kate forbes's faith or her religion it's about her political opinions and
i think that's absolutely right we're able to scrutinize those well yeah i mean
it says you i mean if you're kate forbes you don't think that do you think that
there is a continuity between religious views and political opinions and it
suits those who are coming from a position that wants to be critical of the way
that she sees certain things that they find you said yourself you felt under
threat other people will simply they say maybe i'm uncomfortable you know people
have different degrees of what they object to but you see these things as very
connected what if i were to say to you actually that might not be that so for
everyone some people might really want to respect that there is a difference
between religious views and politics well i i think that again it comes down to
this point of us being able to scrutinize those views no matter where they come
from if someone has a view or an opinion and is asking to to be the next first
minister of the country i should have that right to be able to be critical of
those views especially when their views that impact me directly and impact my my
my life as you know an lgbt plus person for instance uh in scotland i mean even
when we look beyond for instance the legislation i think it's important to look
at the the the the cultural significance that the first minister has and that
influence there that that they have i think that especially when you look at the
rate of of hate crimes as an example uh towards lgbt plus people at the moment
it's incredibly important we have those i'm sorry just i must break in um does
the phrase matters of conscious or anything that comes outside a particular tick
box you know exercise and i mean we all do it about politicians but is there
anything that is just like the box that says well i'm leaving this one you know
not not applicable or i'm not gonna go there because i accept that there's
private space well maybe the answer for you is no i i wonder why it is that when
we talk about matters of conscience it's always around uh issues that affect
minority groups or equalities issues i think that's interesting isn't it that
there always seems to be an opt-out when we're talking about the the lives of of
minority groups such as lgbt plus people uh but but when it comes to other
issues which have have you know vast uh moral and ethical implications uh we
don't seem to have those same conversations thanks very much indeed for joining
us this evening our next witness is isabel hardman assistant editor of the
spectator of course author of why we get the wrong politicians does kate forbes
particular faith make her the wrong kind of politician or at least make you want
to ask questions about how far she might want her beliefs to apply to other
people i mean i think as a political journalist i'm naturally suspicious of
everyone and i think that that's probably the what's the right attitude to have
because kate forbes is worthy of suspicion because she wants to lead a political
party and she has a worldview but then so do all the other candidates so did
nicola sturgeon and i think when we assume that non-religious worldviews are
somehow the default way of thinking perhaps unquestionable ways of thinking and
we don't direct the same interrogations at non-religious politicians then i
think we fall into a dangerous trap that can actually really harm policy making
because we start to think that people's assumptions are always correct so we've
been throwing around this phrase a lot so far called matter of conscience what
for you defines a matter of conscience it's a really interesting question
because as your previous speaker was alluding to it tends to be moral issues
around abortion around gay rights uh around things that are really deeply
affected by people's religious beliefs and it doesn't apply to matters of war
for instance which you could argue and lots of people in politics do argue uh
should be a conscience vote because that would involve killing people and do you
and do you take the view that it's important for politicians to be able to act
on matters of conscience i think if we had party whips on moral issues we would
end up having very religiously uh delineated parties uh which you do in other
countries uh but we don't in this country and i think it is a good thing that
the labor party for instance has catholic mps in it has muslim mps in it i think
if you were to have a party whip on matters such as abortion you would then get
that sort of segregation let's let's take that up for a second because one of
the reasons why i generally vote for left-wing parties is that i think that
abortion rights are safe with them right so let's say i vote for the labor party
but my local mp who's labor um ends up because it's a matter of conscience
voting against abortion rights or abstains in it don't i have the right as a
voter who's given my vote to that party allow them to form a government even to
feel deeply and profoundly politically betrayed i can understand why you would
feel deeply politically disappointed but you might do on lots of other issues as
well ultimately we elect our politicians to take decisions on our behalf often
to be better informed on things we can't be bothered to get to know such as
fractional reserve banking for instance we're talking about abortion yes right i
know about abortion you know about abortion and if someone votes against my
right to have one yeah that's different from fractional reserve banking of
course it's different and of course it's you know that's i think one of the
reasons why it's often been back bench legislation because governments haven't
wanted to to get so involved in these big issues if you look at the big social
changes of the 60s they were all through backbench legislation because political
parties didn't want to involve themselves and to get that reaction that you talk
about but but to talk about another moral issue the death penalty is often
something that polls suggest a large number possibly even a majority of the
public would like to bring back i think there's a lot of people who take comfort
in the fact that their politicians don't want to enact that joss razor i'm
slightly bothered by this line that you get with politicians all the time of
faith that it's a private matter and and i can see why they say that and people
advising kate forbes might well have been you know should have said that to us
say something like that but from a theological point of view it's nonsense i
mean the idea that that something like that can be a private matter so how do
the politicians square those two things up i think in a way politicians with a a
recognized faith have thought about this much more than those who don't and i
think that it would be better if we acknowledge that all of us have influences
on our world views i used to be a committed conservative evangelical christian i
am not anymore some of my views remain quite stupid even though they're
diametrically opposed to what i subscribed to when i was a christian some of
them are actually largely because of the social group i'm in and if i
interrogated them it would be because i want to fit in with my friends i don't
want to upset people now is that really any better than because my church told
me that that was the right view to have so i think a suspicion of all
politicians if you look at nicola sturgeon when she was being asked about gender
self-id she actually looked as though she hadn't been asked about the basis for
thinking about these things before and she looked quite exasperated because
normally those questions are labeled at the religious people the sort of you
know that the slightly stupid people yeah no i get all that i i just i'm just
trying to sort of plumb out why it is that religion where we're allowed we're
allowed to see it as a sort of private matter you know it's particularly in this
country i mean it's something that you sort of do in the in the privacy of your
own home or bit like how you used to think about sex or having to do it in the
privacy of your own bedroom i mean you know as opposed to in public well i mean
as opposed to talking about it about talking about it queues a very lively place
i mean i suppose the other question would be do we want to end up in a political
culture where flaunting your religious beliefs is something that's desirable and
will help you get elected not just in the the us but in italy and other
countries i'm not sure that that would be very palatable to it wouldn't work
here would it it's not it's not an electoral asset no no and to a certain extent
i i think i quite like the british spirit of mockery about these things i just
think it should be applied across the board because all of us have daft beliefs
you know i agree with that do you think there's something about the the way we
think about kate forbes and our suspicion of religious people that's slightly
imported from america is that is that that sort of we think about american
evangelicals and we we have this very english dislike of it particularly
evangelicals it's you know we don't we don't interrogate rishi sunak about his
you know hindu beliefs or but we you know we've we've gone for kate forbes we
don't and i don't think it's just exported actually from from the us i think it
is also a historic thing if you talk to members of generations above mine they
will remember greater restrictions being placed on their lives by religious
groups who they didn't necessarily agree with and i think that's particularly
the case actually in some scottish communities is it isabel harman thanks very
much indeed our next witness is andrew copson who's chief executive of humanists
uk and author of secularism a short introduction so there you are you've written
a bible so to speak for the non-religious but does it make you feel
uncomfortable to think that kate forbes might be denied office some say even
pushed out of politics because of her beliefs if that were to happen i would be
very uncomfortable because i think that the public square and political life
should be a place that's open to people of all religious and non-religious world
views but the corollary of that is that we're all judged on our values and
opinions including our most deeply held ones and that i think is what's
happening to her quite rightly and does rather depend doesn't know what the
penalties are for being judged or where we give people a free pass so if we take
something like gay marriage which is foundational to to this case if a majority
of voters in a particular territory in this case scotland uh were opposed to it
would you then concede that even if your own belief was strongly in favor that
that was the democratic will no because i'm not a radical democrat who thinks
that everyone's lives and rights should be subject to the the whim of a majority
i think that there are some rights the very intimate ones like the right to life
the right to marriage and basic fundamental civil rights which should be
protected regardless of uh the democratic feeling about it that's why we have
things like the human rights act why other countries have constitution well
indeed but they are kind of secular religions aren't they i mean the idea that
gay marriage is a fundamental right is a very recent uh extension of the idea of
rights now maybe very beneficial some people will disagree with it but you do
have a spread of things which taking on a kind of almost religious sort of
conviction which are secular the idea that marriage is a fundamental right and
there's a fundamental right to private life isn't new um the bringing into the
concept of human rights of people who previous generations thought was somehow
not fully human like gay people or women or disabled people or people of
different races is new that's true but i think it's a very good thing and it's
part of a growing recognition um that we're all human beings and i think that i
mean you're right that uh these things are contingent we might change them
tomorrow and and that would be unfortunate but it might happen but i think
they're beneficial so that's why i personally support them yeah no i understand
why you personally support them but i just don't see quite why you think that
they should be so foundational to why everyone would sort of say you should or
should vote or vote this way or another you of course are very free to to vote
as you wish and to recommend doing so but i wondered whether you felt it was a
kind of mission creep here that by the time we've had your views on abortion
your views on gay marriage your views on we haven't touched on euthanasia but i
think it often comes into this kind of mix that we end up with lots of things
now being seen as core to a decision to vote for or support a candidate which
would once have been perhaps more rightly put into a different category maybe i
mean i don't think you can do much about that because you can't control people's
minds i mean the individual citizen is going to vote on their preferences um
whatever um they might be but i think well they have to a candidate has to be
allowed through the process for that to happen she's i mean she was leading
until very very recently i don't know how she's doing now but i don't think
there's much evidence that candidates can't get through that process i mean
parliament is full of conservative christians they're over represented as as
compared with the population as a whole um so i think that the idea that people
with those beliefs being kept out of politics probably isn't sustainable and
they are getting through they're getting into politics that's not a problem um
but the arguments i mean what your question boils down to is what you know why
should we respect fundamental um human and civil rights and i think the answer
to that in the end is pragmatic because we all benefit from that mutual respect
dim sunny if i was to encounter a candidate who wanted to restrict abortion i
would vote for them i presume if you encountered a candidate who want who didn't
want to do that to keep the current situation you'd vote for them so all we're
really talking about here is a contest between values in the public sphere yes
that's such a bad thing no i think it's a very good thing that's the nature of
our democracy so we can so we can agree so really the kate forbes thing actually
this is politics as it should be what is meant to happen is happening um she has
uh expressed her strongly held values beliefs and opinions good and people will
now judge her for it and it looks to me like you as a humanist your side is
winning well i wouldn't put it like that i don't think that doesn't prove it
because the very well she's doing quite well isn't she well for a start she's
being challenged not on things that she could possibly do but on things which
are now settled law so you've got the gay marriage you've got the abortion
rights gender self-id is probably going to go through so in other words
legislatively she's won but also the fact that she couldn't even voice a private
opinion on it without being shouted down implies that not only is the law legal
battle won but culturally you've won as well well she did voice it and she
wasn't shouted down in fact her view was very widely covered in all sorts of uh
media as it as it should be in a mix of outrage and amusement well you seem to
have approved of it so i mean other people approved of it and there are plenty
of people who agree with you um and and like you say that's that that's the
contest in in politics so why but why okay but one can accept therefore that
really she's lost she's lost the big battle but is she allowed to have that
private opinion i see i mean i don't know about you but when i am making my own
decisions about who to vote for um um i don't look so much at party although i
look at party of course and i do look at the individual person i question their
judgment and part of that is their values and opinions right and i think that
you know if you express your fundamental beliefs and your worldview then you
will be judged by it on a politician because you can't ever know a politician's
101 policy positions you've got to sort of make a judgment about their instincts
and their worldview but is it our matters doesn't it but but we've moved from a
position where 40 years ago we were unfortunately there was prejudice against
certain minorities and they were culturally not represented and they were looked
down upon and sneered at it now just feels like that's it's switched that this
is really a power struggle and the old conservative side have lost and they're
now the ones being laughed at and marginalized i suppose you might feel like
that if you're on what you perceive as the losing side um that's not how i uh
feel i don't think i sneer at people like that and in in most of the people i
encounter who have the same mind of me i don't feel they're a sneery bunch um
but i can understand how a side that feels it's losing as you express it might
feel that way but a lot of us feel that way because it's not just about what
they might wish to do if they were elected it's also this perception that if you
hold certain views you're an idiot and you just shouldn't be allowed into the
public well i don't agree with that right so i'm not the right person to ask
about that because i think this mix of views is what we get in a plural society
glad to hear it andrew copson thank thank you note of agreement uh thank you
very much indeed our last witness is james eglinton who's senior lecturer in
reformed theology at the university of ennebra and he's on the line from there
now um we're really on to the wider questions of religion and politics now but
but reverting for a moment to kate forbes would it be good for scotland to have
her or someone like her as leader do you think i think so i've argued this
publicly recently that the kind of culture that we've had in scotland under
sturgeon has been what sociologists would call a bureaucratic culture it's all
about uniformity it's quite a low trust culture we've a lot of scots find it
difficult to trust people who are different to them but who say they will
represent them nonetheless i think having a leader with some minority opinions
even some quite unpopular opinions like kate forbes but who is committed to
democracy to representing those who don't think like her would actually shift us
into quite a different kind of culture and i would see that as a properly
political culture that's about unity over uniformity okay charles tricer how can
you trust someone who says they're against gay marriage but they wouldn't do
anything to against it they wouldn't move against it there seems inconsistency
isn't that what creates the distrust that's a very good question giles i think
that the exercise of trust is one of the big and difficult things about living
in a liberal democracy a few of the previous witnesses have touched on that
issue of trust and i think that's one of the key issues in in scottish culture
at the moment in terms of politics exercising trust is really difficult you make
yourself vulnerable but because it's a democracy if someone breaks that trust
you vote them out the next time you vote for someone else but but we trust
people because there is some sort of consistency between how they what they
believe and how they act and there seems to be some break in that in the cape
ford situation which is how we we feel trust is is actually problematic here
okay well that's again a good question so i think the way that i approach this
when i think about liberal democracy who to trust and how to exercise trust a
lot of the previous witnesses have spoken about world view and that's i think
that's great to hear that that's a big part of the conversation the idea that
everyone believes something that there's no such thing as a neutral politician
who's just some kind of robot and even robots are pre-programmed by something
else i think it's really important that we can ask people questions about how
their values and beliefs have been formed and because liberal democracy needs
politicians who are people of distinctive identifiable you know they have a fire
in their belly over particular issues but we don't want to just bland
politicians i think you have no convictions i think it's really good that we
have politicians who do believe things even if we disagree with them i'm with
you on that does that does that mean that you think that this would be sort of
conscience votes which feel a bit to me like sort of religious get out of jail
free cards you can just you know you put it down and and no one's allowed to ask
you i mean it's just the way of bypassing not at all so i actually favor a more
rigorous level of interrogation so i think that every politician as i said has a
world view i want the freedom and a liberal democracy to ask them tell me where
your beliefs come from they come from somewhere that one of the previous
witnesses mentioned that that was quite painful to watch with sturgeon on gender
self-id that it was as though she hadn't been asked that before and she was
shocked at trying to the difficulty of trying to articulate where this is from
so i want to ask politicians two questions one is where your beliefs are from
and then that gets you the distinctive things we're doing this with kate forbes
at the moment but then the second question i want to ask is how those beliefs
how that world view enables you to live well alongside people who don't share it
i think that's really key for liberal democracy i think that that we're not
quite at that level in terms of a very healthy public conversation about this
but we need to get there and then i think you let the world view explain how it
makes the politician distinctive but also able to represent people who don't
agree with them do you want kate forbes because she actually does broadly agree
with you oh i'm not here to endorse any particular candidate i think that
there's a really you said you said that would be a better place for her
leadership i think that the example of a minority um a minority opinion leader
who's committed to democracy would be a really good thing for scotland because
of the break from that kind of bureaucratic culture where again it's just i
think it's a really big problem that for a lot of us we find it difficult to
trust people who are other but who say that they will look after our best
interests that's not healthy for a liberal democracy i think that's really
troubling the kind of direction that it pushes us in towards being a low trust
culture that's okay do you think that leaders of governments like a first
minister for instance have different moral obligations than your average citizen
or a local councillor or indeed an mp or msp oh yeah i think the bar for being
able to practice the the key beliefs of liberalism that's much higher for a
leader and i think that uh that so far in scotland uh that actually all three of
the candidates have demonstrated or they've put forward their case that they're
not autocrats that they're all democrats and i think for me that's an absolute
bar and i think that it has to be a really high bar so you can tolerate uh maybe
lowering levels of skill and being able to work work out how to live well
alongside people to represent people who aren't like you at a very fundamental
level um at lower levels in society that's that's i think it's really important
still but less important than in the first minister and that's why i think being
able to ask these kinds of questions of candidates is so important so so so if
we both agree then that prime ministers first ministers they're not just another
flower in the garden of diverse opinion it's really essential that the
electorate can expect and be confident that a prime minister won't ride
roughshod over those who didn't vote for them or who aren't like them that
they'll in short protect minority rights and we've heard from a witness earlier
who said i cannot trust kate forbes with my rights as a minority isn't that kate
forbes is failing uh rather than ellie gomisles i think i would find it
difficult to lay the blame at the foot of any one person in society because i
see this as a as a collective failing over a number of years in scotland in
general that we have shifted towards being more of a low trust culture and
that's just not a good thing i think people are diverse people are different but
you're saying that someone like you're saying that someone like kate forbes
would mean that we all have to become more trusting more able to live with
people of different opinions so that ultimately means that it's us as voters or
minority voters who have to kind of get on and lump it rather than kate forbes
being sensitive to the needs of those voters oh i think that it probably takes
two to tango between uh between the voting public and whoever they vote for as
the leader that the leader really does have to be sensitive the leader does have
to be a prime minister is a lot bigger feat than you know your average voter
right they can do a lot more damage if they step on you indeed but there are a
lot of us with a lot of feet so we want to add a lot then you know that maybe
the metaphor kind of uh runs out of steam but um i think in this case i think in
this case the exercise of trust is i think one of the most beautiful things but
also one of the most difficult things and the most necessary thing in a liberal
democracy and i think we want to lean into that more than ever actually in
scotland i think that it's uncomfortable it's uncomfortable for everyone in a
democracy nobody gets everything that they want or at least not in a liberal
democracy maybe in a one-party democracy or so on in a much weaker form there is
someone who gets whatever they want but in our kind of diverse society nobody
will get everything that they want and that just takes trust james eglinton
thank you very much indeed for joining us this evening right interesting how the
the arguments developed panel um how did you feel uh tim about uh about our
first witness the trans woman ellie gomez or saying well actually she almost
said she wouldn't feel uh safe uh living in a scotland led by somebody like uh
uh like kate i'd say that i understand uh and i'm sympathetic and i think as a
christian kate forbes would want to uh would want to provide an answer to that
which was compassionate because that's typically what christians want to do
regardless of their religious beliefs um i one thing i want to add is that kate
forbes hasn't lost yet and my suspicion my suspicion is that a lot of the
negative reaction in fact was a london media reaction to her and not necessarily
reflective of a scottish opinion scotland don't forget uh in many ways is very
socially conservative society uh it was sort of it was created by the
enlightenment and the reformation it's the land of john knox the idea that this
is this is some secular paradise and she is ruining it no she speaks from a
tradition which is very strongly represented and the other thing i'd like to say
as a political journalist is i follow parliament i sit on debates christianity
is mentioned a lot a lot of mps are christian i would say that proportionally uh
westminster is far more christian than the rest of the country uh what isn't
popular within politics is a certain brand of christianity which cape forbes
represents which is a a traditional or religiously conservative form of
christianity but actually there are plenty of politicians to talk about jesus
christ and he is often in vote to justify uh left-wing positions like welfare
spending and i'm all for that but when witnesses like on this program and
elsewhere say that um that because of her beliefs she is uh disrespecting
delegitimizing uh gay people in in in who've had gay marriages and so on uh do
you think they're overreacting yes i do i mean i disagree with her profoundly i
uh i believe in gay marriage i think gay marriage would be a very good thing and
i believe it in for religious reasons as well as you know would vote for it but
i actually think the idea that someone disagrees with me on that i don't think
that is especially in the 21st century is any sort of threat to the rights and
privileges that have been built up hard fought for of course but actually are
well secured in our society but uh there was a point though wasn't it when one
of the witnesses said that uh that kate forbes saying that she'd fight for gay
right that the gay right to get married because it was the law but she'd vote
against it if it came up again is something of a contradiction well this is the
point that i was trying to make which is that opinions and votes aren't the same
thing so i don't mind what kate forbes or anybody else thinks what my concern
would be is how's it going to come down when it comes to your vote because
that's really the only thing we've got to hold politicians to account and i
think that that's where ellie gomisole was coming from and i know that you were
saying it's highly unlikely that a crunch vote on gay marriage would come down
to the vote of kate forbes but ellie gomisole was essentially going can i trust
you with my rights can i trust you to vote in a way that would protect my rights
the answer is no therefore i don't want you to be first minister and that's
called democratic discernment but can you see how this might get crossed with
that get crossed with a sort of broader suspicion of the religious people yeah
that the that you get a sort of um uh that that there is somehow there's
something working underneath here which is you know we think this is crazy we
think this is mad i don't i don't believe people who say they don't care what
you think privately i don't believe them so ash if you had the perfect socialist
candidate but you knew they were a creationist would you still vote for okay
i've actually got a real life example for you rebecca long bailey a socialist on
the left wing of the labor party and a catholic and one of the things that she
said is that my catholic beliefs will not impact how i vote on abortion these
things are totally separate and i believed her okay and i i suppose the central
it's not a very it's not a very catholic line i can tell you that and the
central question uh really i suppose in in what way are religious beliefs
different from political beliefs i think that's what i mean is this a value
difference or you know is it coming from such a different place well if we don't
accept that there is some difference i think we do get into a bit of a dangerous
territory because it's not to say that every religious belief that affects
politics is legitimate some of them are wise some of them are unwise and some of
them you know you and i and everyone around the table and listening would have a
different view of but i don't think we have given enough weight in these
arguments tonight to what happens when you don't allow religion its space in
society and we become a little bit lazy about it and we think that when someone
pops up and they are inconvenient as in the forbes case to a very smooth view of
what a progressive politician should believe in or should not believe in we go
after them but actually i think the more interesting thing for me is have you
looked at what is happening in societies where religion is not allowed to
coexist in all its paradoxes close to to politics that's the danger zone i mean
the really interesting thing about this is saying you know are we excluding
religion from the public sphere when you look at what's going on with
demographics and birth rates there's a book called the religious shall inherit
the earth religious people are having more babies they will make up the bulk of
the american electorate within 25 to 50 years and we will probably be having a
really different kind of conversation about the protection of minority opinions
in that context i think it's really bad to treat either a secular worldview or a
religious worldview as one which is natural and right it's one that you
constantly have to advocate for getting getting down to specifics again for just
just for a minute the argument was that it was not really a full and
satisfactory answer to say my religious beliefs apply to how i live my life i
don't impose them on others isn't that the question how far do you think your
beliefs should apply to others josh yeah i mean i think there is some sort of
distinction here i mean you know not everything i think is right or wrong needs
to issue in legislation i mean it's perfectly consistent to say that you think
adultery is wrong and to think you don't think adultery should be illegal i mean
that's a that's a perfectly that's a perfectly fine position i imagine quite a
few people think it so you don't think everything that you believe morally even
quite strongly morally has to end up in law so i think there is something to
that um but it's when people start um you know it's when it's when beliefs as it
were private beliefs whatever that really means sort of uh are very very
proximate to what is a live issue political then that's a different matter i was
going to say to sort of take a you know to take the other side of that charles i
did think that was a very interesting case when ruth kelly a very traditional
catholic who was not opposing gay adoption as such but she didn't think that in
this case that catholic to give the example of a catholic adoption agency should
be mandated which was the way that the policy was going to to go uh under labor
and i think that's a very good example as we say well it might be nice if you
could separate these things off but what will happen is there will be something
that will arise practically speaking which will turn the screw and what then
does the politician have to answer to do they simply say and i think she did try
to say this is simply my belief that wasn't good enough for a lot of her
colleagues but i do rather understand where they were coming from as well
because there was well if you believe this then something follows from it that's
where this becomes more than more than a maze you really have a hard choice then
as a religious person what do you think is is basically happening here do you
think there's some sort of new new orthodoxy that's antipathetic to religion or
at least to conservative christianity and that and the matters of moral
conscience are actually mainstream politics now that's what political argument
is increasingly about jars you're nodding but that's not so i think it's partly
that i think also the culture is obsessed with sex and one thing that really
irritates me as a christian is that whenever a politician is is exposed uh they
come out of the closet as a christian the first christian they're asked to say
what do you think about sex it's really prurient and it's really offensive
because of course christianity is not primarily about sex and christians have
many views which might be quite outrageous and controversial i'd love to know
what kate forbes thinks about culvert various calvinistic doctrines does she
believe in the total depravity of man that's really interesting plus there are
many christians a vote winner but there are also many christians like the former
archbishop of canterbury who's very pro-trans rights for a christian reason and
finally i think michael it was you who raised the question about moral about
issues of conscience uh someone who mentioned war yeah now if really now about
about 50 or 60 years ago probably actually 100 years ago second world war first
world war the primary issue of moral conscience in this country was pacifism now
it's not anymore but actually that's a that's an entirely legitimate christian
perspective and i think it's so interesting how it's never mentioned anymore we
just go straight to the sex stuff i thought the other interesting point was that
nobody asks rishi sunak about being a hindu they're embarrassed and in fact
there is a muslim candidate for this they're embarrassed and it's so silly
because it's a fascinating subject i'd like to know actually the muslim
candidate in this instance has been asked repeatedly about gay marriage he was
asked just this sunday on sophie ridge do you consider gay sex a sin and he said
no so he was comfortable in his answers and i think that that does kind of
explain a little bit he's not getting an easier ride because he's a muslim
questions itself what kind of he but the thing that i'm saying is that i think
that this is part of what's driving the story is that it's very counterintuitive
for lots of people in westminster to see an argument about gay marriage play out
whereas the pakistani muslims saying i'm fine with it and because they can't
handle the fact that their person who aligned with them on things like gender
recognition actually has a whole host of other opinions too that's at the heart
of this story oh we could go on with this for at least another quarter of an
hour uh but i'm afraid our time's up that's it for this week from our panel
giles razor ash sarkar and michael voy and tim stanley until the same time next
week god speed goodbye the moral maze was chaired by michael burke and it was
produced by jonathan hallowell and you can subscribe to the program on bbc
sounds kassa alarm reports on the tough decisions which may have to be taken
about flood defenses along the uk's coastline as sea levels continue to rise
that's in costing the earth at nine o'clock but now here in radio four time for
lent talks a series of personal reflections inspired by aspects of the story
leading up to easter this year the series explores themes found in the lord's
prayer and looks at the impact these words have on people's lives today in the
first episode the mobile award-winning rapper governor b considers the opening
words our father in 2017 my world turned upside down where my dad died suddenly
and unexpectedly one moment he was on the l-shaped sofa watching match of the
day full of smiles and the next day gone vanished from my world i was 27 years
old and had never taken a moment to consider my life without my dad by my side
on the 18th of july 2017 3 a.m i was asleep why if you intervene and said your
brother's on the phone wake up took the iphone hi bro i beg you say something
this don't feel right so he told me daddy's on lab support doctors are saying we
need to come in hung up and started rushing where if he wanted to come but i
told her stay behind didn't want to believe that anything could happen to my
favorite guy but she came anyway his death plunged me into the depths of despair
where i lost all sense of who i was i felt lost and alone and lacked the
necessary tools for coping with an immense sense of grief i'm a bit of a live in
the moment kind of person and one of the positives about that is i tend not to
take life too seriously one of the challenges about that though is sometimes i
can take life for granted and not truly appreciate the blessings in my life i
was fortunate enough to be able to see my dad's body on the day he passed and as
i looked at him lying there in complete peace i was so grateful for the
magnitude of his impact on my life hit me my dad was a man of few words he
wasn't very vocal at all but even though i rarely heard the words i love you son
i knew he probably did he left home at 6 30 a.m every weekday morning and
returned home at 6 p.m he did everything he possibly could to provide and care
for his family he'd often drive me to my gigs and to and from the airport before
i could afford airport parking i still can't to be honest we never said much in
the car but we sat in comfortable silence and i felt secure knowing that he had
my back and that he loved me deeply our father who art in heaven hallowed be thy
name your kingdom come the lord's prayer is one that i've said since primary
school i remember my school class having to recite it in assembly even though i
didn't truly know the depths of what it meant i understood the importance of it
in my teenage years as my faith started to develop but even still when you've
said the same prayer for most of your life it can sometimes feel like a bit of a
ritual rather than life-giving words that provide real comfort in really hard
times i tell you what after the passing of my father some of those words that
used to feel like rituals jumped to life it means even more to pray our father
in heaven when you no longer have one on earth having someone who guides me who
protects me who is looking over me and who loves me unconditionally is something
i don't take for granted i'm not gonna lie it's taken me a while to get to the
point where i can speak so openly about my grief and how i feel about fatherhood
i probably took after my old man when it comes to how much i talk about my
feelings i never used to view it as an issue until around three months after his
death i was on tour in america and on my last night in la before i was due to
fly back home i bought a notebook and went down to the beach it was the first
time i had been in complete solitude in a long long time and i remember feeling
very heavy that day when i woke up sitting on the white soft sand looking out at
the pacific ocean as the waves rolled back and forth i was struck by how big the
world is and how small we are how every single one of our lives matters but only
to the tiny number of hearts we touch all of a sudden tears started streaming
down my face and i'm not talking the pretty type i'm talking like real real ugly
ones and i couldn't stop them in that moment i don't just think i was crying for
my dad i think i was letting out everything that had seriously affected my
mental well-being in the past i grew up on a council estate in east london and i
was subconsciously conditioned to believe that real men don't cry and real men
don't show emotion stiff upper lip and all of that because of this i buried
everything and it all came out on that beach in california in big ugly sobs i'm
quite grateful for that moment because i felt so free afterwards i felt
empowered to be more vulnerable with the people in my life who care about me not
just for my sake but for the sake of my own son ezra who was born in 2019 i've
spoken a lot from the perspective of a son but my perspective as a father blew
my mind when i first set eyes on my son i remember being overwhelmed with an
extreme sense of love and joy he's three and a half years old and i still feel
it now even after the tantrums from the little terror there's nothing that he
can do that will stop me from loving him nothing he can do that will stop me
from wanting to protect him and nothing he can do to earn my love i give it
freely unconditionally and with intent for the first time it gave me a unique
glimpse into how i believe god our father in heaven my father in heaven must
feel about me through all my imperfections all my mistakes all of my darkest
valleys he still loves me and wants to protect me i can't begin to describe how
comforted that makes me feel well maybe i can because that's exactly how i feel
about my son he's also made me want to be even more vulnerable in a world where
men haven't historically been encouraged to do that i love how conversations
around mental health are now more commonplace i don't blame my dad at all for
the fact he struggled with that i found that sometimes it's not that men don't
want to open up so that they might not necessarily know how or have the tools to
do so i'm going to try my best though just like i think my dad did carry on i'm
losing patience i'll still carry on nobody told me it would take this long
question my faith and where my pain belongs but maybe pain ain't wrong oh
something really important happened on the day he died up until that point i
don't think i'd ever heard him saying i love you that's not an exaggeration but
as he was slowly falling asleep on his final day he whispered son i love you him
saying those words meant the world because it removed all doubt i think most of
the people i know want to feel loved one of the things that drew me to faith was
how loving and lovely the lady who first invited me to church was ever since my
son came into the world three years ago i'll make sure i verbalize how i feel
ezra probably has no clue what i'm going on about and even though it's slightly
uncomfortable for me to be emotionally vulnerable i know just how much it can
mean to someone because it meant a lot for me so i guess my dad saying i love
you that one time wasn't just a gift to me it was also a gift to the grandson he
never met those words our father i view them as a bit of an admission that i
need help i've tried them in life alone but i don't actually like it i love
being king of my own castle until i find myself in situations that i can't
control when the price of energy pretty much doubles what do i do then when i
lose a loved one i'm trying to make sense of it all what do i do then when i
accidentally fall into a drinking addiction and i'm looking for a way out what
do i do then the answer i landed at was there's not much i can do i need
something or someone bigger than the situation to come in and help and i think
that's what our father does i don't want to be the shepherd of my own life it's
way too complicated it's too much pressure and the situations i'm faced with are
too big thousands of young people face the reality of youth violence and knife
crime every day finding themselves in situations they can't control and with
pressures that are too much for anyone to deal with in the current epidemic of
youth violence knife crime is up 70 percent with 1012 knife-related hospital
admissions for 10 to 19 year olds recorded in 2019. Many people think the
problem is only in London but that's not the case the problem is countrywide.
What's going wrong? Well the answer depends on who you ask. All too often i hear
from the police the media or authority figures at the top that drill and grime
music are probably to blame for the recent increase in youth violence but this
makes no sense to me. Saying that drill or grime are the sole reason for youth
violence devalues the reason the music is being created in the first place and
it ignores the structures in society that are failing our young people. My
parents came to England from Ghana when they were in their 20s and i remember my
mum would say this phrase it takes a whole village to raise a child. What this
African proverb means is that an entire community of people must interact with
children in order for them to experience and grow in a safe and healthy
environment. By community i mean parents, siblings, neighbours, teachers,
government, police, youth leaders and more. All of these different groups coming
together and saying okay what can i do to improve the life chances of this child
makes a huge difference. I was blessed with having people like that in my
childhood revealing to me what my purpose in life might be. If i'd not been told
i was a gifted writer in primary school or had someone encouraged me to write
lyrics at an essential point in my teens my life could have taken a completely
different path. I believe that every young person needs someone to have faith in
them and to care about them and this includes fathers. The role of a father in
the village is an important one and i don't know about you but i can put a lot
of pressure on myself to get it right. When i think about my dad though i don't
really remember the times when he got it wrong. Yes he could have spoken about
his feelings more or not work as hard as he did so we could spend more time
together but what i remember is that he showed up and he was present. He didn't
bow out or give up but he kept going and kept finding ways to show us that we
were loved and cared for. And when i look at my heavenly father what i feel is
that he shows up and he is present and he keeps finding ways to show me that i'm
loved and cared for and for this i'm forever grateful. That Lent talk was
written and presented by Governor Bee and produced by Catherine Longworth. Next
week Zoe and Andy Clark Coates talk about their own experience of baby loss and
the work they're doing to support other people who have similar experiences as
they reflect on the words thy kingdom come thy will be done. And this year
throughout Lent Sunday worship and the daily service are also following themes
taken from the Lord's Prayer. You'll find these episodes now on BBC Sounds.
Lemsisse is a one-off. Are you the poet a woman said to me in the street?
Lemsisse isn't anyone else. Now i can say she said that i finally met Benjamin
Zephaniah. Lemsisse explores uniqueness. You are a visible original a pinnacle
of miracle. We're talking about being the one and only non-graduate in the room.
He just said you failed you are the Lord Mayor of Manchester. Lemsisse is the
one and only. Are you that poet Tony Walsh? On Friday mornings at 11.