TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-01H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at Midnight. This is Charles Carroll. A police officer is in a
critical condition tonight after being shot in Oma in Northern Ireland. It
emerged that thousands of asylum seekers from Afghanistan, Syria, Eritrea, Libya
and Yemen will have their cases fast-tracked by the Home Office. Shamima Begum,
the East London schoolgirl who ran away to join the Islamic State group, has
lost her appeal to be allowed to return to the UK. The government will publish
plans in the morning for a radical shake-up of the way English football is
governed. And the Six Nations match between Wales and England will go ahead on
Saturday after the Welsh players dropped their threat to go on strike. An off-
duty police officer has been shot in the town of Oma in Northern Ireland.
Reports say the officer, a football coach, was attacked at a sports complex. He
was taken to hospital where his condition has been described as critical but
stable. Reporting from Belfast, here's our correspondent Emma Vardy. It's
thought the off-duty officer was shot multiple times at around 8 o'clock in the
evening. Irish police have increased patrols in neighbouring counties after
reports the gunman may have fled across the border after the attack. There's
continued to be a security threat against police officers in Northern Ireland
since the end of the Troubles 25 years ago, but attacks are now much rarer. In
2011, a police officer was killed by a bomb that had been placed under his car.
The Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Chris Heaton-Harris, said his
immediate thoughts were with the officer and his family. Tom Elliott, an Ulster
Unionist Party member at the Stormont Assembly, was among those to condemn the
shooting. It's absolutely despicable. We thought we'd got past this. It throws
back to many years ago whenever we were hearing of this on a regular basis. It's
just terrible, particularly in the circumstances that it was, I'm told, in front
of young people out there when he was taking a football coaching session or just
ending the session. The Home Office has announced that 12,000 asylum seekers can
be granted refugee status without being interviewed face-to-face. Migrants from
Afghanistan, Eritrea, Libya, Syria and Yemen, who applied for asylum before last
July, will have their cases decided on the basis of a 10-page questionnaire,
which must be completed in English within 20 days. The move is designed to
reduce the asylum backlog, which the Prime Minister has pledged to eradicate by
the end of the year. Our Home Editor Mark Easton reports. The Home Office
insists this is not an asylum amnesty, but a way to streamline the processing
system for five nationalities which have an asylum acceptance rate of more than
95%. All the usual security and criminal checks will be conducted and biometrics
taken. But for the first time, a cohort of 12,000 asylum seekers will not be
required to attend a face-to-face interview. Instead, if they applied for asylum
before last July, they must fill out a form. The Home Office is likely to face
criticism that the fast-tracking has more to do with the Prime Minister's
promise to eradicate the asylum backlog than having rigorous checks for
identifying individuals with no right to be in the UK. However, the British Red
Cross is among organisations concerned that insisting asylum seekers complete a
questionnaire in English and return it within 20 days could increase the
suffering of already traumatised individuals. Shamima Begum, who travelled to
Syria as a schoolgirl to join the Islamic State group, has lost her latest legal
bid to regain British citizenship. The Special Immigration Appeals Commission
accepted there was evidence that she had been a victim of trafficking when she
left the UK as a 15-year-old girl with two of her friends, but the tribunal said
it was lawful for the Home Secretary to revoke her citizenship and to bar her
from returning to the UK on the grounds of national security. Her lawyers have
described the ruling as extraordinary but have vowed to continue their legal
battle. Our Home Affairs correspondent Daniel Sanford reports. In their ruling,
the judges said they found this a case of great concern and difficulty. Shamima
Begum left her home in East London eight years ago. She was 15 years old. Along
with two school friends, she travelled to Turkey and was smuggled across the
border to what was then Islamic State-controlled northern Syria. Within days,
she'd been married to an IS fighter. When Shamima Begum re-emerged as IS rule
collapsed in February 2019, the then Home Secretary, Sajid Javid, took away her
British citizenship, saying she was a threat to national security. Shamima
Begum's lawyers argued at the Special Immigration Appeals Commission that the
Home Secretary should have instead treated her as a child victim of trafficking
for sexual exploitation. In their ruling, the judges said there was a credible
suspicion that she'd been trafficked and harboured for the purposes of sexual
exploitation. But they decided in the end that that did not trump the Home
Secretary's power to remove her British citizenship on grounds of national
security. Shamima Begum's solicitor, Gareth Pearce, warned that it had been a
lost opportunity to put into reverse a continuing injustice. The outcome that we
face is that no British child who has been trafficked outside the UK will be
protected by the British state if the Home Secretary invokes national security.
And the government's own independent reviewer of terrorism legislation, Jonathan
Hall-Casey, said that the UK was increasingly out of step with other countries
which are taking women back from the camps in north-east Syria. I do wonder,
whatever happens in this litigation now, bringing it forward to 2023 when the
camps are just beginning to be emptied out of Europeans, whether the UK is
prepared to be an outlier on that. If nothing else, it would create this awful
spectre of Britain's Guantanamo. I'm sure it would be a propaganda coup for
Britain's enemies. Speaking before today's decision to the makers of the BBC
documentary and podcast The Shamima Begum Story, the young woman herself clearly
had little hope of making it back to Britain. What do you think you'll be doing
in seven years' time from now? Still be in this camp. Really? Yeah. You don't
think you'll be home? Nope. Not at all? Nope. Why not? Because ISIS was the
worst thing of the 21st century and I was a part of it and now I have to face
the consequences of my actions and this camp is the consequences of my actions.
Shamima Begum's legal team will continue to challenge the government's decision,
but Home Secretaries do have huge powers to take away British citizenship when
national security is at stake. The government is publishing plans for a radical
shake-up of the way English football is governed. A white paper tomorrow will
include the creation of an independent regulator with the power to licence and
sanction clubs, oversee the financial stability of the game and prevent
unscrupulous owners buying clubs. Here's our sports editor, Dan Rowan. This is a
hugely significant moment for the English game. The key recommendation of a fan-
led review, the independent football regulator is designed to prevent a repeat
of the failings that led to the collapse of Bury FC in 2019, one of a host of
clubs to suffer financial crisis in recent years. The body would oversee a
licensing system to ensure clubs are run sustainably, be responsible for a
strengthened owners and directors test, give fans a greater say in key decisions
and could block teams from joining breakaway competitions like the European
Super League. With the Football League wanting a greater share of the Premier
League's record wealth and the FA pushing for more funding for grassroots
football, the regulator could also intervene to decide how much money flows down
the pyramid. In a statement, the Premier League said it recognised the case for
change, but that it was vital regulation did not deter investment or reduce its
competitiveness through unintended consequences. Ministers say they want to
preserve the top flight's global popularity, but insist a governance overhaul is
now needed for the good of the wider game. The Six Nations match between Wales
and England will now go ahead on Saturday after the Welsh players dropped their
threat to go on strike. They were angry about the contracts they'd been offered
by the Welsh Rugby Union, but a compromise was reached this evening during talks
between the two sides. Reporting from Cardiff, our Wales correspondent, Thomas
Morgan. So far this year has been a disaster for the Welsh Rugby Union. Last
month, allegations of sexism rocked the organisation, leading to the chief
executive standing down. The first team are on a losing streak and contract
negotiations had led to players threatening strike action this weekend. But
after what were described as robust talks between the players and those holding
the purse strings, a compromise has been reached. It appears most of the
players' demands for reform have been accepted. The main sticking point until
this evening was on a variable performance-based portion of future salaries that
will remain alongside another proposed contract described as a hybrid model.
Addressing the media hoarse-voiced and looking strained, captain Ken Owens
admitted this had not been the easiest week or the best look for Welsh rugby. It
has been tough, but we are fronted up in training. We've prepared as we would
for any test match over the last 10 days since the announcement came. We're
looking forward to getting out on Saturday and going toe-to-toe against England.
Had the game been cancelled, it would have meant a huge financial loss, an
estimated Â£10 million for the union, money it desperately needs. The Welsh team
announcement will now take place tomorrow. Everyone involved adamant that the
players remain focused and ready for the match. But after such a turbulent week,
how much of a psychological toll has this really had on players going into a
game with their biggest rivals? Two more of the UK's biggest supermarkets, Tesco
and Aldi, have become the latest to introduce limits on the sale of certain
fruit and vegetables. Asda and Morrisons have already imposed restrictions
because of shortages caused by extreme weather affecting harvests abroad. The
problem has coincided with growers in the UK providing fewer supplies this year
because of rising production costs at home. Our business correspondent Mark
Ashdown has more details. With widening gaps on their shelves, Tesco has now put
a buying limit of three items per customer on tomatoes, peppers and cucumbers.
Aldi has done the same. They followed Asda, which has also restricted those
products, but has gone further, also putting limits on lettuce, salad bags,
broccoli, cauliflower and raspberries. You can buy three of each on one visit.
If you shop in Morrisons, you can buy no more than two each of tomatoes,
cucumbers, lettuce and peppers. The supermarkets say extreme weather over the
past year in Europe and North Africa has hit their suppliers. The UK relies
heavily in the winter months on imported produce. Jed Futter is a retail
consultant and says rising costs this year have also led to UK growers producing
less than usual. Energy bills for greenhouses, they've gone up sevenfold. And if
you can't recover that, if you're growing products and your energy bill is that
high, if you can't recover that and get the cost, you will go bust. So it's much
cheaper just to have nothing there whatsoever. While last year's fuel shortages
and transport delays were widely attributed to Brexit, these shortages are not
thought to be related to the UK leaving the EU. But Fraser McEvott from the
analyst Cantar said prices could still be affected. One item in six in a
supermarket trolley is actually fruit, veg or salad. And prices were already
going up a really high rate before this latest shortage. So, for instance, price
of cucumber up 42 percent, price of two and a half kilo bag of potatoes was up
about 22 percent. So these prices are really hitting people's budgets. The
government says UK food supply chains are resilient and well equipped to deal
with disruption. All the supermarkets involved said they hope to end the buying
restrictions within the next few weeks. Lancashire police are facing a number of
investigations into the way they handled the disappearance of Nicola Bulley. The
county's police and crime commissioner is setting up an independent review after
criticism that officers released too much personal information. It was Bulley,
who was 45, had been missing for more than three weeks when her body was found
on Sunday afternoon. Here's our North of England reporter, Nick Garnett. It took
police more than three weeks to find Nicola Bulley's body, which was discovered
in reeds in the River Wyre on Sunday. In the preceding days, Lancashire police
released highly personal information about her medical background and well-
being. Information the family said the mother of two would never have wanted to
be made public, but it was being done to deter the sale and publication of
stories to newspapers about Nicola. Police said they did it to help explain why
they firmly believed Ms Bulley had gone into the river. There's been widespread
criticism of the force's actions, with some accusing it of victim-blaming, or,
at the very least, being indiscreet. A number of reviews of those decisions will
now be held. Firstly, the Information Commissioner's office is to look at the
release of the highly personal details, while Lancashire Police and Crime
Commissioner Andrew Snowden has announced the College of Policing will begin its
own wide-ranging independent inquiry. It is right that we ask those questions
around why that information was released and make sure that that is properly
reviewed by the ICO, about the investigation and use experts who can have access
to the information in the investigation and can have the national standards to
hand and are the national lead experts in this area to make those assessments.
Meanwhile, the Independent Office for Police Conduct has launched its own
inquiry into previous contact between the police and the family, after a police
car was called to the house earlier in January. Also today, the inquest into
Nicola Bulley's death was opened and adjourned. The coroner said he was
satisfied the body was that of Nicola Bulley after dental records were examined.
A full inquest is due to be held in June. British Steel has confirmed that it's
to close its coking ovens in Scunthorpe, with the loss of up to 260 jobs. The
company's Chinese owners are blaming high inflation and energy costs. Unions say
the plan is devastating for the UK steel industry. More details from our
business editor, Simon Jack. British Steel plans to close the ovens that turn
coal into the hot burning coke that feeds the steel furnaces. Energy prices are
60% higher here than in Germany and workers leaving shift today were making that
connection. We're seeing it's energy prices at the minute. Obviously, the rising
cost of living, you use a lot of electric running a plant like this. The Chinese
owners Jingye have said they are looking to make further cost savings. Unions
fear that means hundreds more job losses and say the future of steelmaking in
the UK is on a knife edge. Mike Wilkinson is regional officer for the Unite
union. Well, our fear is that the recent announcements are probably just the tip
of the ice bag and if it closes, I would see Scunthorpe as being almost on its
knees. The government described today's news as disappointing given negotiations
are ongoing to provide British Steel and the Port Talbot plant owners Tata with
around Â£300 million each in support. Those offers are conditional on long-term
job guarantees and are tied to decarbonisation goals that the firms say will
cost billions. Recent comments from the business secretary, Kemi Badnok, that it
was not a given the UK needed its own steel industry have set alarm bells
ringing throughout the sector. Pay talks have begun between ministers and the
Royal College of Nursing after the union suspended next week's strike in
England. But Unison has announced other NHS staff will hold another day of
strike action across England next month in an escalation of their dispute. Our
health correspondent Sophie Hutchinson reports. There's yet to be any word from
the talks between the health secretary and nurses which have been held this
afternoon. There is, however, some hope that the two sides will find common
ground to reach a deal on a pay rise for nurses in England. Meanwhile, outside
the negotiating room, the relationship between the government and other health
care unions seems to have deteriorated during the day. A new strike was
announced for 8 March by Unison across nine of England's ten ambulance trusts
and at some hospitals, including specialist blood and transplant services. Along
with that, the flicker of hope for the meeting between the doctors' union, the
British Medical Association and government officials was quickly extinguished
this afternoon, with the BMA saying it was very disappointed the health
secretary had decided not to attend. It said there was no offer on the table and
that it was made clear the government was not ready to enter negotiations. It
means the planned three-day walkout by junior doctors next month, the longest
ever attempted by NHS medics, will still go ahead. But the government has said
the health secretary met the BMA in January and now wants to arrange another
meeting as soon as possible. Rishi Sunak has told MPs that Parliament will have
a chance to express its view on any changes to Northern Ireland's trading
arrangements negotiated with the EU. But he told Prime Minister's questions that
intensive discussions were still taking place. The Labour leader, Sir Keir
Starmer, accused Mr Sunak of failing to stand up to what he called the wreckers
on the Conservative benches who oppose the changes. Here's our political
correspondent, Jonathan Blake. Downing Street insists a deal has not yet been
done, but the Prime Minister is coming under pressure to reveal details of an
agreement with the EU which had looked close to being announced this week. Sir
Keir Starmer pressed Rishi Sunak on what he said were the trade-offs that needed
to be faced up to. Northern Ireland, Sir Keir said, would have to follow some EU
law to avoid a hard border with the Irish Republic, and there would need to be a
role for the European Court of Justice. Rishi Sunak responded with what he said
were his criteria. I am a Conservative, a Brexiter and a Unionist, and any
agreement that we reach needs to tick all three boxes. It needs to ensure
sovereignty for Northern Ireland. It needs to safeguard Northern Ireland's place
in our union, and it needs to find practical solutions to the problems faced by
people and businesses. Asked if MPs would get a vote on changes to the Northern
Ireland protocol, the Prime Minister said Parliament would of course express its
view. Did that mean a vote? Downing Street later said it wouldn't get into
hypotheticals. Sir Keir Starmer repeated his pledge to support any deal reached
with the EU and sought to highlight Conservative divisions. It's the same old
story. The country has to wait while he plucks up the courage to take on the
malcontents, the reckless, the wreckers on his own benches. But I'm here to tell
him he doesn't need to worry about that because we will put country before party
and ensure that Labour votes to get it through. The Prime Minister accused
Labour of agreeing to anything the EU offered, which wasn't a strategy, he said,
but surrender. Sir Geoffrey Donaldson, the Westminster leader of Northern
Ireland's main Unionist party, the DUP, asked for a guarantee that the current
trading arrangements would be replaced. It is unacceptable that EU laws are
imposed on Northern Ireland with no democratic scrutiny or consent and will he
assure me that he will address these fundamental constitutional issues and do so
not just by tweaking the protocol but by rewriting the legally binding treaty
text? Mr Sunak said he had heard loud and clear the DUP's concerns. This
afternoon, the Prime Minister held a call with business leaders in Northern
Ireland. Last night, he spoke again to the President of the European Commission,
Ursula von der Leyen. And this evening, the Foreign Secretary, James Cleverley,
met Tory backbenchers as the government continues to try to shore up enough
support to finalise a deal. The Russian President, Vladimir Putin, appears to
have confirmed that his Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, is planning a visit to
Moscow. Mr Putin has held talks with China's most senior foreign policy official
days before the anniversary of Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Russia thanked
China for what it described as its consistently balanced position on the war.
President Putin then went on to address crowds filling Moscow's main stadium for
a patriotic gala, from where our Russia editor, Steve Rosenberg, reports. Today,
the Kremlin put on a show to rally Russians around their President and his war
in Ukraine. At the stadium, which hosted the 2018 Football World Cup final,
patriotic pop songs were the warm-up act, plus speeches reminding Russians that
their country had defeated Napoleon and Hitler and would be victorious in
Ukraine. The event was highly staged-managed. Tens of thousands of people had
been bussed in from colleges, factories and state enterprises. Enter Vladimir
Putin. Sharing the stage with Russian soldiers back from the front line, the
Kremlin leader declared, Right now there is a battle on our historical frontiers
for our people. They are fighting heroically, courageously, bravely. Three
cheers, hurrah! State propaganda here tells Russians that it was the West that
started the war in Ukraine. Many in the stadium seem to believe that. We didn't
start all this, Irina tells me. I trust our President. Not everyone here,
though, was so enthusiastic. In temperatures of minus 15, we saw large crowds
streaming away from the stadium, even before Vladimir Putin arrived. The head of
the United Nations has condemned Russia's invasion of Ukraine as an affront to
the world's conscience. Antonio Guterres was speaking at a special meeting of
the UN General Assembly in New York tonight. It's debating a motion tabled by
Kiev's allies calling for Russia to pull out of Ukraine immediately and
unconditionally. The Kremlin's ambassador accused the West of wanting to defeat
Russia at any cost. Military chiefs in South Africa have defended the country's
decision to host naval exercises with Russian and Chinese forces coinciding with
the one-year anniversary of the Kremlin's invasion of Ukraine. The exercises
have been criticised by the United States and the European Union. Reporting from
Johannesburg, our correspondent Andrew Harding. Russian sailors gathered on deck
as their warship, the Admiral Gorshkov, arrived off the east coast of South
Africa. A huge letter V, the symbol of Russia's invasion of Ukraine, was visible
on the ship's side. At a news conference on board, the Russian captain insisted
this was a scheduled military exercise and neither provocative nor secretive.
His South African counterparts agreed, saying the drills were planned long
before the war in Ukraine began. Major General Sipiwe Sangueni went further,
arguing that this kind of cooperation was actually what Russia and Ukraine
needed today. The Republic of South Africa and other countries as well subscribe
to negotiated settlements. Maybe we are that country which can assist to bring
together different nations who are opposing each other. But the timing, exactly
one year after the invasion, has raised questions about this country's claims to
neutrality. Western nations have criticised the exercises, as has South Africa's
main opposition party, which said the government was being used by the Kremlin
for propaganda purposes. Palestinian officials say at least 10 people, including
an elderly man and several militants, have been killed by Israeli forces during
a raid in the occupied West Bank. Witnesses described hearing explosions and
gunfire as troops entered the city of Nablus. The Israeli military said its
forces were looking for terror suspects. Our Middle East correspondent Tom
Bateman is in Nablus. Explosions and gunfire sounded in the heart of Nablus as
armoured troop carriers and soldiers with dogs raided the narrow streets of the
old city. It triggered armed clashes with Palestinian gunmen before Israeli
troops fired shoulder-launched missiles at a house in which three senior
Palestinian militants were holed up, having said they wouldn't surrender. Israel
says they were involved in the killing of a soldier last year and were planning
imminent attacks. But several of those killed outside are civilians, including
two elderly men, while footage shows young men, apparently unarmed, running away
as gunshots are heard before one falls to the ground. The Israeli army said it
was reviewing the video. Palestinian officials called it a massacre, while the
militant group Hamas said its patience was running out. After a spate of
Palestinian armed attacks, Israel's military search and arrest raids in the
occupied West Bank have intensified over the last year, and this one is one of
the deadliest since 2005, with a huge number also injured. Health officials say
more than 80 people have suffered bullet wounds, now being treated in five
different hospitals. It is a further sign that recent attempts by the US to ease
spiralling tensions are failing. Well, now for a first look at the morning
papers. Some of them lead with the government's plan to reduce an asylum
backlog. The Daily Mail says the fast lane for migrants from Afghanistan,
Eritrea, Syria, Yemen and Libya has been dubbed an amnesty in all but name. The
Times says it's seen a draft of a plan to tackle staff shortages in the NHS. The
document calls for a doubling of medical school places by the end of the decade,
which would require half a dozen new medical schools. In an interview for the
Financial Times, the boss of the Philip Morris tobacco firm admits he would
rather keep its business in Russia than sell under tough terms imposed by the
Kremlin. Yatsek Olchuk said that he can't just abandon his shareholders' assets
in Russia. And Metro highlights the case of a woman who was prevented from
buying 100 cucumbers in a little store because of a shortage of vegetables. The
personal trainer, Lisa Fearns, wanted to make a detox drink but was told by the
manager that she couldn't take that many. In the city, the 100 share index
closed down 47 points at 7,931. On Wall Street, the Dow Jones entered the day
down 85 points at 33,045. On the currency markets, the pound is trading at
$1.20. And against the euro, sterling is at 1.136, which makes a euro worth 88.1
pence. With ten weeks to go until the coronation, the race is on to recruit and
train more bell ringers to mark the big day in May. The Central Council of
Church Bell Ringers says it wants to ring every bell in the country for an event
it's calling Ring for the King. It estimates that there are around 30,000 to
40,000 campanologists in the UK, but 8,000 more are needed. Our correspondent Jo
Black sent this report. On the waterfront at Ipswich, the bells at the Church of
St Clement ring out. It's a deconsecrated church, and this isn't the weekly
service. It's a training session. Balance to balance, so when we ring rounds in
a minute, you can control. That's it. Now control the backstroke. Most of the
new recruits have answered the call to Ring for the King, a recent appeal by the
campanology community to get more people interested in acquiring this skill.
Among them, Freya, a 17-year-old A-level student who has been ringing since
November and says being involved on Coronation Weekend will be something to
remember. It's been something I've been interested in, but I suppose Ring for
the King made me think this is the time to get into it. Amanda Richmond from the
Association of Ringing Teachers is guiding the new members and is pleased with
their progress. We want to make sure that there are ringers for every church so
that we can all ring out for Ring for the King for the coronation. In some areas
of the country, bell ringing is thriving. Those here at St Paul's in Birmingham
are aged between 11 and 80 years old, and their bell ringing school is full. But
in other places, there can be very few. Simon Linford is from the Central
Council of Church Bell Ringers. We probably had a couple of decades of not
really realising that the ringing community was getting older and failing to
replace ourselves, but now we're actively looking to replace ourselves. It takes
around 10 to 12 hours of one-to-one tuition to get a basic level of ringing.
Still time to learn ahead of May 6th. The headlines again. A police officer is
in a critical condition tonight after being shot in Omer in Northern Ireland. It
emerged that thousands of asylum seekers from Afghanistan, Syria, Eritrea, Libya
and Yemen will have their cases fast-tracked by the Home Office. And Shamima
Begum, the East London schoolgirl who ran away to join the Islamic State group,
has lost her appeal to be allowed to return to the UK. BBC News. Which was read
by Charles Carroll. In a couple of minutes, Blake Ritson continues to read
Catherine Rundle's moving and revealing new biography of the Renaissance poet
John Donne. But first, with a look at the weather forecast for the next 24-48
hours and beyond, Helen Willets. Tuesday into Wednesday brought the first
appreciable rain for some time. It wasn't a great amount, only 5 or so
millimetres across some of the eastern parts of England, but here we'd barely
seen that much so far this February. It's still on track to be a very dry
February. We did have 15 millimetres further north and west, Achnagar for
example. We had 11 degrees in Bute Park in Cardiff, which is cooler than it has
been, but only 6 degrees, quite chilly at Spade Adam in Cumbria. But once the
weather front cleared away, we had 8 hours of sunshine at Prestwick in Ayrshire.
Now those clear skies have been drifting southwards through the night, but for
England and Wales, there's still quite a bit of cloud out there, particularly in
the south with some bursts of rain, some sleetiness, and even snow over the
hills of Wales and the south-west, perhaps the peak districts in Pennines. But
it is clearing from the north, and as it clears from the north, it turns cold
enough for a touch of frost, mostly 3 or 4 further south under the cloud. Still
misty and murky with hill fog here as well. Now that will be slow to clear for
the day ahead, particularly across southern and eastern parts of England, but
elsewhere it looks much drier, much brighter, fewer showers around, except in
the south with that band of cloud. It will still be chilly, temperatures only 6
to 8 degrees Celsius, particularly close to the east coast, and it could be a
little bit icy first thing, of course, with a touch of frost in the north. And
for Northern Ireland, where the showers have been clearing under the clear
skies, a cold and a frosty start to Thursday morning, where the surfaces are
damp, we'll have some ice to watch out for, but we should see plenty of sunshine
first thing. However, we will see cloud building through the second half of the
day and ahead of the next weather front. Temperatures here about 10 degrees
Celsius. For Scotland as well, we've had some wintry showers around. They should
be easing down, mainly dry by morning, but frosty quite widely with some ice, of
course, where the roads and pavements are damp. And then it will become
increasingly cloudy with some more rain to come across the north of Scotland and
the northern isles later as the breeze picks up. Further south, we hold on to
the sunshine and temperatures about 8 degrees. Helen, thank you. Helen Willetts
at the BBC Weather Centre. And now on Radio 4, time for Catherine Rundell's new
biography of the Renaissance poet, John Donne. Today, The Loss of His Brother
Henry and the Loss of His Faith. Super Infinite is read by Blake Ritson. Donne's
pleasure in Lincoln's Inn, in teasing his fellow students, in testing the scope
of his linguistic virtuosity, lasted roughly a year. It was shattered by a
double bill of disaster, by persecution and by plague. In 1593, cases of plague
began to grow exponentially. The theatres were closed, the bear baiting was
forced to shut, the brothels emptied. In the streets, officials wielded three-
foot-long martial wands to swat at people who weren't maintaining social
distancing. William Shakespeare, who across the river was just beginning to make
his name as a playwright, found his livelihood temporarily overturned, swiftly
switched to poetry, and wrote Venus and Adonis, an epic which abruptly made him
famous at court. Donne wrote a lament for the city's swagger. Now pleasures
dearth our city doth possess, Our theatres are filled with emptiness, As lank
and thin as every street and way As a woman delivered yesterday. Donne had been
at Lincoln's Inn for a year, when his brother Henry was arrested. Henry was
John's junior by a year, and had followed him after Oxford to Thavey's Inn,
close by Lincoln's Inn. In the spring of 1593, Henry took a young priest called
William Harrington into his chambers. He planned to hide him from Elizabeth's
priest-hunters, and feed him and care for him in secret. He was still barely
more than a child, or he would have seen the impossibility of it. Henry's fellow
scholars would have been all around, eating and working and gossiping. How did
he expect to get food to him? How did he expect to wash Harrington's clothes, to
dispose of his waste, to keep friends away? In May, without warning, Henry's
chambers were raided. A man called Richard Young hunted through his rooms and
found Harrington inside. Both William and Henry were arrested, but Harrington,
trained to withstand pain, at first steadfastly denied being involved in the
Catholic Church. Henry betrayed him. He broke under questioning, and admitted
that Harrington had said he was a priest, and did shrive him. To shrive is to
listen to confession. Henry and Harrington were sent first to the Clink prison,
and then to Newgate. Newgate jail, rebuilt in 1423, was notorious for its dirt
and cruelty. By the time Henry was sent there, it was a grotesque place, cold
and dark and humiliating. Corruption and bribery were accepted as the norm.
Prisoners were kept in leg-irons and forced to pay for their own board. The
floor was said to crunch because of the carpet of lice, dead and alive. It was
from Newgate that Harrington was tried and found guilty of high treason on 18
February 1594. He was subjected to the death of a traitor. It was reported that
he was drawn from Newgate to Tyburn, and there hanged, cut down alive, struggled
with the hangman, but was bowled and quartered. Henry never saw his friend leave
Newgate for the scaffold. The plague was running untrammelled through the cells.
Dunn did not visit his brother in jail. He delayed a few days. Perhaps he was
afraid of the plague, or perhaps there was nobody who could tell him there was
an urgency. He may not have known what was happening to the boy with whom he had
gone, small and alone, to face the older, taller undergraduates of Oxford.
Within days of arriving in Newgate, Henry was feverish, tortured by buboes. He
died fast. He was nineteen years old. Dunn barely wrote about his brother's
death in the letters that we have, but fever and corruption and plague got into
his writing. Often ill in later life, Dunn was handsome, but not strong. Henry's
death must have made it more terrifying. To have lost his brother to plague
would have made every one of Dunn's own itches or coughs a terror. Later in
life, Dunn repeatedly fell ill with what's now thought to have been relapsing
fever, a tick-borne infection. The symptoms were exactly those of the early
stages of plague. Each time he felt it rise in him, there would have been the
question, was it the old familiar fever, or had Henry's contagion come for him?
There's a kind of imaginative ferocity to Dunn's writing about death after
Henry, and it grows over time as he loses more and more of the people he loves,
and their ghosts pile up around him. He becomes a peddler of the grotesque, a
forensic scholar of the entropy of the body. The word decay appears a dozen
times in his verse, and that old Norse word, rot, is scattered through his work.
Of an imagined love rival, he writes, In early and long scarceness may he rot.
In an elegy, he demands of us, Think that thy body rots. He wrote of death, Now
wantonly he spoils and eats us not, But breaks off friends and lets us piecemeal
rot. Between Thomas More's execution in 1535 and Henry's death in 1593, we can
count eleven members of Dunn's family who died in exile or in prison for their
Catholicism. There was some majesty and glory, as with Thomas More, who ended by
being canonised by the Catholic Church, but also plenty of humiliation and muddy
uncertainties. Exactly when Dunn turned from Catholicism to Protestantism is the
central boxing ring of Dunn's studies, how, when and why the young man decided
to turn away from the rituals and well-loved rites of his childhood. In 1593, at
Henry's death, Dunn was still Catholic, and when he married, he was not. What
happened in between? Is it possible that he licked a finger and held it to the
political wind and saw that no man could advance while remaining a Catholic?
It's possible there was never a change of heart, only of expedience, but if the
conversion was real, there was probably no single burst of light or dark that
caused it. Like almost everything in our rusty-hinged, slow-moving world, it
happened in pieces. There was the power of his ambition, and his understanding
that promotion and success would not be compatible with open Catholicism. But
there would also have been new books and new conversations, drinking with
Protestants, flirtations with Protestants. There would have been the pull of
other allegiances over denominational ones, to the monarch and to the idea of
nationhood, which slowly took on the shape of national loyalism and led him
towards the Church of England. His priorities shifted, realigned, took on new
shapes. You, too, have experienced time. And what happened to Henry must have
been part of it. Dunn wrote nothing that explicitly names his brother, in part
because he wrote very little about any of his family. There are far more of his
words to be found about eagles, dust, the suburb of Mitcham and Tacks, than his
own mother. But he did write, Grief which did drown me and half quenched by it
are satric fires which urged me to have writ in scorn of all. In that lack of
naming you could hear the guilt that must have haunted him. He would have known
that Henry was sheltering Harrington. It's been suggested Dunn may even have
helped shelter the man himself, although there's no evidence for it except the
bond of closeness between the two brothers. The loss shaped him. It seemed to
clarify his sense of the necessity of seizing control of your own self and own
fate. He told a friend in a verse letter in the 1590s, Be thine own home and in
thyself dwell. Henry was dead, and the delight of London was dead too. By 1596
Dunn was keen to get away. He was finished with the law and with the life he had
led. Untrained and inexperienced though he was, Dunn joined a naval expedition
against Spain. In early June they set out, dressed in their finest clothes,
silver and lace gleaming, cheered by crowds. Their weapons shone, and they were
some of the best-equipped men to have departed England's docks for many years.
The first portion of the expedition was an Admiral's dream. After just over two
weeks the English sailed in sight of Cadiz, where they launched a cannon attack
on the Spanish ships in harbour. It was a great success, but the kind of success
that was terrible to watch. Dunn wrote in his epigram, Nave Arsa, a burnt ship.
Out of a fired ship which by no way but drowning could be rescued from the
flame, some men leaped forth and ever as they came near the foe's ships did by
their shot decay. So all were lost which in the ship were found, they in the sea
being burnt, they in the burnt ship drowned. In 1597 he took part in a second
unsuccessful expedition with Walter Raleigh, which immediately ran into a
violent storm. Dunn wrote that it rained more than if the sun had drunk the sea
before, and some coffined in their cabins lie, equally grieved that they are not
dead and yet must die. In chaos they made it back to shore. Slowly the ships
were repaired, the sailors loitered about in the port waiting to begin again,
though some thought better of it, found horses and galloped home. Dunn was
tougher than the boys who went riding home for warm fires and clean clothes, but
he was underlighted by the way the days were going. In late August the fleet
prepared to set out again for Spain, but the crew was depleted, dirty and sick.
The rest of the expedition was chaotic, the ships communicated largely by musket
fire and it's difficult to be specific with a musket. The Spanish fleet evaded
the English. The English could find no viable way to attack it. They seized a
few straggling ships but failed to take several larger ones. They returned home,
rocking and tipping through huge waves, to a royal reception as stormy as the
weather. Nobody gathered at the dock to cheer. Sailors had foot rot and
suppurating wounds. Dunn did not attempt the privateering life again. Perhaps,
though, voyaging had got into his blood or perhaps it was always there. His
poetry after his sally on the sea is shot through with images of exploration,
discovery, fresh territory. Oh, my America, my new-found land! New-found lands
were at the forefront of the Renaissance mind, that and maps of lands. The first
accurate map of England and Wales, Christopher Saxton's Atlas of 1579, became a
kind of talisman. Dunn would have seen it. Years later, near the end of his
life, he would imagine himself a paper-thin chart. Whilst my physicians by their
love are grown cosmographers and I their map who lie flat on this bed. And just
as West and East, when the map is folded, meet and touch and become the same, so
West, death, becomes the East, rebirth. As West and East in all flat maps and I
am one are one, so death doth touch the resurrection. Before that, though,
before he knew about pain and fever, there was the thrill of exploration. Dunn's
verse insists over and over that we approach another body with the same awe with
which we would step onto unknown earth. In the Good Morrow, from around 1602, he
wrote it out, step by step instructions. Let sea discoverers to new worlds have
gone, let maps to others worlds on worlds have shown, let us possess one world,
each hath one and is one. www.mooji.org Copyright Â© 2014 Mooji Media Ltd. All
Rights Reserved. No part of this recording may be reproduced âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª
âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª âªâª
âªâª âªâª âªâª And that completes the Shipping Bulletin. on behalf of my colleague
Charles Carroll in the newsroom, and myself Al Ryan, here in Broadcasting House,
if you have been, thanks for listening. Have a safe, quiet, and peaceful night.
Good night. Good night. We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are
distributed via third party services and platforms, and the BBC stream you are
currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an
internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the
manufacturer. If you are listening on web or mobile, this service is available
to stream on BBC sounds.