TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-05H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 their differences. The newsroom is next. This is the BBC World Service, the
world's radio station. It's four o'clock GMT. I'm Jackie Leonard. This is the
newsroom from the BBC World Service. The US Justice Department says the former
President Donald Trump shouldn't have official immunity from prosecution in
civil lawsuits over his supporters attack on Congress two years ago. The number
of people confirmed dead in the Greek train disaster has risen to 57. It was a
personal mistake. This has been written and of course we will wait the police
investigation to give us answers on that. A case that's gripped the US. A
prominent lawyer is found guilty of killing his wife and son. Roman Catholic
bishops in Portugal meet today to discuss a report that found widespread
evidence of child sexual abuse in the church. Also in the programme. We look
back at the life and work of the saxophonist Wayne Shorter who has died aged 89.
All here on the newsroom from the BBC World Service. We'll begin with a news
bulletin. BBC News. Hello, I'm Gareth Barlow. The US Justice Department has told
a federal appeals court that the former President Donald Trump should not be
immune from prosecution over civil lawsuits relating to the attack on the US
Capitol two years ago. David Willis reports. The US Justice Department has
determined that whilst an American president might enjoy considerable latitude
when it comes to making remarks that some might deem controversial, such a
loophole does not extend to the incitement of violence. Two police officers and
nearly a dozen democratic lawmakers have been seeking to make Mr Trump
personally liable for injuries, physical and psychological, suffered on the day
of the insurrection. A spokesman for Mr Trump urged the courts to rule in short
order and dismiss what he called frivolous lawsuits. The Cambodian opposition
leader Kem Sokha has been banned from politics and sentenced to 27 years in
detention for treason. Kem Sokha was once considered the main challenger to the
long-term Prime Minister Hun Sen. He was accused of colluding with foreign
governments and his Cambodian National Rescue Party was dissolved in 2017. Kem
Sokha has always denied the allegations. Clashes between protesters and the
security forces outside an oil field in southern Colombia have led to the deaths
of a policeman and a civilian. After the incident, community leaders took more
than 80 police officers and oilfield workers as hostage. Our America's editor,
Leonarda Rocha, reports. The violence happened after days of protests by
residents who had blocked access to the oil field in Caquet√° province in
Colombia's Amazon rainforest region. The protesters have been demanding that a
company exploring for oil there carry out work to improve conditions on a local
road. The situation remains tense in an area where dissident members of the FARC
rebel group are known to operate. President Gustavo Petro has sent a team to
negotiate with community leaders. He has also ordered the deployment of the
armed forces in the province. A prominent lawyer in the United States has been
found guilty of killing his wife and son at their mansion. Alex Murdoch showed
little emotion as he was convicted of shooting the pair at their family property
in South Carolina. Prosecutors said he wanted to distract attention from his
theft of millions of dollars from his clients, which he used to fund an
expensive drug habit. South Carolina's Attorney General Alan Wilson gave this
reaction. Today's verdict proves that no one, no one, no matter who you are in
society is above the law. And our criminal justice system worked tonight. It
gave a voice to Maggie and Paul Murdoch, who were brutally mowed down and
murdered on the night of June 7th, 2021 by someone that they loved and someone
that they trusted. World News from the BBC. The US Secretary of State has told
Russia's foreign minister that Washington is prepared to support Ukraine to
defend itself for as long as necessary. Antony Blinken and Sergey Lavrov met
briefly on the sidelines of the G20 summit in India, which ended without a final
statement due to disagreements over Russia's invasion. The number of people
confirmed dead in Tuesday's train crash in Greece has risen to 57. Coroners have
been using DNA samples to identify the victims. Rail workers across Greece held
a one-day strike, insisting they had repeatedly warned about lax standards and
underinvestment. More than 2,000 people protested for a second day in Athens.
The Scottish government has become the first in the world to ban an anaesthetic
gas named desfluorine from hospitals because of its contribution to global
warming. Smeeta Mundusat has the details. Over the last decade, desfluorine gas
has been used widely in hospitals across the UK to help keep people unconscious
during operations. But there's growing recognition that it can be harmful to the
environment, and many British hospitals have already decided to phase it out.
Different anaesthetics are being used as alternatives. In Scotland, experts say
eliminating the gas entirely from its peak use in 2017 will save emissions
equivalent to powering 1,700 homes a year. A similar ban is coming in in England
next year. A new study says fires in the boreal forests of North America and
Eurasia are a ticking time bomb, with greenhouse gas emissions increasing over
the last 20 years. Wildfires in the forests around the Arctic Circle are
increasingly frequent and have been linked to regional warming, which is the
fastest in the world. The study says that in 2021, emissions from fires in
boreal forests were the equivalent to double the carbon emitted from the global
aviation industry. Live from London, that's the latest BBC News. Hello, I'm
Jackie Leonard and this is the newsroom from the BBC World Service. Donald Trump
has long argued he should be immune from civil lawsuits related to the attack on
the US Capitol two years ago because he was president at the time. But the US
Justice Department has told a federal appeals court that it believes the
lawsuits brought against him by police officers injured in those attacks should
go ahead. It said an exception should be made in Mr Trump's case because
incitement to violence wasn't part of his official duties. It's another setback
for the former president, whose legal woes are mounting. The Guardian's
Washington DC bureau chief, David Smith, told us what was at the heart of the
Justice Department's legal challenge. Well, it's really this issue of the free
speech of the president of the United States. Donald Trump is arguing that he
has absolute immunity when acting as president in an official capacity and can
basically say anything he wants when at the time that he was president. But the
Justice Department argued otherwise in court today and said, yes, the president
has a traditional function of public communication, but that does not include
incitement of imminent private violence. Mr Trump's lawyers, though, have rather
dismissed this, haven't they? They describe the whole thing as frivolous. That's
right. And we saw a spokesperson for them saying that Trump's speech called for
peace and patriotism and respect for the men and women of law enforcement. They
dispute that his remarks did lead to violence. And they also dispute the idea
that he did not have immunity at that stage. And just explain to us a little bit
more about this immunity. A president can say anything because of the First
Amendment. This is the commander in chief. The idea is a bit like members of
Parliament in Britain, I suppose, or members of Congress in the US. The normal
rules of libel and slander and so on do not apply. And American presidents
traditionally have been given a very wide berth. But there is a ruling from the
1960s that suggests certainly the Justice Department argues that that does not
protect speech that incites or produces imminent lawless action or potential
violence. And so that's the road they're going down. Okay, so what might happen
next? Well, this is only step one. Even though the Justice Department is arguing
this, the court may decide otherwise. And certainly legal experts think that the
members of Congress and police officers bringing this suit still face an uphill
battle. They would actually have to show that Trump made a direct and
intentional call for imminent violence, which is going to be pretty hard to
prove. But presumably, if they did, then potentially they could sue Trump for
financial damages in addition to all his other legal troubles. That was David
Smith, the Guardian's Washington DC Bureau Chief. Alex Murdoch's murder trial, a
tale of death, deception and drugs has gripped the US. The lawyer was once
considered one of the most powerful men in South Carolina. But two years ago, he
found himself on the opposite side of the law when he called police to report
that his wife and son had been shot on the grounds of their family estate.
Charges followed. And a few hours ago, after a six week trial, he stood
expressionless as the judge read out the jury's verdicts. Mr. Murdoch, you now
having been found guilty of two counts of murder involving your wife and your
son, two counts of possession of a weapon during the commission of a violent
crime. Of course, the minimum sentence for murder is 30 years. The maximum
sentence is life imprisonment. Our North America correspondent, David Willis,
told us more about the trial. The prosecution claimed, Jackie, that Alex Murdoch
murdered his wife, Maggie, and his 22 year old son, Paul, in order to conceal
evidence of financial crimes, basically. The court heard that Alex Murdoch
embezzled millions of dollars from his clients over the years in order to feed
an addiction to a prescription painkilling drugs. And Mr. Murdoch admitted a
number of crimes on the stand, including fraud, embezzlement, even a faked
assassination attempt. But he denied killing his wife and son in June 2021. And
even in the absence of a murder weapon or indeed any evidence of blood on his
clothing or anything like that, that was recovered, it took the jury less than
three hours at the end of this six week trial to convict Alex Murdoch on all the
charges that he was facing. Sentencing has been deferred until tomorrow, Jackie,
and Alex Murdoch faces the possibility of life imprisonment. He had pleaded not
guilty. What did he say happened? That's right. And for decades, the Murdoch
family had made an ally out of juries, of course, walking out of courtrooms with
the judgments that built their fortunes, that cemented their influence, if you
like, in that community, in that part of South Carolina. And his decision to
take the stand to testify in front of the jury was unusual. It was also
something of a legal risk, perhaps a testament as well to the sort of enduring
self-belief and the confidence in his own ability to sway people in quite the
way that he'd done with juries over the years. Now, outside the court, the
prosecutor in this case, Crichton Walters, told reporters, it doesn't matter who
your family is, it doesn't matter how much money you have or how prominent you
are. If you do wrong, if you break the law, justice will be done in South
Carolina. That was David Willis. Cambodia is one of many countries where even
the appearance of democracy has been beating a steady retreat. The latest
example, the opposition leader Kem Sokha has been given a long prison term on
treason charges, which he has denied. He's also been banned from politics. The
United States immediately denounced his conviction, which comes just months
before Cambodia holds another election, as a miscarriage of justice. The Prime
Minister Hun Sen has been in power for almost four decades. Here's our Southeast
Asia correspondent, Jonathan Head. The Cambodian courts are widely seen as being
firmly under the control of Hun Sen, the man who's ruled Cambodia for 38 years.
So few will be surprised by this verdict. Kem Sokha, a former human rights
advocate, led the main opposition party through a series of increasingly strong
election performances to a point where it seemed poised to unseat Hun Sen from
power. In September 2017, he was arrested in his home and charged with
conspiring with the United States to overthrow the government. His Cambodian
National Rescue Party was dissolved and most of its leaders either prosecuted or
forced to flee into exile. The next general election is scheduled for July this
year, at a time when Hun Sen is planning to hand over power to his eldest son.
With Kem Sokha now sentenced and banned from politics for life, and the
remaining opposition party severely weakened, there's little to threaten this
succession plan for one of the world's longest-serving autocrats. Western
governments will once again voice their disapproval. But the unwavering backing
of China, these days Cambodia's most important strategic and economic partner,
gives Hun Sen the luxury of being able to ignore the complaints that he's killed
the democracy which was built at great cost to international donors after the
end of the catastrophic civil war which all but destroyed Cambodia in the 1970s
and 80s. That was Jonathan Head. A coroner involved in the investigation into
Tuesday's train crash in Greece, its deadliest ever, has told the BBC that at
least 57 people are now known to have died. More than 350 passengers, mainly
students returning from a public holiday, were on board the service from Athens
to Thessaloniki when it collided with a freight train. From the site of the
crash in central Greece, Nick Beek reports. This is a tragedy which has played
out in the foothills of Mount Olympus, home to the gods in Greek mythology.
Today's Greek government has been quick to blame human error for the country's
worst ever train disaster. But the swift and simple explanation has caused
rising anger. Plenty believe the crash could have been avoided had decades of
safety warnings been heeded. Today rail workers across Greece walked out,
affecting national services and the subway in Athens. They claimed it was not
safe for them to do their work. A 59-year-old station master in Larissa, the
city nearest the crash site, appeared in court charged with manslaughter by
negligence. Visiting a hospital nearby where relatives of the missing had
gathered, Zoe Rapti, Greece's deputy minister of health, told the BBC her
government wasn't to blame for the crash. It was a personal mistake. This has
been written and of course we will wait for the police investigation to give us
answers on that. Of course things should have been done during these years, but
of course Greece has faced a big economic crisis for more than 10 years, which
means that many things went back. The station master has denied any wrongdoing,
blaming the collision on a technical fault. But there are claims he may be
scapegoated to mask long-standing systemic failings. The Greek government has
promised an independent investigation which it insists will deliver justice for
the victims and their families. That was Nick Beek. And a reminder of our main
news at the moment, the US Justice Department has said that the former President
Donald Trump should not have official immunity from prosecution in civil
lawsuits over his supporters' attack on Congress two years ago. Since the Women,
Life, Freedom protests in Iran erupted in September last year, it's thought 500
protesters have died. Human rights campaigners say around 20,000 young women and
men have been detained by the security forces and hundreds are still reported to
be in jail. Among those imprisoned was a 26-year-old boxer, Ashkan Mouravati. He
had been shot multiple times during the protests. He was considered at risk of
execution but somehow managed to flee to a neighbouring country from where our
correspondent Gia Ghoul spoke to him. I know every moment I'm at risk. I escaped
through the mountainous border region in a very bad condition. I faced death
every moment. I lost lots of blood. My whole body was shivering. I'm a
professional athlete but it was difficult to walk. I had shortage of breath. In
late October last year, the Kurdish city of Sanandaj in western Iran was one of
the epicentres of protests against the regime. In this video, Ashkan confronts
the security forces but he was shot multiple times in close range and beaten up.
I took off my shirt. I shouted, shoot me. I have no fear of you. My goal was to
keep the Women, Life, Freedom uprising alive. I went there to die. Ashkan ends
up in an intensive care unit in a hospital. To stop bleeding, Ashkan's medical
team was forced to operate on him multiple times. My legs' main artery was torn
apart. I was bleeding heavily and my body was full of pellet balls. Some of the
pellet balls penetrated my lungs. One night, the security forces stormed the
hospital and took him from an intensive care unit room to a prison cell. Moving
a patient who is connected to an oxygen tank from an ICU unit to a prison cell,
it means death. It means murder. In prison, my wounds were infected. I was
rubbing salt on my open wounds to fight infections. The officials were worried
his death in custody may spark another mass protest again in Iranian Kurdistan.
I was released on a heavy bail for 20 days to go to a hospital, treat my wounds
and then surrender myself to the prison officials. But instead of going to a
hospital, Ashkan escaped Iran. The prosecutor accused Ashkan of maharabah, which
means waging a war against the God, a crime punishable by hanging in Iran. My
mom begged me to leave. She said, if you stay, they execute you. I would never
forgive you. I hope to be alive and go back to that square where I was shot. I
want to chant again, woman, life, freedom, democracy and equality. Mora Vartey
was speaking to GR Goel. Roman Catholic bishops in Portugal are meeting today to
discuss a report that found widespread evidence of child sexual abuse in the
church, including by serving priests. More than 200 members have signed an open
letter calling for reform. Alison Roberts has the details. The extraordinary
session of the Portuguese Episcopal Conference has been called to discuss a
searing report presented last month by an independent commission and to find
ways of offering justice to victims. But the 220 signatories of the open letter
clearly want to keep up the pressure on a church hierarchy that it says must
stop being authoritarian and arrogant and to be more inclusive, more fraternal
and humbler. Some of the signatories were behind an earlier letter that helped
persuade the bishops to set up the commission in the first place. Among their
demands now are the immediate suspension of priests facing well-documented
suspicions of sexual abuse, even without these being proven in court,
psychological aid for victims and major reforms in how allegations are handled
with an independent body to monitor this. Alison Roberts in Lisbon. Wildlife
species are rapidly disappearing around the world, but occasionally a new one
does get discovered. An international team of researchers has just found a
family of snakes that's completely new to science. Anna Aslam reports. The
evolutionary tree of snakes is complicated and tangled. To try and make better
sense of it, researchers conducted thousands of DNA tests and examined the
individual bones that make up snake skulls. After a decade-long study, they
realized that some snakes, which had mistakenly been included in other families
over the years, had a set of unique genetic characteristics and made up a
completely separate family. The researchers hailed the discovery as a rare
occurrence in modern science. It's believed the Microlapidae family emerged from
the evolutionary tree about 50 million years ago. It consists of three species,
which can be found in Kenya and Tanzania, as well as parts of the Middle East,
including Israel, the West Bank and Syria. It's thought the snakes originated in
East Africa and then, at some point in history, made their way north through the
Great Rift Valley. The snakes are small and usually have glossy yellow and black
stripes, so the researchers joked that you'd definitely see them coming. Anna
Aslam. A BBC investigation has found hundreds of dogs being smuggled into the UK
from illegal puppy mills in Eastern Europe. The demand for new pets in lockdown
has fuelled a sharp rise in dog smuggling into the UK, which is one of the
biggest markets for puppies. Our reporter Anna Adams infiltrated online groups
who are buying and selling puppies online. A charity worker removes the lid on a
shallow, rusty box. Inside are four puppies, which they've rescued from illegal
breeders in Hungary. A BBC Our World investigation found smugglers breaking the
law and abusing the pet passport scheme to traffic pregnant dogs and puppies
into the UK. They make their way to the UK on land via Germany, where police
have seized more than 3,000 dogs since 2021. The BBC learned about one case
where a Hungarian national tried to bring four heavily pregnant Dachshunds into
the UK in squalid conditions, claiming they were his pets. We spoke to staff
who'd rescued the dogs at the animal shelter, but they asked us not to use their
names. The boxes were far too small, very dirty and full of urine. At the animal
shelter, they gave birth to 21 puppies, worth more than ¬£42,000. They weren't
used to any contact with people. They didn't know any sounds, and the outside
was also alien to them. The first time we put them on the meadow, they were
completely overwhelmed. They didn't know what to do. The smuggler was released
without charge in Germany, a few days later he was caught by British border
authorities as he tried to smuggle more dogs into the UK. But he was released
again without charge. We tried to contact him, but he didn't respond. The BBC
infiltrated a network of online groups buying and selling pregnant dogs. In the
UK, it's illegal to sell puppies that you haven't bred yourself. Back in
Hungary, we meet Adina, who's rescued hundreds of dogs from puppy mills. She
says breeders will go to extreme lengths to hide the dogs. She's a rescue from a
puppy mill in Karcz√°g, where there are nearly 150 dogs. The adults had their
vocal cords cut so that they couldn't bark and draw attention from the
neighbours. As long as the humans are alive, the dogs are safe. As long as the
UK's appetite for puppies continues, experts say smugglers will persist. They
say the only way to stop them is to refuse to buy a dog unless you are sure of
where it's come from. That report by Anna Adams, and you can watch the full
documentary on this weekend's Our World episode on BBC World News TV. Now let's
get some sports news with Paul Saras. The former England cricket captain Michael
Vaughan is expected to give evidence to the Discipline Commission examining the
racism scandal surrounding Yorkshire County Cricket Club later on Friday. The
BBC Sports editor Dan Rowan has more. Michael Vaughan captained England to ashes
glory in 2005, but for the last two years, his reputation and his career as a
BBC broadcaster have been in jeopardy after he was alleged to have used racist
language by a former Yorkshire teammate, Azeem Rafiq. A current England star,
Adeel Rashid, has corroborated Rafiq's allegation. Asked by Vaughan's lawyer
Christopher Stoner KC of his memory of the alleged incident, Rashid claimed
Vaughan had said, there's too many of you lot, we need to do something about it.
Mr Stoner suggested that Rashid did not have a clear memory of events, which
Rashid rejected, along with claims that he'd been pressured into backing up
Rafiq. However, he did say that he didn't believe Vaughan was a racist, and that
he believed the comments were a poor attempt at humour. Vaughan himself is set
to give evidence on the third day of this hearing, the latest episode in a saga
that continues to cast a shadow over the game. The Formula One season gets
underway later on Friday, with first practice at the Bahrain Grand Prix ahead of
Sunday's race. Britain's seven-time world champion Lewis Hamilton says the
struggles of last season put him in a better place this time round. I would say
I'm a lot more relaxed, a lot more, even after like the three days, just knowing
that we're not in this area fighting for pole and fight for win position just
yet. After a difficult year last year, I feel we're best prepared for whatever's
thrown at us this year, good or bad. So I know who to go to in my team, I know
how to deal with the struggle, and through it and through hard work, we will get
there. Football and FIFA could change the 2026 World Cup format back to four
team groups. After the excitement generated by last year's tournament in Qatar,
the expanded tournament of 48 teams was initially supposed to be 16 groups of
three in the US, Mexico and Canada, but a rethink could be announced as soon as
this month. And in golf, the world number one John Rahm shot an opening round 65
to lead the Arnold Palmer Invitational by two strokes. Paul Sarras. Now we're
ending this edition of the Newsroom with a look at the life of one of America's
greatest jazz saxophonists, Wayne Shorter, who's died at the age of 89. He
played with the likes of Miles Davis, Joni Mitchell, Carlos Santana and Herbie
Hancock, who in tribute described him as irreplaceable. Shorter most famously
performed with the hugely successful 1970s fusion group Weather Report. David
Sillitoe begins with one of his best known hits, Birdland. In Weather Report,
Wayne Shorter's soaring tenor saxophone was part of the magic that turned the
jazz fusion band into a mainstream child success. Born in New Jersey, he was
part of three of jazz's most celebrated combos. Art Blakey's Jazz Messengers,
Miles Davis's mid-60s quintet with Herbie Hancock and in 1970, Weather Report.
He also helped bring jazz into rock. Recording with Stilly Dan, Carlos Santana
and here Joni Mitchell, who considered him a poetic, kindred spirit. 11 Grammys,
a Lifetime Achievement Award. Wayne Shorter was jazz royalty. That was David
Sillitoe on the life of Wayne Shorter, who has died aged 89. I'm Jackie Lennart
and let's finish the programme with a little bit more of Birdland, itself a
tribute to another jazz great, Charlie Parker. Thanks for listening. This is the
BBC World Service, remembering one of the world's most famous political
activists through music. I'm Jonah Matrading and this is a song I wrote for
Nelson Mandela. As the first democratically elected president of South Africa,
Mandela's remarkable journey to freedom was followed around the world. Music
inspired him and it was central to the cultures that made him. Closer music
informs its people of closer values. It can be organised, it can be spontaneous,
sung in a group and it can be about anything, work, play. In his own words, it
is music and dancing that makes me at peace with the world and at peace with
myself. Mandela, a legacy in music. At bbcworldservice.com slash documentaries
or wherever you get your podcasts. When we think of division in the Middle East,
it's the Israeli-Palestinian conflict which normally comes to mind. But there's
a new and dangerous tension in Israel between its own Jewish people because of a
controversial plan to change the justice system. Critics say it could lead to
stricter Jewish laws being imposed on all. Join me, Jolande Nel, in Jerusalem as
I meet two rabbis at odds over the issues and try and bring them together.
That's on Heart and Soul after the BBC News. BBC News with Gareth Barlow.
Cambodia's most prominent opposition leader has been barred from politics and
sentenced to 27 years in detention for treason. Kamsokha was arrested in 2017 at
a time when his rising popularity threatened the long-serving Prime Minister Hun
Sen's grip on power. About 80 police officers and oil workers have been taken
hostage by protesters at an oil field in Colombia's Amazon region. Earlier, two
people died in clashes between local people and the security forces in Koteka
province. The residents want a company that's exploring for oil there to build a
new road. The US Justice Department says the former president, Donald Trump,
should not be immune from prosecution in civil lawsuits over the attack on the
US Capitol two years ago. It argued that Mr Trump exceeded his presidential
duties by inciting people to violence. A prominent lawyer in the United States
has been found guilty of killing his wife and son, but prosecutors said Alex
Murdoch wanted to distract attention from the theft of millions of dollars from
his clients. The number of people confirmed dead in Tuesday's train crash in
Greece has now risen to 57. The Tunisian authorities have banned an opposition
rally that was due to take place on Sunday. Members of the opposition coalition
that called it are accused of crimes against the state. A new study says fires
in the boreal forests of North America and Eurasia are a ticking time bomb, with
greenhouse gas emissions increasing over the last 20 years. It says that in
2021, carbon emissions from fires in boreal forests were about double those from
the Global Aviation Industry. And the Scottish government has become the first
in the world to ban an anaesthetic gas named desflurin from hospitals because of
its contribution to global warming. There's growing recognition that it could be
harmful to the environment, and many hospitals have already decided to use
alternatives. World News from the BBC. Hi there, Rabbi. It's Yolande here from
BBC. Hi. Hello. Good morning. I hope everything is well. And I just wanted to
make sure that we're on schedule for this morning. Yes, I think I might even be
at the address, but I'm not totally sure. I'm driving. I should be there within
three or four minutes. Joshua Feffer is not your typical Rabbi. I'm not a
regular Rabbi. I'm a regular Rabbi. In three or four minutes. Joshua Feffer is
not your typical ultra-Orthodox or Haredi Rabbi. Slight in build and with
gingery hair and glasses, he describes himself as quite chilled out. I can vouch
for that. He's the only Rabbi from the traditionally conservative community here
who agreed to speak to me for this programme. I'm very, very flexible here. You
know, whatever works for you, I'll try to be a good boy. I'm Yolande Nell, and
for this week's heart and soul for the BBC World Service, I'm in Jerusalem to
look into a battle that people are saying is threatening to tear Israel apart.
No, this is not another story of Israeli and Palestinian tensions, but one that
has pitted a rapidly growing ultra-Orthodox Jewish population against secular
Jews who fear becoming a minority in Israel. Over the last few months, tens of
thousands of Israelis, mostly with more liberal politics, have taken to the
streets, protesting against reforms that they say will weaken the judiciary and
give the government too much power. Ultra-Orthodox parties have become
influential in the elected coalition government, and some protesters fear Jewish
religious law, known as Halakha, will start to become more prominent in everyday
life. The situation is tense. Israeli opposition leaders have even said the
country could face civil war. In this programme, we're going to try and bring
rabbis from both sides together to see if they can find some common ground. But
there's no guarantee here. Even though they're from the same faith, they deeply
oppose each other's ideas, and we have no idea if they'll agree to meet. One
minute, you never said it's a woman reform rabbi. Hold on. Even for me, it's a
bit of a stretch. We meet at last. Hello. Yes. How you land? Nice to meet you.
Nice to meet you. In person, good. Yes, and in English weather, even. Lovely,
charming, absolutely. But big deal. Let's get indoors and we'll make it work.
Let's get indoors. Thank you so much. Yeah, this is our library. And as an
example, these are books that relate to some of the issues that are quite
contentious, you would say, nowadays. This is a volume that speaks about
Shemitah, what's Shemitah. Every seventh year, the land is left fallow. You
don't work the land when you're in the biblical land of Israel. You don't work
it for seven years. How do you do that when you have a state? And you've got
agriculture, you've got everything. You've got everything. You've got
agriculture, you've got export. So what do you do in the seventh year? This is a
tremendous point of debate and argument in the state of Israel. And every time
you have a Shemitah year, then the debate comes up, what are we going to do? So
there's like three ways of taking care of it. Either you just ignore it and you
say, all right, this was good for biblical times, but it's not going to work in
an international economy where we need to export our stuff. So just ignore it.
Another way is to find a loophole if you want, and that's done by selling the
lands to non-Jews, to Arabs. And then because the land is owned by non-Jewish
ownership, then you're allowed to carry on working the land even during the
seventh year. Or if you're a part of the community I belong to, you say, listen,
it's our privilege to be able to keep the Torah law. And if we do it, then we'll
have the divine assistance that things will be fine. The next year we'll come
back so strong that everything will be great. So almost any topic you'll choose
in this library, you'll find some issue which comes up on a state level. At the
moment when members of your congregation come to you and they're looking for
advice at what has been quite a difficult few months, what do you say to them?
You're a rabbi, you're someone with a lot of influence. Of course, you know, it
is important to understand the religious population in Israel really feels hard
done by right now because there's a new government. The new government was
democratically elected and yeah, a lot of my congregation will have voted of
course for those right-wing parties. And these parties were democratically
elected with a certain agenda. And then to have that agenda hijacked because of
the minority that didn't win the elections is not so easy. Now, from a religious
perspective, the problem here is that many of the values that are espoused and
represented by the Supreme Court today are values that run against the grain of
religious observance, of religious sensitivities. Whether it's questions from
very private questions such as marriage, faithfulness in a marriage, and meaning
the Supreme Court has what to say about that. Whether it's in questions of
educational curriculum, the Supreme Court will have what to say about
curriculum. Whether it's in political appointments, the Supreme Court will
interfere in appointments because of what it considers to be appropriate or
inappropriate, reasonable or unreasonable. And you know, the religious public is
scratching its head and saying, you know, one second, now we've got a new
government that we formed, we ought to have at least a reasonable chance at
realizing those policies. So if we summarize all of this, the big question that
a lot of this is coming down to is how Jewish should Israel be as a Jewish
state? Yeah, listen, Israel is a Jewish state. By the way, this is a subject of
some discussion. What did Herzl, the original founder, what did he intend? Did
he intend it as a state for the Jews? Or did he intend it as a Jewish state? I'm
not the greatest scholar on Herzl, but I think from reading, you definitely get
the impression he intended it as a Jewish state. The question is, what does it
mean to have a Jewish state? What is the balance between the universal values,
let's call them democratic values, and between the Jewish values? To which
degree is that Judaism expressed in the different arrangements of religion and
state? And I think that it's absolutely the debate, the argument that's going on
today in Israel. Ultimately, the resolution of that will have to be the people.
We need to reach compromise. But as populations shift, as democratic
representations change, then those arrangements should also be changing. And
that is what this is about. One of the things we were hoping is that you might
come along with us and meet somebody who is from a very different perspective
from you when it comes to Jewish life, but also in terms of the political goings
on at the moment. Is that something that you'd consider? Possibly. Need to get a
bit more detail. But yeah, I would consider it, especially in this kind of
format. You know, the Talmud teaches us that when you're sitting on a rabbinic
court, and you're going to be adjudicating, you have to make sure who your
partners are on the bench and make sure that you're aligned with them. So here
we're not going to be sitting on a court together. And therefore, I think it
should be okay. But it would be difficult for some other Haredi rabbis, you
think, to meet someone who's from the reform end of the Jewish spectrum and a
woman rabbi. You never said it's a woman reform rabbi. Hold on. I mean, even for
me, it's a bit of a stretch. So this is Meir Sharim. It's one of the real ultra-
Orthodox neighborhoods of Jerusalem, an old one. And it's immediately visible
when you're here that people are dressed in a certain way. The women have got
their long skirts on below their knees. It's all about modesty. The men, okay,
they've got their umbrellas up today, it's raining, but they're all dressed very
similarly in long black coats. They've got white shirts, black suits. And people
shop in this community. They live in this community. Lots and lots of children's
shops because people have really big families. And another thing I always
notice, you don't see many smartphones because they're really not permitted. So
this is the kind of community where people will be listening to their rabbi,
voting for ultra-Orthodox Jewish parties, or perhaps religious nationalist
parties. And there are some signs up around as well, which tell you how you
should dress, even outsiders coming here, how they must conform. So just stepped
inside the Hebrew Union College. It's on one of the main streets in West
Jerusalem, and big building, lots of people inside. And we're off to find the
office of Rabbi Nahama Kelnan. Hello. Hello. Hello. Welcome to the Hebrew Union
College. Thank you very much for coming. Thank you. Welcome to the Hebrew Union
College. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank
you. Thank you. Thank you. Hello, hello. Thank you very much. Rabbi Nahma Kelman
is a trailblazer in every way. She's a Reform Jew and made history as the first
woman in Israel to become a rabbi. She's now dean of Jerusalem's Hebrew Union
College and has been out protesting regularly against the government's planned
reforms. She wears glasses and has short hair that frames her face. Her
demeanour is calm and composed, yet she radiates a strong sense of purpose and
confidence in her approach. These demonstrations, particularly in Jerusalem now,
are very much to fight the proposals to upend the judiciary and take away from
our Supreme Court to take whatever kind of authority out of their hands and
place it all in the current government, that all you would need is a slim
majority to override the Supreme Court. And our Supreme Court has very often,
not always, but overwhelmingly has protected the rights of women and LGBTQ. In
matters of civil rights, they have been the guarantor. And for me, it's what it
means to be a Jew. To me, to be a Jew is to care about the poor, the widowed,
the orphan. You walk in Jerusalem, we're walking in the footsteps of a Jeremiah,
of an Isaiah, who said, I don't want your rituals, I want you caring for the
poor, I want you treating the widow, the orphan, the marginal. That is the
Judaism I come from, the Judaism that sees everyone made in God's image. And in
a modern state, it translates itself into a system of checks and balances. But
it sounds like you have a lot of other personal issues with the direction, the
likely direction of this new government, which is Israel's most right-wing ever.
It includes these religious nationalist parties and orthodox parties.
Absolutely. I am so fearful for this government. You're being too polite.
They're racist in this government. I'm very worried. I'm extremely worried. They
don't represent me. What are some of the policies that concern you personally
the most? How do you think you could be affected by the direction the country's
taking? So a more recent one is we, the Supreme Court, recognise our
conversions. We do conversions of people come to Israel as looking for work,
livelihood, love. And it's very hard to become a naturalised citizen if you're
not Jewish. But many of them want to become Jewish. And the orthodox branch will
make it very difficult for foreign workers, etc., to become Jewish. We offer
conversion to people we believe have an honest wish to be Jewish. Again, that,
with the new system, the current government, could try and rescind that proviso.
I know that on the ultra-orthodox side, Rabbi Pfeffer, who I've spoken to, he
believes very much that the ultra-orthodox Jewish voices have been ignored,
overlooked for a long time by the state, and that actually what happened
recently was a democratic election, and that people here are trying, through
protest, they're trying to undermine the democratic process, if you like. I find
it very interesting when ultra-orthodox say that they've been ignored, when they
have been the needed piece of almost every coalition, every government. I find
it odd that the millions and billions of shekels that yeshiva students get, that
ultra-orthodox men are exempt from the army, they're considered unrepresented,
unheard. What are we asking for, the secular? We're asking for... I'm not saying
they should become secular. I'm not saying they should become reformed. I'm
saying, give me... allow me to live. Allow me to live as a reformed rabbi. How
far are you willing to go in terms of protesting to try to stop the changes from
happening? I'm certainly not a violent person, and I would not... I do... poor
violence. I believe in non-violent protest, and I will continue to protest week
after week. At the moment, I mean, the current government is digging in their
heels, not willing to talk. So I will keep protesting, but much more
importantly, we will keep promoting programs, training, rabbis, teachers,
educators, spiritual caretakers, to speak a Jewish language of tolerance, of
love, of compassion, of coexistence. That's the long haul, to fight for the... I
think, the Jewish state that, you know, I dreamed about, and many people. So
that's the protest now. Here, this is the famous hijab picture. Ah, so this is
the woman with the red hijab, who looks like she's in a really engrossed
conversation with this orthodox religious woman here, who's got the red
headscarf that married women wear. Correct. Humanising one another. So you're
just showing me what you do in your work, bringing together Israelis and
Palestinians for dialogue. Would you be ready to meet somebody who's from a very
different religious perspective to you? Absolutely. It's usually not we who have
the problem. Sadly, I've been on panels where the ultra-orthodox refuse to join,
because I'm there. Is that because you're a woman, or from the reform movement?
The reform movement. The woman is just an additive. I'm happy to, with pleasure.
So I just have to give you my times tomorrow. So I've taken this chance to come
down deep into the old city, and I'm in front of the Western Wall, or Wailing
Wall. Really an impressive site with its large stone blocks. And there's a
partition in front of me, so you've got men on one side praying. You've got some
of them with their umbrellas right up against the stones. Women on the other
side, some of them with their heads pressed against the wall, deep in prayer.
And this is where Rabbi Yehoshua Pfeffer would come to pray on the men's side.
But when Rabbi Nahama Kelman comes here, there's actually a small section just
off to the south where mixed pluralistic prayer is allowed. And that's why the
Western Wall has become just another point of contention between ultra-Orthodox
and more progressive reform Jews, because it's under Orthodox control, and
there's a lot of ultra-Orthodox opposition to what happens down in that southern
mixed pluralistic section. You'll sometimes see real tensions here and clashes
happening during the prayer sessions. So next, I'm really hoping that both
rabbis are going to turn up for a meeting point not very far away from here, and
we can get them to put some of the points they made to each other, see if we can
get a dialogue on the issues that divide them. I have a feeling that, as I said,
that Rabbi Pfeffer and I share a lot of values when it comes to Jewish life,
where we diverge is on who's a rabbi, who has the authority to decide or not,
whether the nature of a Jewish democratic state. I mean, listen, I think that
the foundation of many of the good values that we find in Western society are
sourced in the Tanakh, and they come from us. And I think it's a big mistake
that we often source them in the Greeks. They're sourced in the Tanakh before
the Greeks. However, there are other elements of the Torah, of the Jewish
tradition, that are in very deep tension with, at the very least, the way in
which the humanistic values are realized, are applied. It's not about the
authority of the Supreme Court. It's more about the way in which the Supreme
Court takes its authority and uses it to apply and to introduce a set of values
that a lot of the more conservative, right-wing, religious, Haredi, whatever,
population of Israel takes issue with. There are plenty of people in the liberal
community that would argue that the Supreme Court isn't liberal enough in many
matters. When we get to the section in the Jewish Bible on how adulterous women
should be treated, the sotah, we read it quietly, for example, because it's a
terrible ritual which our rabbis basically abandoned. So, I think, again, I
think a lot of our arguments or our differences stem from who interprets and who
has the authority to interpret. Now, I believe that women should have the right,
if they want to serve in the Air Force, to serve in the Air Force. And when the
Supreme Court ruled in their favor that women can, for example, serve in the Air
Force, does that fly in the face of Jewish values, of Jewish life? You might
think so. I don't think so. You know, one has to be able to understand both
sides of the argument. And if we see such a large population in Israel that is
in favor, in strong favor of these reforms, there's something underlying that. I
think it's important to... What's underlying it? We're split in half at the
moment. Okay, we're split in half. I'm not sure everybody who voted for the
current government voted for all the reforms. I think a lot of us don't
understand what the reforms mean. What would you like? What's your ideal Jewish
state? That I will live orthodox values? That I will live an orthodox Jewish
life? Is that your ideal Jewish state? Of course, certainly, but not one that
you'll be coerced to do that, that you'll choose to... Oh, one minute, let me
get to that. It's your choice. Well, then who's going to guarantee my choice?
Who is going to guarantee my choice when there's a government that will rule by
one vote or three votes that, for example, public funds will be used to support
X? I will now have to ride on public buses that will separate men and women if
we're going to live an orthodox... I'm exaggerating. But these are... What will
guarantee my rights in this country? The understanding of any democracy is that
your rights are guaranteed by the democratic process. That's first of all.
Meaning, if we're in a country that's ruled by a majority rule, which is, at the
end of the day, the foundation of a democracy... One of the foundations.
Correct. Then that is the... Well, that ought to be the best guarantee of a
person's right. Now, you're right that sometimes Supreme Court needs to
intervene. And no one who is arguing in favour of the reform is saying that
there shouldn't be any intervention of the Supreme Court. Of course there should
be. The question is a question of proportion. Now, what kind of reforms do we
need? I think that should be a good conversation. We need to speak to one
another and we need to reach compromise. However, I do think it's very important
to bear into... To keep in mind the following. As the demographic, as the
population of Israel changes, it stands to reason that different arrangements in
Israel, whether it's concerning religion and state on different levels, whether
it's concerning the nature of the public space, whether it's concerning many
things, also should be in flux. They need to be dynamic. Now, while dynamic, I
agree. We don't want anyone to be coerced in any way. But the absence of
coercion doesn't mean that we're in a static model that shouldn't be in flux and
changing with the change of demographic. That, at the end of the day, is a
democratic society. So there's an assumption of Israel as a Jewish state. How
does the Jewishness of Israel look? Well, it depends on the people. If in this
discussion I would know that the ultra-Orthodox or the Orthodox world would
allow me to function, then there's something to talk about. If you're going to
come back and tell me all the time, well, demographically we're winning. And by
the way, as a Jew, as a Jew, I believe it's a miracle what's happened in the
ultra-Orthodox world. It's a demographic miracle. It's a political nightmare for
me, but it's a Jewish demographic miracle of the replacement. Okay? But that
doesn't mean you wield this kind of power without any checks and balances.
Because, again, show me where ultra-Orthodox rabbis will sit down and talk to
people the likes of me. So, first of all, I want to agree strongly. It is a
demographic miracle, and not just the Haredim. Israel is a demographic miracle.
The secular birth rate in Israel is far above any other country in the OECD.
It's true that the Haredim might be the spearhead of that miracle. I've made my
modest contribution. We have eight kids, but we're just average for a Haredi
community. And that I agree with you. I also agree with you. Well, you know
what? Let me take your argument a step further and say, I think that it's up to
us. Rabbis, educators, people of some prominence within Haredi society to come
up with a proper manifest, some description. What do we want? A lot of the fear
is a fear of the unknown. I think it's up to us, people in my camp, in a
religious camp, to actually get together and think, what do we want? How do we
envisage a state of Israel where we get to call the shots, given the fact that
there's a majority of people who are not observant Jews, who do not perform all
of the mitzvot in an observant, orthodox, Haredi, whichever way? And I think
that the absence of that actually does cause a lot of anxiety, a lot of concern,
and I think we need to do better on that, no question. I'm really extremely
grateful to both of you for having this conversation, for coming here on a rainy
day in Jerusalem to get together. I know it's not easy discussions for either of
you, and one thing that you both really do seem to agree on is the need for
dialogue and more dialogue. Or we are people that have survived through
argumentation, okay? And Amos Oz, the famous novelist, said, we give each other
ulcers and heart attacks, but we don't get violent. I truly don't want any
violence, not verbal, not physical, but we need some healthy arguing, and
hopefully in the great rabbinic tradition, some resolve and compromise. Yeah, I
would express my gratitude for bringing us together. It's true, it's a rainy
day, it wasn't easy, but it's nice to be able to speak. Even in the Hebrew, it's
achdot and achidot. Achidot is uniformity, and achdot is unity. You can't be
united if you're all the same, because there's nothing to unite. It's just
monolithic, it's one color. But how much more beautiful is something
multicolored when it can be unified? Art and Soul was presented by Jolande Nell
and produced by Rajiv Gupta. We are making changes to the way BBC live streams
are distributed via third-party services and platforms, and the BBC stream you
are currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an
internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the
manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to
stream on BBC Sounds. When he plays the recorded sounds of a healthy coral reef
on a wrecked one, the fish think it's the real deal.