TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-12H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 around. The Gold Watch on BBC iPlayer. BBC News at 11 o'clock. In the last
hour, Shaimima Begum has lost her appeal against the government's decision to
strip her of her British citizenship. Ms Begum was 15 when she travelled from
the UK into territory controlled by Islamic State. Her British citizenship was
taken away when she was found in a Syrian refugee camp in 2019. Her lawyers
argued the Home Office had failed to consider that she was a victim of child
trafficking. The Home Office says she poses a risk to national security. Anthony
Gleese is a security expert from the University of Buckingham. She wasn't the
only person who'd been stripped of her citizenship. About 150 people, we're
told, have also been stripped. All of them would have appealed and had she come
back to the United Kingdom, whatever her own views were, she would have been
treated as an icon. The politics of it were wrong. But the bottom line is, this
is the law. The government has been found not to have broken the law. British
Steel has announced plans to close its coke-in ovens in Skuntop with a loss of
up to 260 jobs. The company's Chinese owners say they face significant
challenges because of high inflation and energy costs. Unions say the move will
be devastating for Skuntop and British steel workers across the UK. The Royal
College of Nursing will hold pay talks with the Health Secretary Steve Barclay
this afternoon. The union has paused plans for a 48-hour strike from next
Wednesday and says it's confident of reaching a fair settlement. China and
Russia have reaffirmed their close relationship, promising further agreements
between the two countries. China's top diplomat Wang Yi promised more deals on a
trip to Moscow, where he met the Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov. Mr Wang
is later expected to meet President Putin. Around 200 health, sport and fitness
groups have urged the Prime Minister to provide more support for leisure
facilities with high energy costs. In an open letter to Rishi Sunak, they say
many swimming pools, leisure centres and gyms in England were at risk of closing
once the government scales back its energy relief scheme in April. BBC News. Now
on BBC Radio 4 we continue the Shamima Begum story, presented by Josh Baker.
What happens on the day you release? Can you take me through that day? Well, I
was a shock. I thought I was a dead man walking. These guys are going to kill
me. Sure of it. Then all of a sudden I get put into a van and I get dropped off
somewhere in the middle of Rota. Of course I was happy. It was euphoric. It was
just a normal day. I was sitting in my room. It was the morning and there was a
knock at the door. My husband came in and we just stared at each other and then
we didn't say anything. We just hugged each other. Even my very, very, very
strong hug. She was very happy to see me as well. It was a very, very nice
moment. Yeah. Were you surprised? Yeah, I was really surprised. I was surprised
and happy though, that he was out and that he was not a spy. Shemeema Begum says
her husband Yago spent seven months in prison. Isis had accused him of being a
spy just 10 days into their marriage. Now he's been released. We got an
apartment of our own. We got to spend some time with her, got to know her. It
was nice. You get a bit of personal space. You can do whatever you want. You can
walk through the house whenever you want. No limitations. It was a nice time.
Once we had moved out of the Egyptian family's house, it was just me and my
husband. He was a very different person than when I first married him. He was
just like very quiet and reserved and yeah, just didn't show his emotions much.
You know, it was hard for him to stay in Isis after everything that they'd done
to him. He didn't want to continue being there. He didn't want to fight for
them. Do you remember the moment that you became disillusioned? Yeah. After I
got out of prison, it's like, what the heck is this? Where did I come to? So it
wasn't when you were doing any of the fighting or anything before. It was when
you went to prison. That's the point where you changed your mind about the
caliphate. I guess so, yeah. He had no friends because he found out that all his
friends were talking about him while he was in prison. So he just cut them all
off. So he only had me. I only had him. And that was hard. You know, you start
to lose your mind when you're just only stuck with each other. What is a woman's
place in Isis? Just a wife and a mother. That's it. That's it. Just those two
words. That's what you're reduced to in Isis, a wife and a mother. When you talk
about your husband, how would you characterise your relationship with him? I
don't... I don't know. He just told me what to do and I did it. That's our
relationship. Because my personality is very, like, quiet and reserved. So it
wasn't that hard for me to, like, obviously do what he tells me to do. But
sometimes it was depressing when he wouldn't let me go see people or do things
or just go outside in general. How was his behaviour towards you in that period?
Just taking out his anger and frustration on me because of the situation he was
in. Was that abusive? Yeah. Unfortunately, she had a miscarriage. It was a bit
difficult for her. After prison, would you say you were ever abusive to Shemeema
in any way? No. Did you two ever have any fights? In the beginning, I think we
had, like, one or two small little fights, but basically our marriage was very,
very smooth. It's gone very, very good. What were those fights look like? It was
the beginning of our marriage. We didn't really know each other too well. One
time I tried to help her in the kitchen. It didn't really work out too well. So
we had a bit of a fight. I screamed a bit and then I had chles the last time I
went to the kitchen. I wanted to feel loved and I felt unloved and worthless.
Like, I couldn't, no matter how hard I tried, he just wouldn't accept me and
just move on. I just feel trapped and, like, I have nowhere to go. Did you ever
try to leave ISIS? No. Why? Because it was just too hard. What would have
happened if you'd been caught? Probably put in prison and tortured because they
would assume that I was fine if I wanted to leave. Because if they could do it
to my husband, then they could maybe do it to me too, you know? What would have
happened? Shemeema Begum says she was isolated and living in an abusive
relationship. She thought she was coming to live in a utopia. But the reality is
a society built on oppression, brutality and dominated by the will of men. She
says she felt there was no way out. But her friend Khadiza, who she'd travelled
to Syria with, is thinking differently and wants to escape. I'm Josh Baker. This
is the Shemeema Begum story. Episode 7. Trapped. OK, so I'm going to start
recording for you tomorrow. It's late 2015 and while Shemeema Begum and her
friends are in Syria, I'm in East London waiting for a call from Raqqa. I hate
this wait. Hello. Hi, Khadiza. You OK? Yeah, I'm OK. It seems a lot bigger. It's
Khadiza. I'm recording with her sister. OK, Joanne, if you're friends with you.
Yeah, if you're on Sharmina, I'll see. She asks if it's safe to talk. In
Siletti, a language spoken in Bangladesh, Khadiza is with her friends Amira and
Sharmina in an internet cafe that's used by ISIS members. Do you walk through
the park to go to the internet cafe or? Yeah. Walk through the park? Yeah, it's
just straight Aussie. OK, is there a chicken shop there? Yeah, yeah, candles. Is
it red? Yeah, I know it's not. So this is where you are, OK. Khadiza's sister
wants to work out exactly where she lives because there's a plan to try and
sneak her out of Islamic State Group territory. So I'm going to get up. I don't
know if I want to do this because I don't have a good feeling that I feel
scared. Well, you feel scared? Yeah. Why do you feel scared? You know, if
something goes wrong, like, that's it. I know what you mean. I understand what
you mean and it is, you know, from where you are, I can understand. But the only
thing I would say to you is just trust us. After she arrived in Raqqa, Khadiza
married a Somali-American man who apparently worked in a hospital. They moved to
the ISIS-controlled city of Mosul in Iraq. There, they stayed in a hotel that
was famous throughout the so-called caliphate as the terror group's luxury five-
star destination. I've seen photos she took there of a swimming pool surrounded
by palm trees, marble floors and a grand chandelier. It was sort of the ISIS
version of the rids. But Khadiza's husband was soon killed, likely in an
airstrike. So she returned to Raqqa where she moved in with two of her friends,
whose husbands were also dead or missing. Amira, who she'd left London with, and
Sharmina, who'd convinced the girls to come to ISIS. It was around this time
that Khadiza decided she needed to escape. Did you know she kind of maybe wanted
to leave? No, because at that time, when all their husbands died and one of
their husbands left, my husband, like a week later, my husband came out of
prison. So I was just with him all the time and they were in their own house
together. And I think during that time, her family may have tried to take
advantage of the fact that she didn't have a husband and persuade her to leave.
And I guess it did work. She did want to leave at some point. How do your
friends feel about, you know, are they quite supportive? No, they don't know,
but she loves me, that she's scared. She goes, I know what you mean. I
understand that you're feeling scared, yeah. But I don't trust your friends, you
know, by the way. I don't know, I just kind of feel like what if they tell
someone or... But try and just keep, you know, as much away from them as you
can, yeah? Do you understand? Where is mum? I want to speak to mum. She's
crying. Oh, you know what, that might be their turn. I'm looking at the roots in
and out. There's only about four or five. The plan to get Khadiza out of the so-
called caliphate started weeks ago. It's being orchestrated by Taz, the lawyer
who's been helping the families of the girls since they left. How do you hide
somebody in a town that small when everyone's looking for you? That's not a big
town. In his office, surrounded by shells stacked high with books, and a cat
that's trying to get his attention, he stares at satellite images of Raka. There
are towns around Raka where there are people who are friendly to helping people
come out. So essentially, these towns that you're looking at have safe houses
in? There are safe houses, the problem is who do you trust and whose safe house
is do you trust? Taz is working with contacts in Turkey and Syria, who are part
of a network that smuggle people out of ISIS territory. He says they've given
him a plan for how they can help Khadiza. ISIS allow for women to go on their
own for medical reasons. And so she would complain of a toothache and that she
would need to visit a dentist. She would then go into a taxi relatively
regularly and go to the dentist. And so no one would then think anything of it
that a woman on her own is getting into a taxi. On the final occasion, that taxi
driver takes her away from where she was to a location to hand over to people
that were known to us. On the phone call from Raka, Khadiza's sister is trying
to explain this plan to her. But Khadiza is terrified. If she's caught trying to
escape, it could be fatal. Say now you're going to have to complain about like
say pain and you get on a cab wherever you go rather than walking, yeah? I don't
know what. Do you remember what I said to you last time, just follow my
instructions, yeah? How you doing? Hi guys. How confident are you like say when
things are put in place and you have to get on a cab? Zero. You shouldn't
cuddle, okay? Just try and keep it to yourself. It's just that I feel what if
someone says something to someone and it comes out and people try to follow you
about or whatever. I don't want to put someone else's life at risk. Do you
understand? It's someone's life. What's that noise? They're just closing shots.
Oh, they're closing now? Yeah, that's it. Okay then. And let me know soon, yeah?
Well, I've said to you, okay? How are you feeling? She sounds terrifying. She
sounds very terrifying, you know, and she did get very emotional there as well.
Is it hard to hear her so scared? I really feel helpless really thinking, you
know, what can I do? It's really hard. I mean, that's the first time I've heard
her voice and she sounds so young. She sounds just like a little girl, do you
know what I mean? Very delicate. She is a baby. And from all the conversations
you've had with her, do you feel that if you were to ring her today and say
there's a plan for you to come home, you need to do this? That you do it? She'll
do it. Straight away. I think she'll do it. Not long after this conversation, I
get a text from the lawyer Taz. He asked me to meet him in East London in the
middle of the night because he's just got news from Rucker. It's just broken
that a young girl, she was trying to leave Rucker. She got unfortunately caught
and I just have beaten her to death and let that news spread as well. That's
obviously a very worrying development for us in terms of Khadija wanting to get
out of Rucker. But it does also explain why she's so terrified. Taz has just
found out about a 17-year-old girl who was caught trying to escape ISIS
territory. The terror group have beaten her to death. It's more akin to really
people trying to leave a drugs gang in Colombia or something. It's a message
that was being sent that if you try and leave, you will be brutally killed. Taz
says Khadija has also found out about the girl's fate and is now even more
terrified. Khadija knew that there was a lot of risks in terms of trying to
leave. She knew that there were checkpoints in place and if she was stopped
there and she didn't have a very good reason that checked out, then she would be
arrested by ISIS, which was effectively execution. And so she decided that she
would abandon the plan and she would stay where she was. Khadija decides to stay
in Rucker. Shemeema Begum's told me that she felt it was too dangerous to
escape. It seems Khadija came to the same conclusion. She ends up remarrying to
a Dutch Somali jihadist called Tai Muller. He's blind, a big guy and often
pictured carrying a weapon. He appeared in ISIS propaganda. In one video, he
addresses people in Somalia, telling them ISIS is fighting for them,
decapitating Christians who are tormenting them. As he speaks, footage appears
showing prisoners having their heads sawn off with a short knife. It's gruesome.
Khadija moves in with Tai Muller. They live in an apartment building in downtown
Raka. It's in a nice neighbourhood not far from the house of the Egyptian ISIS
armorer Abu Qumra, who Shemeema Begum might have lived with. So Khadija ended up
married to a notorious jihadist trapped in the epicentre of the so-called
Caliphate. Years after this, Taz and I discuss what happened. We've never really
spoken about how he felt about Khadija's decision to stay with ISIS. How does it
feel to have somebody you've been trying to help turn down that option?
Horrible. It feels horrible. But the options were potential death and potential
death. Those were the options. She's a young woman and she was in the impossible
situation of trying to assess whether staying where she was was more lethal or
less lethal than trying to escape, which if caught is lethal. That played on my
mind a lot because if she were killed, en route, following a plan that we had
put into place, well how much of her death is on my shoulders. But yeah, these
are the choices that war presents here. She chose. Taz pauses for a moment,
seemingly losing his words. A cigarette wobbles in his hand and he stares right
through me, lost in his thoughts. Shemeema Begum and I have spoken a few times
about Khadija. When was the last time you saw Khadija? I was in my house by
myself. My husband was out of town and her and her husband just came to visit me
and they said, do you want to stay here in your house by yourself or do you want
to come stay with us? And obviously if I had made that decision, I would not be
sitting here with you now. So she just said, do you need anything? Do you want
anything? I was like, no. And then she left. That night I heard the bomb. I
didn't know at that time like how much it would affect me obviously. But the
next morning, Um, Amira and Sharmina, they came to tell me that Khadija had been
killed and that we need to go to the hospital and like identify her body. So we
went and saw her body. It was really hard because it had been bombed really
badly. It was in pieces. Like that's the lasting memory I will have of her. Are
you okay? Yeah. You sure? Yeah. It was just hard. I mean, it was hard to see her
body and then we had to go to the internet cafe and tell her family what
happened. And that was also hard as well because that was one of the lowest
points of my life. I guess I feel like in a way I've not accepted her death yet.
It's just like a constant reminder, you know, that she, she could be alive
today, but she's gone. And in a way it may be my fault. I don't know the word,
but like if I had said, you know, I don't, I don't want to go to ISIS guys
don't, don't come either. Or if I told the police the truth, maybe she would
still be alive. You know, maybe we would have never gone to Syria. Maybe they
would have never spoken to me again because they would see me as a snitch, but
they'd still be alive. And that would be enough for me. So you feel guilty?
Yeah. But they made their own decisions, didn't they? They did, but I feel like
I could have stopped it. It's just how I feel. Is it hard to carry that around?
Yes. And if I ever do go back to the UK, having to face their families is going
to be really hard. This is the first time I've heard Shmima Begin admit she
could have stopped the girls from leaving. It shows she does recognise there's
been a huge cost to some of the choices she made. To think something as simple
as telling a teacher or a family member about their plan to join ISIS might have
stopped all this is a tragedy. Back in 2016, I reported on Khadisa's death and
published some of the call between her and her sister. I recorded a phone call
in London with Khadisa's sister in an internet cafe. I've heard it many times.
After she died, Amira and Shamina told me the truth about how she wanted to
leave, even though it was long after when she died. But they told me the truth
and they showed me the video clip of her sister calling her and her talking.
It's strange to think that the recording I made was listened to by Shmima Begum
and her friends in Raqqa and became a way for her to remember Khadisa. I've
spent time investigating how and why Khadisa died. I located her apartment in
Raqqa and spoke to people who were there on the night of the bomb. I've mapped
airstrikes throughout the city and reviewed declassified documents. It had been
reported that she was killed in an airstrike by Russian forces who were
targeting ISIS at the time. I don't think that's accurate. The night she died,
I'm told the basement of the apartment was being used by ISIS militants. It's
possible a meeting of high profile individuals was taking place there. And it
looks like the US-led coalition was watching. They likely released a single
precision bomb from an aircraft to target the building. We put this to the US
Department of Defense in October. They told us they were working to provide us
with an answer very soon. But we're still waiting. By August 2016, one of the
girls Shmima Begum travelled with is dead. She says she feels trapped and at one
of the lowest points of her life. But then she tells me her life changes. I
found out on my birthday that I was pregnant, so it was a good day. I was really
excited. I was excited because I was excited to tell my husband. And he was
really happy too and it made me happy to see him happy because of something that
I did. I kind of craved his approval and that was one way of getting his
approval. Obviously I was happy for myself. I wasn't just getting pregnant for
him. I wanted a child for myself as well. Do you remember the moment you found
out you were going to be a father? Yeah, yeah I remember. He said, hey I'm
pregnant. When I was pregnant with my daughter, maybe seven months, the bombings
started to get really bad. And my husband looked at the situation and he said,
Raka is going to fall and I don't want to be here when that happens. The
situation looked very unstable. I didn't want to be there for the fight. But he
also did not want me to be there in my condition because I was pregnant. I felt
like I would not have been able to survive ISIS without him. Even though there
were hard times, I told myself that it's worth it because if I did not have him,
I would lose my mind. So I told her we were going to have to move soon. She
says, okay we'll move. We pack our bags and then we went to the other zone. They
leave Raka, that's now increasingly being hit by airstrikes, and move to Deir
Ezzor. It's about three hours away and sits on the Euphrates River and offers
Yago and Shmima Begum another place to live. It was like a lot of bomb
buildings, not a lot of people, not a lot of life in general. I was at the end
of my pregnancy. I gave birth. I was just by myself, taking care of my daughter
with my husband, didn't know much. And how did it feel when you held your child
for the first time? It was beautiful. It's like nothing else. It gives a whole
different dimension to your life. This small little baby that's there. Since the
earliest days of their marriage, Yago, a man Shmima Begum describes as abusive,
had wanted her to get pregnant. By the time she was 17, she'd miscarried twice
and was undoubtedly living in a difficult situation. Regardless of her
circumstance, she tells me having a baby gave her a sense of purpose. What did
it feel like to become a mum? The best feeling ever. I cannot explain it really.
I felt like I had a purpose in life. The first time ever I felt loved really.
The first time in my life that I felt loved and I felt needed and wanted.
Obviously after I gave birth to my daughter, the bombings scared me a lot more.
They made me realise that I'm not just responsible for myself, I'm responsible
for another human being that completely depends on me and I took that very
seriously. It was a really big burden on me. It was really scary because I
didn't know anything about being a mum. I barely knew anything about being an
adult, let alone a mum. And then right after I gave birth I got pregnant again.
And then my son was born as well. I get to enjoy time with my family. I used to
take my daughter to the market every day while I was selling stuff. It was a
nice time here. Jameema Begum now has two young children, a girl called Sariah
and a boy called Jarrah. For now she's able to enjoy this moment in relative
safety. But it won't be long before the fighting catches up with the family. Did
you worry about bringing kids into that environment? I didn't think it was going
to end like that. I didn't think it was going to be that bad. The Jameema Begum
Story is series two of the investigative podcast I'm Not a Monster and is
presented by Josh Baker, who produced it with Sarah Obedat and Joe Kent. And if
you want to hear more, Josh will be talking about this episode with Adrian
Charles over on Radio 5 Live in a few minutes time. Why are some kazoo
subscription customers being told to hand back their cars? You and yours will
investigate after the news at midday. We have comedy before that in another
episode of Gloomsbury, coming up in just a moment. You can literally go anywhere
at the snap of your fingers. For 100 years, the BBC has been making
groundbreaking radio drama. Of course, a tired woman! But you have to ask
yourself what I'm tired of. The radio plays our voices in the dark. Join me,
Michael Simmons Roberts, as I explore this great dramatic form. It's just a
sheer amount of possibilities. Continuing our celebration of the centenary of
BBC radio drama. There is scope for so much more to happen on radio. Basic Beats
on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds on Saturday night at 8. Gloomsbury, a rhapsody about
Bohemians by Sue Lim. Episode 4, bosom charms. It is the summer of
1930-something or other, and the writer and gardener Vera Sackloth-West and her
husband Henry Miquelton are enduring what can only be described as a very
disappointing breakfast. How's your sausage, darling? I've seen more appetising
objects lying in the dust in the deserts of Kazakhstan in the wake of a camel
train. I thought the toast was passable. No, I've had enough. Henry, please
don't spit things out at the table. I should have done the decent thing and
spatted out ten minutes ago. Don't be disgusting. We're not barbarians. Well,
they're certainly going to descend into barbarism if the Goslings don't sort
themselves out and resume normal duties. I'm going to sack Mrs Gosling and put
an advertisement in the Times for a replacement cook. No, darling. Yes, darling.
She's very upset at the moment, darling. They're on the verge of divorce.
Servants shouldn't be allowed to get divorced. They should be setting an example
to the rest of us. If you put an advertisement in the Times, we'll be deluged
with applicants. Who's going to interview them? You? Well, no. I rather... You
rather thought I would do it. Spend all day talking to seventeen different
women, one who mutters in order, please. It's not illegal to mutter in order,
please. Then one never stops talking in broad Scots, so I can't understand a
word. Oh, well, you don't seem to have a problem understanding a Scots accent
when you're talking to that Hilda woman. What? Your latest admirer? Or does she
revert to her BBC voice in your intimate moments? Henry, I refuse to talk about
this. The episode with Hilda is over. She's merely a colleague now. Oh, yes. I
will not discuss this at breakfast. We were talking about the trials of engaging
new staff. Mrs Gosling must be forced to forgive her husband. I have a feeling
Mrs Gosling is impervious to forgiveness. Nonsense! She's a Pentecostalist. I'll
have a private word with her. Appeal to her better nature. Has she got a better
nature? Oh, oh, Mrs Gosling. And how are you feeling this morning? Much better,
I hope. I've been in tears since twenty-five to seven, madam. But I hope with
the help of the Lord Jesus I shall find the strength somehow to carry on at the
post-come. Thank you, Mrs Gosling. And there's another thing. I want to
apologise. I lost control of my breakfast this morning. It's just that I feel so
nectar about that Mr Gosling creature. What I should never have married. And
he's been a God who broke my heart. And I shall never forgive him as long as I
live so help me God. Live it! Live it, live it! Good luck with your forgiveness
project, darling. Oh, well. I'll have to give it one more shot. Who's that from?
It's Augustus Dong, of all people. He wants to drop by this morning as he
happens to be in the area. Isn't Augustus Dong rumoured to have an extraordinary
number of children? Yes. I think women must be attracted by his long hair,
straggly beard and arty clothes. Perhaps he wants to have a child with you,
darling. He'd better not try. I can't stand beards. And I want you to get rid of
him with lightning speed, Henry. I simply must take advantage of this cloudy
weather and trim my box. Now, Lionel, you will never guess what we're going to
do today. Mmm. Something wonderfully clandestine and exciting. Mmm. Do you know,
instead here, somebody's seen something in Loch Ness that looks like a giant
lizard. Lionel, will you listen to me? We're going down to Sizzlinghurst today
and taking a surprise present for Vera. Mmm. Will you please put that newspaper
down, Lionel? Oh, very well. What were you saying about going to Sizzlinghurst?
Really, Lionel, do you ever listen to me at all? I've got a present for Vera,
and it's something quite, quite marvellous. We're going to install it in her
garden, secretly, as a surprise. Install it? What is it? The statue? No, no, no.
Something far more mysterious. It's an aeolian harp. An aeolian harp? One of
those contraptions that makes a noise when the wind passes through it.
Contraptions, Lionel, noise? Your choice of vocabulary is always so prosaic. As
the casual summer breeze caresses its strings, the aeolian harp trembles. It
resolves. It echoes. The music of the spheres. Gosling's going to help smuggle
it in and install it. Why does it all have to be so harsh, Harch? Because I've
got to sweep Vera off her feet with a breathtaking gesture. I must rest back the
initiative vis-a-vis Hilda, you see. Rest back what initiative? Oh, Lionel! I
used to regard myself as Vera's closest friend. But now that nauseating Hilda
has come barging in and distracted her. Between you and me, I fear there may be
a little romance going on. No, no, no, Ginny. I'm sure you're quite wrong about
that. You're simply imagining things, as usual. Hilda Mathewson? Hilda, darling,
it's me. Vera, darling, how wonderful to hear your voice. I'm still tormented by
the cruel things I said after that broadcast. Do forgive me. I've already told
you there's nothing to forgive and I'm so looking forward to our clandestine tea
today. Ah, that's the thing. I'm sorry, Hilda, but I can't come up to London
today. I simply must sort out this servant problem once and for all. I'll come
down and sort it out for you. Nobody dares to disobey me at the BBC. No, no,
darling, you mustn't come down. Henry's here all day and he's in the most
frightful mood. Just leave it to me. Vera, you're hopeless with staff. They take
advantage of you. Let me be your knight in shining armour. No, no, please,
Hilda, let me deal with it. Oh, somebody's coming. I've got to go. I'll renew
tomorrow. Honestly, being adored can be such hard work. Mrs Gosling? Yes, sir?
I'd like a word with you in confidence. Mrs Gosling, please don't go. I can't
bear the thought of never tasting your muffins again. Can't you find it in your
heart to forgive your husband and stay? I'll never forget that scoundrel if I
live to be a hundred. But as to staying, well, there is one thing what might
make me change my mind. What? Well, you know, I've always admired you. And I've
seen ladies come and go, your bosom chums, that Mrs Fox were their heirs and
vapours, and now this BBC lady mishealed the thing of me jig of... Whenever I
cease them, sucking up to your like, it makes my blood boil slightly. If you
don't mind my saying so, sir. Are you saying... What are you saying, Mrs
Gosling? I want to be one of your bosom chums. You? Yes, I know I'm beneath you,
ever so far beneath you, and not worthy to kiss the soles of your boots. Though
I've polished them often enough, and washed them French brassiers of yours, and
folded up your silk drawers in as much as am whereupon I know you intimately to
a certain extent, if you get my drift. I'm not sure I do get your drift, Mrs
Gosling. Well, I'll make myself plain, sir. I'll forgive Mr Gosling and stay on
here as your cook. If I could be permitted once in a blue moon to worship and
adore you, not at close quarters like, but from a respectful distance, just
perhaps recite the odd poem or make you a special bosom cake. A bosom cake? To
celebrate being your bosom chum. I could make a cake in the shape of a bosom,
your bosom, if I may be so bold, and decorate it with a couple of cherries. Mrs
Gosling, I am infinitely obliged for your kind offer, but I need time, time to
reflect, to consider, so I will let you know my thoughts later. Very well, sir.
Or may I call you... Beloved. I'll have to think about that. Now, my husband and
I have a brief meeting in the library, Mrs Gosling. Yes, Mr Mcloughton told me.
The coffee's ready on the stove. Do you want me to bring a chain? No, it's all
right, thank you. I'll take the key. And may I just say, if ever I shall get a
little cat, in retirement like, I shall name it after you. Thank you. Oh, Lord,
she is one of thy most beautiful creations. Well done, thou. I'm burning like a
flame, dear. I'll never be the same, dear. Do you take milk, Mr Don? No, no,
thank you. Black. As black as the people's in your eyes, Miss Mcloughthort. Or
indeed, her fingernails. There is never happier than when she's grubbing about
in the earth. Yes, and in fact, I'm in the middle of something rather crucial in
the garden at the moment, so I shall have to dash off shortly, I'm afraid. I'm
so sorry. Oh, but wait! I was listening to that broadcast you did about modern
marriage, and I have a little proposal for you. Something really modern. If you
have the imagination and courage for it... I have very little courage, old boy.
And I have absolutely no imagination. But do please go on. Well, I'm proposing
marriage to you. Both of you. A beg of pardon? A pentasocracy. A penti... what?
A pentasocracy. A sort of commune, you know. All possessions shared. Complete
sexual freedom. Liberty. Igality. Depravity. Sorry to disappoint you, but I
don't think we're all that orgiastic, are we, darling? Certainly not. Well, if
the commune doesn't appeal to you, how about another child? What? I could spare
half-hour this afternoon. I could give you one if Henry has no objection. Well,
I've got an objection. Quite frankly, I find both your proposals not only
absurd, but impertinent. And what's more, I'm sick and tired of being
propositioned. Good day to you. I'm sorry about that, Augustus. We do respect
the idea of free love, of course, but Vera's under a lot of strain at the moment
because of our servant problem. Yes, yes, her spirited nature was very evident
on that programme you did on the wireless. Gotta keep women in their place, man.
Call them women for a start, if they like that. Well, I'm not sure Vera would
respond well to being called woman. That's what's wrong with your marriage. If
you want to stop her running off with other women, you must start being
masterful. Other women? Common knowledge, old boy. And another thing. Give her
heaps of children. I've got 57, so I know what I'm talking about. Keep some
busy. Frankly, the only woman here who needs to be brought to heel is our cook,
Mrs Gosling. We're trying to get her to forgive her husband. I'll perform that
office with pleasure, man. But? Really? Yes, yes. Never miss the opportunity to
bring a woman to heel. Nothing would give me more pleasure, but first I'd like
to wander about in that glorious garden of yours, if I may. I need to do some
stretches of a canthus league. Of course. Be my guest. You might come across Mrs
Gosling in the garden, actually. She's a short, stout woman with bright red
hair. Right then. No need to show me out. Thank you. Good day. Enjoy the garden.
A month in France with Hilda? Out of the question, woman. Right, now, Lionel.
Where's Vera at the moment? Over by the South Cottage, trimming her box. Well,
go and keep an eye on her and make sure she doesn't wander this way. If I must.
Oh, Gosling, I want the Aeolian harp to be heard from the gazebo, but not seen.
Where would be the best place to put it? Right about here, madam. The gazebo's
just the other side of this hedge. Oh, thank you. That's perfect. And this will
catch the passing breeze. This is quite a drafty spot this can be out here. Not
much wind today, though. I can blow into your harp if you like. No, no, Gosling.
That would not be necessary. Thank you for your help. But, I'm all... Oh! Er,
Henry, what are you doing here? Oh. Ginny wanted to give Vera a surprise
present. A peace offering or something. Have they quarrelled? Not as such. I
think Ginny's a bit jealous of that Hilda woman. Oh, no, I don't want to hear
any more. Tear-stained letters, phones slammed down, moping and sulking. It's
like living in a girl's boarding school sometimes. Women do seem to be at the
mercy of their emotions. I don't think I've ever had a strong emotion, apart
from anxiety. Actually, Lionel, I've got a little project you can help me with.
Oh, what? Augustus Dong is visiting. He's somewhere around. You might meet him.
He looks faintly biblical. Anyway, he's a frightful bounder and all that, but he
gave me an idea about how to bring Vera to heel, and I'd rather want to try it
out. Oh, well, good luck with it. No, I mean, I want to try it out now. Rehearse
it, I mean, with you being Vera. Oh, oh, lovely. Could I wear that green silk
frock of hers? I've always admired it. No, no, no, Lionel, I don't want a great
theatrical charade. Just pretend you're Vera for a moment, will you? And you're
going to the south of France with an imaginary woman, let's call her Elsmeth.
Oh, oh, all right then, Henry. Um, um, uh, Henry, dear, I hope you don't mind,
but I'm thinking of going down to Mont-Tin with Elspeth. No, listen to me,
woman. You're not setting foot outside this house. Castle, Henry, dear, surely.
Don't interrupt me, woman. You're not setting foot outside this castle until you
come to your senses. I won't have it, I tell you. Oh, Henry, you're so masterful
all of a sudden. Perhaps I should go to the south of France with you instead.
No, Vera would never react like that. She'd go cold and steely and stalk out.
Perhaps I need more practice. It's out of the question, woman. Was that
convincing? Mm, nearly. Take that and that and that and that. Vera, dear, how
are you? J.V., oh, God, what the hell are you doing here? Oh, I just happened to
be passing. I thought I'd drop by and see how you're getting on with your
haunted servant problem. Oh, it's just gossipy on words. Mrs. Gossiping has
placed me in an impossible position. And then Augustus Don turned up out of the
blue and made some indecent suggestions. I get so sick of people. Oh, dear. What
you need is to be soothed, charmed, perhaps enraptured. No. What I need is to be
left alone to clip my box. I'm sorry, but I'm in such a temper. I'm not fit for
company at the moment. Why don't you come back tomorrow? Just come and sit with
me at the gazebo for a peaceful moment, Vera. Relax. Listen to the music of the
spheres. I don't want to listen to the music of the bali spheres. I've got to
clip my box. Why have you got to clip your box? Because it's cloudy. One must
clip one's box when it's cloudy. There's no need to shout. I'm not shouting. I'm
sorry, but I just told you I'm feeling unsociable and I want to be left alone.
Woo wee, Hilda. Oh, damn blast. Who's that? You're precious, Hilda. I don't
expect you to be feeling unsociable now. What? Hilda? But I told her. Good
afternoon, Vera. Good afternoon, Jenny. Good afternoon, Hilda. Although it's not
a very good afternoon, really. Poor Vera's wrestling with the servant problem.
She's not feeling very sociable, you know. Oh, don't you worry about that. I'll
get your servants to jump to it. Now, where's Mrs Gosling? In the kitchen, I
presume? No, no, Hilda. Let me deal with this. Vera doesn't need more
confrontation, Hilda. She needs to be taken out of herself. What Vera needs,
Jenny, is somebody to lay down the law firm. I am that person. Starpate both of
you. How dare you presume to know what I want? Please, will you both go away and
leave me to deal with my own affairs? Well, Vera, that is quite a hurtful thing
to say. Of course, I know I must be very irritating. Yes, you are irritating. I
know you're a literary genius, but you're extremely irritating. Please, Hilda.
Jenny is not irritating. Yes, she is. I may be irritating, but at least I don't
say pardon and toilet. I may say pardon and toilet, but at least I'm head of
talks at the BBC. Well, at least I'm not Scottish. I'm not saying here to be
insulted. I'll await your kitchen, Vera, to get Mrs Gosling a piece of my mind.
Are you sure you can spare, sir? Oh, please, both of you. And don't try to stop
me. She's going off in the wrong direction, of course. Never mind. I don't want
her to speak to Mrs Gosling anyway. Well, I'm glad she's gone. Now, Vera, for
one last time, will you come and sit at the gazebo? No, Jenny. For one last
time, I want to be left alone. I'm sorry. I'll telephone you tomorrow and come
up to town to see you. Ah! You'll find five minutes for me before running off
for an afternoon with Hilda. Oh, stop it! I've been foolish all along. It was
very foolish on me to come down today. I leave you to your precious solitude.
But, Jenny's sure... Goodbye! Oh, damn! Damn! You left me sad and lonely. Why
did you leave me lonely? Vera! Vera! Vera, what is going on? What do you mean? I
just met Hilda in the North Walk. She said you'd ask her to come and sort out
the Gosling problem. Oh, that's an absolute lie. I told her not to come, but she
ruled a rough shod over me. You spare me the sordid details. Listen to me,
woman. I don't want to see her here ever again. Do you hear? How dare you speak
to me like that, Henry? I've had enough of your womanizing, I tell you, woman!
Oh, don't you ever call me woman again? What's come over you? You know being a
woman is the bane of my life. And as for Hilda, I wish she would just go away.
Sure, sure. May I have a word? Oh, God, whatever next. Don't leave me alone with
her for a split second. Why not? Excuse me, sir, but I made some cherries for
something I'm making. There's a cherry tree by the gazebo. Making something
delicious, I hope, Mrs Gosling. Just a cake, madam. Ah, a peace offering for Mr
Gosling, perhaps. I know, madam. I would have wasted on that swine. Your wife
knows who it's for, don't you, sir? The bile earth was all that about. Really,
I've no idea what she's talking about. I think I'll go and get my waistcoat. The
wind's getting up. What are you doing, woman? I'm just picking some cherries.
Almost a thousand glasses. It's... it's... it's... you! I mean, thou! You know
who I am. Yes! Yes! From the paintings! And I know you, woman. Oh, of course you
do! Thou knowest everything! Mrs Gosling, you must forgive your husband. Of
course! Of course! Anything for you, my lord, sir! You have children, woman. No,
sir. I mean, lord. Never been blessed that way, most of pity. You shall bear a
child, Mrs Gosling. I shall give you one. Oh, my stars! Oh! Oh! I feel faint!
Oh! Oh! Oh! Oh! Oh! Gertrude! Gertrude! Gertrude! Gertrude! You all right? Oh!
Where's he gone? You fainted! Take it easy! Put your head between my knees. No,
no, Mr Gosling. You've got that wrong. It should be. Put my head between my
knees. But I forgive you. You forgive me? I forgive you. What? For everything?
Everything! You all right, Gert? What's come over you? I seen a vision. Didn't
you see him? He was here just now. He told me to forgive you. My life will never
be the same. I am truly blessed. Great news! Let's get back to the kitchen and
have a nice cup of tea. Oh, this is just one thing, Mr Gosling. What? I just
feel I ought to warn you that there's a fair chance I may be with child. What?
Who's? Jesus is. Jesus? This child will be the Messiah. The set will come in if
that's all right with you. Oh, quite all right. I forgive you. We can call him
Percy after Percy Fender, the Surreal Rounder. My tears for you. Make everything
easy. Three sugars, Mr Gosling. Yes, please, Gert. And being as we're back
together now, may I join you tonight in the matrimonial bed? You may, Mr
Gosling, but I don't want you taking no liberties until I've run it past Jesus.
Fine, fine. I never used to have much time for Jesus, but now I reckon I've got
a lot to thank him for. Mrs Gosling, I want a word with you. Do you indeed, Miss
Mathewson? Yes, I do. You've got to put your nose to the grindstone and get back
to providing your employers with the service they expect. You must abandon this
ridiculous row with your husband at once. What? Well, I'm going to show you that
Mr Gosling and I are enjoying perfectly amicable relations. In fact, we're even
going... I'll go with this, Mr Gosling. So I would respectfully ask you to leave
my kitchen and make no further disrespectful remarks in future about subjects,
about what you know nothing, and what are none of your business. Impartments! I
shall tell Miss Sackler this, what you've just said. Well, I can tell you what
she said about you just now in the garden. I heard her talking to her husband.
She said, as for the Hilda, I wish she would just go away. What you may think,
she's your bosom chum, but you're sadly mistaken. It's not you what's her soul,
mate. It's me. You? How dare you! She loves my muffins, she dotes on my
dumplings, and she adores my sponge fingers. She told me so this morning. So put
that in your pipe and smoke it. And another thing... Let me do with this, Mr
Gosling. So, in view of your being unwelcome here, I would respectfully suggest
that you sling your own... Oh, dear, you speak to me like that. I am the head of
talks at the BBC. I don't care if you're the head of John the Baptist. Now get
out of my kitchen and never darken my door again. You! You're driving me crazy.
What a horrendous day. Ginny and Hilda bickering over you like a couple of
terriers fighting over a tennis ball. You're gone now, so please calm down,
darling. And what on earth's that infernal racket? I don't know. A bird scare-
er, perhaps. You know Gosling's always raging war on the crows. Where is the
damn thing? It's over here. Give me a contraption. Pass me the cheers, darling.
Here you are. Blasted racket! Well done, darling. Ah, I can hear the owls now.
Peace at last. And here's Mrs Gosling with the coffee. Don't be surprised if she
behaves rather oddly. I think she's going through the change. Oh, God. I'll deal
with it. Thank you, Mrs Gosling. You've had a long day. There's no need to stay
up. We'll bring the tray in. Good night. I'd just like to say that I've took the
liberty of bringing you that kike, what I mentioned earlier. Oh, good heavens.
It looks like it... Well, it faintly obeyed. May I beg leave to recite a short
poem? No, Mrs Gosling, please don't. It's only short. Let's give the Lord thanks
for Miss Setcloth's vest. Of all the English ladies, she's simply the best. She
grows lovely roses and chrysanthemums, and I pray to say she regards me as one
of their bosom chums. Mrs Gosling, we appreciate your loyalty. We applaud your
cuisine, but we have been driven to distraction by your recent matrimonial
paroxysms. Beg pardon? Don't say pardon, Mrs Gosling. Say sorry. Sorry? There
must be no more owls. There must be no more sulks, and there must be no more
poems or cakes resembling parts of the body. Do you hear? Otherwise, I shall
have to give you notice. Notice? Yes. What the sack? Yes. And I'd never see you
no more, neither, mistress, neither. No. Oh, must those? What a terrible
thought. I'll be quiet as a mouse from now on, madam. I'll be as good as gold. I
won't say a word. Good. I just must say something else first, though. Leave it
till tomorrow, Mrs Gosling. No, sir, sorry. But it's only right. I'll tell you
this now. I've got reason to suspect that I am with child. With child? Yes. And
it's going to be the Messiah, the second coming. If he's a boy, we're going to
call him Percy. And if he's a girl, we're going to call him Vera after you, sir.
Thank you. I'll be off, then. Mr Gosling and I are going to celebrate with a cup
of cocoa. Good night. Good night. Good night. Well done, Henry. You were quite
masterful with her. Masterful, eh? Was I? Somehow I managed this at last. She
certainly came to heal. Well, apart from the religious delusions, she is a
competent cook. And now, if you'll be so kind, darling, please cut me a slice of
that bosom cake. Would you like a piece with a cherry on? No, Vera. You have
been listening to Gloomsbury by Sue Lin. Vera Sackloft Vest was played by Miriam
Margulies. Ginny Fox and Mrs Gosling by Alison Steadman. Henry Miquelton,
Jonathan Coy, Hilda Mathewson, Moena Banks, Lionel Fox and Gosling, Nigel
Planer, Augustus Dong, John Sessions. The producer was Jamie Ricks. Gloomsbury
is a little brother production for BBC Radio 4. Let's turn our thoughts now to
Moneybox Live coming up at three. Here's Adam Shaw. There have been calls to
limit the tax-free lump sum people can take from their pensions and to increase
the state pension age. Internet searches for pension questions have hit record
highs. Add to that a cost-of-living crisis, unstable markets and the end of the
tax year fast approaching, it all means a lot of people are looking at their
finances and investments. So today we're looking at pensions, investment
portfolios, savings and many of the financial questions which may have been
bothering you. If you've a question or a concern you can email us at moneybox at
bbc.co.uk or you can tweet us at Moneybox.