TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-06H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Indigenous spirituality to fight for justice and heal from trauma. This is the
BBC World Service, the world's radio station. It's five o'clock in London. Hello
and welcome to Newsday on the BBC World Service with Reedy Clappy and James
Cottle. Eastern Europe seems filled with echoes of the Cold War at the moment.
US President Joe Biden has been in Kiev promising yet more weapon deliveries as
Ukraine attempts to defend itself against Russia. US leader has now moved on to
Poland, one of Ukraine's main allies. We'll hear live from Poland's deputy
foreign minister. And as the one year anniversary of the war approaches,
President Vladimir Putin is also keen to control the narrative both at home and
abroad. We'll look ahead to what we can expect from his State of the Nation
speech later today in Moscow. And another terrifying night for people in the
Turkish earthquake zone when new tremors sent people fleeing from buildings on
Monday. Sports and business news too. All of this after the latest world news.
This is Danielle Jawa-Wieczka with the BBC News. Hello. President Vladimir
Zelensky has said a world order based on rules and humanity depends on how
events play out in Ukraine. Speaking after President Biden made an unannounced
visit to Kiev, he said Ukraine's victory over Russia depended on resolve and he
saw such determination in Mr Biden. The American president said his country
would back Ukraine for as long as it took. Jeremy Bowen reports. President Biden
arrived here by train like all the other leaders who visited Kiev. The Americans
warned the Russians at the weekend that the visit was happening but tried to
keep it secret at home. Zelensky welcomed his guest at a brief ceremony at his
official residence. Thank you very much for coming Mr President. It's been a
huge moment of support for the Ukraine and what can I say? He said President
Biden was visiting at the most difficult time for Ukraine. President Biden
responded with strong words of support. Russia's aim was to wipe Ukraine off the
map. Ukraine's war conquest is failing. The president of Belarus, Alexander
Lukashenko, has ordered the formation of a new territorial defence force, saying
every man should know how to handle weapons. His defence minister said the force
should have at least 100,000 volunteers and be in every village and town. Mr
Lukashenko said his army would only fight if Belarus is attacked. Rescue
services in Turkey are again searching for people trapped under rubble after a
new tremor in the southeast, the same region where a much larger earthquake
struck two weeks ago. Officials say three people died and 200 were injured. A
spokesman for Turkey's Disaster and Emergency Authority described the moment the
tremor began. It was very shaky. We hardly stood up. It was very difficult. But
in the camp everything is fine. We checked the tents. Everybody was fine. We
were expecting that. So right now we are expecting more. So everybody should be
more prepared about this. Two top Spanish transport officials have resigned over
a botched order for new commuter trains that proved to be too wide to fit
through non-standard tunnels in the mountainous northern regions of Asturras and
Cantabria. Ana Pissarro has more details. Two managers of the railway companies
in charge of the project have already been sacked since the oversized train
scandal broke earlier this month. The latest heads to roll are the boss of
Spain's state rail operator and the secretary of state for the sector. The
minister for transport apologized to the regions involved and said there would
now be a delay of two or three years for the new rolling stock, 31 trains
costing nearly $300 million. While the government argues diagnosing the mistake
in the design stage will avoid financial loss, costs may yet rise. Good news
from the BBC. Israel's parliament has voted to push ahead with a highly
controversial overhaul of the judicial system proposed by Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu's religious nationalist government. Tens of thousands of
people gathered in the streets outside to protest against the plan. The
opposition in parliament vowed to fight for what it called the soul of the
nation after the bill was approved in a first reading. Senator Netanyahu
welcomed the news, saying it was a great day and night. The number of people
killed by flash floods and landslides in southeastern Brazil has risen to 40.
Rescuers are searching the mud and rubble for survivors after record rainfall
devastated a stretch of coast in São Paulo state. President Lula da Silva has
visited the worst hit area around the beach city of São Sebastião to promise
government support for reconstruction. This woman survived but fears for her
relatives. It was like a horror movie. We saw our house swept away and my
nephew's house. I'm sure they were sleeping, all three of them. And up to now we
have no news. Prosecutors have downgraded the involuntary manslaughter charges
against the Hollywood actor Alec Baldwin following a fatal shooting with a live
gun on a film set in 2021. It means Mr. Baldwin and the film's armourer will
face a maximum 18-month prison sentence if convicted, rather than a minimum of
five years. Mr. Baldwin insists it wasn't his job to ensure the gun that killed
the cinematographer and wounded the director was not loaded. Parkkeepers in New
York have captured an alligator that was spotted in a lake in Brooklyn as
children played nearby. The reptile over a metre long was described as emaciated
and very lethargic. It's been taken to the Bronx Zoo, where it's hoped it will
recover. Officials suspect the alligator had been kept as a pet and then
abandoned when it grew too large. And that's the latest BBC World News. Thanks
for the news. Hello and welcome to Newsday on the BBC World Service with Ridi
and James. So this half hour we're heading to Poland, Ukraine and Russia. There
have been more deadly earthquakes in Turkey. What needs to be done to help
people there? Our text number for that and anything you hear on the programme is
plus four four double seven eighty six twenty fifty eighty five. We'll have
sports and business too. Great to be with you this morning. It's almost a year
since Russia's invasion of Ukraine began and as a demonstration of support for
Kiev and its allies, the US President Joe Biden is in Eastern Europe. He made a
surprise trip to the Ukrainian capital, Kiev on Monday, to highlight America's
long term commitment to backing Ukraine. This morning he's in the Polish capital
Warsaw, where he will meet President Andrzej Duda. Poland has been one of
Ukraine's key allies and is usually at the forefront in pushing for arms
supplies to its neighbour. Joining us now is Pavel Jablonsky, Polish deputy
foreign minister. Welcome to the programme. Obviously a moment of significance
of Western support for Ukraine, President Biden's visit to Kiev. It occurs to me
that you will have been involved on some level in the logistics and of course
you won't be able to go into specifics, but how difficult is it to organise a
trip like this? Do you inform Russia in advance, for example? Hello, hello, good
morning. Thank you for having me, first of all. I think we can tell you some
information, some leaders. Unfortunately, not all about this. We are not able to
share it because we certainly will be eager to be of service to our allies in
the future of similar kind and the war unfortunately is far from being ended. So
logistics in such cases are complex, obviously, then the key thing is to keep
everything as sealed as possible so that it's not revealed to the public until
it only can be. So Poland-linked country next to the border, next to Ukraine,
being in fact a frontline country from a NATO perspective, is providing these
services as trusted and respectful ally. We have done so in the past also when
it went with other partners such as the UK Prime Minister and other leaders as
well. And our leaders also on numerous occasions have been travelling to Kiev
even when it was still under siege. Prime Minister Mora Hilski, together with
Prime Minister of Czech Republic in Slovenia, did this trip in March 2022. We
are aware obviously of the challenges. We don't see it as fitting to ask Russia
for permission to do so. And obviously the technical challenges and all the
things related to security is worked out together with our partners. In this
case, it was with US Secret Service. US, got it. Understood. A significant
moment then and of course President Biden now in Poland. What does Poland want
from the Americans? We've seen you're quite keen to give fighter jets to Ukraine
but you need I suppose support from other countries. Is that going to be high up
on the agenda? From the very beginning of the Russian invasion and in fact even
earlier than that, Poland has been calling to establish a coalition of the
willing, coalition of the countries that are willing to stop this threat. This
threat from Russia today has materialized in Ukraine but it is very real also
when it shows the security of other central European countries. So in fact if we
want to be safe, we need to stop Russia. And the way just to do it is to support
Ukraine in defense, is to help Ukraine stop Russia. Ukraine is fighting for its
own but it's fighting for us as well. In our view, all types of weapons should
be all disabled and all types of weapons should be transferred as an allied
initiative. So that obviously one of the countries that can do something on its
own, Poland has done so repeatedly. We've been first sent tanks in the summer
last year already. But if we want to be effective as NATO, we need to act
together. We will be discussing this today with President Biden, Polish
President Antje Hidodia, Polish Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki. They will be
talking about potential options and what is also needed very much is a constant
reassurance, constant and permanent presence of NATO troops in Poland and other
central European countries because it's our countries that have potential
targets for Russia too. So to be clear, a successful meeting for you would see
America and other countries commit to sending jets in the near future to
Ukraine? We hope that ambitious decisions will be taken soon. We understand that
sometimes it might be difficult to announce them on this very day where the
talks are taking place. But we have seen that if we continue our diplomatic
efforts, sometimes combined with public pressure as it was in the case of
Lieopatang, when we often have been criticized for being too harsh on German
government, that we believe this was necessary at the time. We believe that if
we continue these efforts, we will be effective here as well, even though it
won't be announced today or tomorrow. We are looking also forward to implement
the decisions of NATO summits, the one that was held in Warsaw in 2016, last
year in Madrid. This year in Vilnius, a very important NATO summit that should
strengthen NATO constant presence in the countries of so-called Eastern Flang,
that is Baltic States, Poland, Romania, and a few others. Paul Jablonski,
Poland's Deputy Foreign Minister. Thank you so much. So more bad news for
Turkey. Two weeks after the deadly earthquake that devastated southern Turkey
and northern Syria, residents of some of those areas were sent running into the
streets again as a 6.4 magnitude tremor struck on Monday evening. The Hatai
region of southern Turkey was at the center of the quake. The extent of the
damage is not yet known, but already there are reports of at least three deaths
and a couple of hundred injuries. Tom Coley from the UK Aid Organization Help
Age International is in the city of Gaziantep and felt the tremors yesterday. He
joins us now. Welcome to the program. I'm glad you are safe, first of all. Tell
us what you experienced yesterday. Hello. Thank you. Yeah, so around 8 o'clock
last night, there was a tremor that was not too bad hearing Gaziantep. We're
quite far away from the epicenter, but almost immediately after the tremor,
people started going into the streets, trying to get away from obviously
buildings and falling or falling kind of things from above them. And we saw a
lot of people getting to their cars and kind of driving around and trying to
find open spaces to again avoid kind of injury. And it's obvious that there was
a lot of fear and worry from people, even though it was a relatively light
tremor, but people obviously are influenced by what happened to them a few weeks
ago, unfortunately. Of course. I mean, in light of what happened two weeks ago,
people must have been terrified. Tell us about the damage that you've seen,
where you are and elsewhere. So hearing Gaziantep, I believe that fortunately
the damage is relatively light. I believe only a few buildings were damaged and
hopefully the impact on human life is relatively low. But we've certainly had
reports from further south in Hate, Antakia, the city of Antakia, where there's
considerable damage because that's near the epicenter. And also in kind of
adjacent areas inside of Syria, in non-government controlled areas, some of our
partner organizations, the Syrian Ex-Batriate Medical Association reported
having to evacuate some of their hospitals because of structural damage. And
there was kind of reports also of widespread kind of people on the streets and
panic inside kind of the government controlled areas of Syria. So yeah, again,
considerable panic and unfortunately considerable structural and damage to
buildings and possible loss of life as well. And speaking of that, yesterday
here on Newsday, we spoke to Doctors Without Borders and they were talking to us
about the challenges of getting humanitarian aid to the people affected both in
Turkey and Syria. So for you as an aid worker, this earthquake last night,
although not as severe as the one two weeks ago, it must impact your operations.
Yeah, so one of the most vital things in any humanitarian aid operations is
infrastructure. i.e. roads and rail and airports and also the supply of goods.
So as we've seen, the destruction across Turkey and northern Syria has really
impacted on that infrastructure. So there's a scarcity of supplies just because
of the nature of how many people have been impacted. We're seeing a lack of
tents, lack of medical supplies and these kinds of logistical problems. And
obviously, if we don't have those items, then we can't distribute them and help
people. So it's been a really massive thing. And unfortunately, this aftershock
or new quake, whatever you'd like to call it, will probably add to the
difficulties in logistics. Tom Corley from UK Aid Organisation HelpAge
International. Thank you. This is the Newsday on the BBC World Service. Reedy
James and Rebecca Withersports. Thank you, James. We'll start with football and
the UEFA Champions League Round of 16 continues today with two first-leg
matches. Eintracht Frankfurt play Napoli and there's a repeat of last season's
final with Liverpool hosting Real Madrid. Meanwhile, Liverpool's owner, John
Henry from the Fenway Sports Group, insists that the club is not for sale but
says he is looking for investment. At the women's T20 World Cup cricket in South
Africa, India beat Ireland by five runs to qualify for the semi-finals. And on
today, England play Pakistan while South Africa take on Bangladesh with the
remaining places in the semis at stake. The Australian government says it's
aligned with 34 other nations, including the UK, the US, France and Germany, on
the court for the International Olympic Committee to ban athletes from Russia
and Belarus. That's despite not being marked as a signatory to Monday's
statement. The IOC says it's looking at how the athletes can compete as neutrals
with the Paris Games in 2024 and that's the latest from sport. Beku Adams, thank
you. She'll be back here in half an hour or so. From sports to business now with
our correspondent Katie Silver. Nice to have you with us, Katie. HSBC has just
reported its results. What can you tell us? Well, there's good news and bad
news. So good news is that its quarterly profit doubled almost in the last,
almost doubled in the last three months of last year, up 92%. And the bank says,
for example, that it's on track to deliver higher earnings and return returns
this year compared to last. Its before tax income was 4.3 billion pounds. That's
about $5.2 billion. And that's up on the earlier beating expectations, as I say,
almost 92% up. On a yearly basis, though, it lost. And that was primarily due to
a loss it made selling its retail banking operation in France. It has been
trying to pivot more towards Asia and trying to offload some of its operations,
including in France, as well as the announcement that it was going to be closing
about 114 banks in the UK. So part of this is about, as I say, pivoting away
from Europe towards Asia. And as a result, they had to sell this down for a fair
bit less than they paid for it. So they've had to incur a loss there. They also
said, for example, that once they sell their Canadian arm and they're expecting
to make about $10 billion for that sale, they're likely to pay out a special
dividend to their shareholders. And as I say, all of this is about trying to
pivot more and more towards Asia. They also say as well that they're expecting
to complete the sale of its Russian business in the first six months of this
year. Many people have been watching this with anxious breath, particularly in
terms of when it comes to continuing to trade with Russia. And if there aren't
any multinational cooperation, it's very tricky to work out what to do. HSBC,
for example, last year said that the deal was pending approval from Russia's
government and regulators. But we had heard as well from the Russian government
that they may block the sale of foreign businesses. So we're going to have to
wait and see how that pans out. Katie Silva from our business desk. Thank you
very much for talking to us. We'll connect with you in just a few minutes. This
is Newsday on BBC World Service. And that's where we leave the world service and
start the day here on BBC Radio 4. Good morning. I'm Caroline Nichols. There's
news and weather coming up and we find out with a bit of help from David
Attenborough about the only bird in the world whose bill is bent sideways. Later
this morning, as part of our coverage marking a year since Russia invaded
Ukraine, we hear from a woman trying to work out what her future holds. I could
not imagine that I would stay here for such a long time. Olga is one of the
thousands of Ukrainians offered sanctuary in British homes after the outbreak of
war. Every day I listen to news from Ukraine and I hope to hear some good news.
A year on and facing an uncertain future here, she's going on a search for
answers to the question, where next? I am happy to be more independent now. I'm
ready. Ukrainians in Britain, where next? This morning at 11 on Radio 4 and BBC
Sounds. We're now on Radio 4. Here's Sarah Keith-Lucas. Thank you, Caroline.
Good morning. And now the shipping forecast issued by the Met Office on behalf
of The Maritime and Coast Guard Agency at 0505 on Tuesday 21 February 2023.
There are warnings of gales in Rockall, Bailey, Faroes and South East Iceland.
The general synopsis at midnight. Atlantic Low 955, expected South East Iceland
979 by midnight tonight. The area forecast for the next 24 hours. Striking North
at Sira, South at Sira, Northwesterly 4 to 6, becoming variable 2 to 4, then
southerly or south-easterly 5 to 7 later. Rain, moderate or good. 40s,
Cromartie, variable 2 to 4, becoming South or South West 4 to 6. Rain, moderate
or good. 4th, Tyne, Dogger, South or South West 3 to 5, rain, moderate or good.
Fisher, German bite, West 4 to 6, backing South 3 to 5 later. Drizzle, fog
patches, moderate or good, occasionally very poor. Humber, Thames, West backing
South or South West 3 to 5. Drizzle, moderate or good, occasionally poor. Dover,
white, variable 2 to 4, rain later, moderate or good. Portland, Plymouth,
variable 2 to 4, becoming North West 4 to 6 later. Fog patches, rain later,
moderate or good, occasionally very poor. Biscay, cyclonic 3 to 5, becoming West
4 to 6 later. Thundery showers, fog patches, moderate or good, occasionally very
poor. Fitzroy, Sol, cyclonic 3 to 5, becoming North or North West 4 to 6 later.
Thundery showers, good, occasionally poor. Lundy, Fastnet, Irish Sea, South West
3 to 5, veering North West 4 to 6 later. Drizzle, moderate or good. Shannon,
Rockall, Malin, South West 4 to 6, veering North or North West 5 to 7 later,
occasionally girl 8 later in Rockall. Rain, good, occasionally poor. Hebrides,
Bailey, cyclonic becoming West or North West later 5 to 7, occasionally girl 8
later in Bailey. Rain, good, occasionally poor. Fair Isle, variable 2 to 4,
becoming South or South West 4 to 6. Rain, good, occasionally poor. Ferros,
South East Iceland, South East 4 to 6 becoming cyclonic then North West later 6
to girl 8, occasionally severe girl 9 later in South East Iceland. Rain, snow
near Iceland, good, occasionally poor but very poor near Iceland. And now the
weather reports from coastal stations for 0400. Tyrie Automatic, South West 5,
slight rain 1500 metres, 1011 falling slowly. Stornoway, South by West 3, 32
miles, 1007 falling. Loeck, West North West 4, 12 miles, 1007 rising slowly.
Lucas, West South West 3, 22 miles, 1012 falling more slowly. Bridlington, West
South West 3, 1016 falling more slowly. Sandetti Light Vessel Automatic, West by
South 3, 2 miles, 1020. Greenwich Light Vessel Automatic, 1000 metres, 1021.
Jersey, East South East 1, fog 300 metres, 1020 falling. Channel Light Vessel
Automatic, 1020. Silly Automatic, South by East 2, 19 miles, 1019 falling.
Valencia, South 3, slight rain 3 miles, 1016 falling. Ronaldsway, West South
West 4, 1016 falling slowly. Malinhead, South West by South 5, 8 miles, 1012
falling slowly. And here is the weather forecast for the inshore waters of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland valid for the following 24 hours issued by the Met
Office at 0500 on Tuesday 21 February 2023. General Situation, High pressure
over France will build a ridge north over the British Isles with the winds
easing off for a time over southern coastal waters. Low pressure to the north
will bring a band of rain east or southeast over the UK through Tuesday and
Wednesday with strong winds expected over northern and western areas. Cape Wrath
to Ratray Head, including Orkney. South or southeast 3 to 5 veering south or
southwest then veering northwest later 4 to 6. Occasional rain, good
occasionally poor. Ratray Head to Berwick-upon-Tweed. South or southwest 3 to 5
occasionally 6 later. Rain at times, good occasionally poor. Berwick-upon-Tweed
to Whitby. West or southwest backing south later 3 to 5. Rain later, good
occasionally moderate later. Whitby to Gibraltar Point. South or southwest 3 or
4, mainly fair, mainly good. Gibraltar Point to Northfallen. Southerly or
southwesterly 3 or 4, mainly fair, mainly good. Northfallen to Selseyville.
Variable 2 to 4, rain later, good occasionally moderate later. Selseyville to
Limereaches. Variable becoming west later 2 to 4, rain later, good occasionally
moderate later. Rain reaches to Lanzend, including the Isles of Silly. Variable
2 to 4, becoming northwest 4 to 6 later. Rain later, good occasionally moderate
later. Lanzend to St David's Head, including the Bristol Channel. South or
southwest 2 to 4 veering north or northwest 4 to 6 later. Rain later, good
occasionally moderate later. And David's Head to Great Ormhead, including St
George's Channel. Southwest 3 to 5 veering north or northwest 4 to 6 later.
Occasional Drizzle, good occasionally moderate. Great Ormhead to the Mull of
Galloway. South or southwest 3 to 5 veering north or northwest 4 to 6 later.
Occasional Drizzle, good occasionally moderate. Isle of Man. South or southwest
3 to 5 veering north or northwest 4 to 6 later. Occasional Drizzle, good
occasionally moderate. Lockfall to Carlingford Lock. South or southwest 3 to 5
veering north or northwest 4 to 6 later. Rain or Drizzle, good occasionally
moderate. Mull of Galloway to Mull of Kintyre, including the Firth of Clyde and
North Channel. Wutherly or southwesterly 3 to 5 veering northerly or northwest 4
to 6 later. Rain or Drizzle, good occasionally moderate. Mull of Kintyre to
Ardenmerken Point. Southwest 4 to 6 veering northwest 5 to 7 later. Rain or
Drizzle, good occasionally poor. Ardenmerken Point to Cape Wrath. South or
southwest 5 to 7 veering west or northwest 4 to 6 later. Rain or Drizzle,
moderate or good occasionally poor. Shetland Isle. Variable 2 to 4, becoming
south or southwest 4 to 6. Occasional Rain, moderate or good occasionally poor.
And that completes the shipping bulletin. I'll be back with a general weather
forecast in a few minutes. Thanks Sarah. This is BBC Radio 4. It's half past
five on Tuesday 21st February. Good morning, this is News Briefing with Caroline
Nichols. Vladimir Putin is expected to give his latest assessment of his war in
Ukraine in a State of the Union speech. A senior NHS doctor says online gambling
has created a significant public health crisis. In business, the bank HSBC says
its annual profit has fallen by 7 percent, although revenues increased in the
final quarter of last year. And it's bought Liverpool take on Real Madrid in the
Champions League. President Putin is to set out his latest thinking about the
war in Ukraine when he addresses both houses of the Russian parliament and
senior military figures this morning. The State of the Union speech comes a day
after President Biden made a surprise visit to Kiev and promised to support
Ukraine for as long as it takes. He's spending the day in Poland where he's
expected to deliver a speech describing the war as a battle between democracy
and autocracy. The Estonian Prime Minister, Kaya Kalas, has been calling for
greater military support to Kiev. She told the Today programme here on Radio 4
the EU should order weapons for Ukraine in the same way it procured Covid
vaccines. While the Russian military industry is working in three shifts, the
European defence industry has not really boosted its production, although the
demand is there. But the defence industry says that we don't really have orders.
So how to make this process faster? Because Russia fires European monthly
production of artillery shells per day. You can hear the whole interview just
after eight o'clock. China's Foreign Minister Wang Yi is holding talks in Moscow
days after the United States warned that Beijing is considering supplying
weapons to Russia. Both the US and the EU have warned China of serious
consequences if it does that. In Turkey in northern Syria, devastated by
powerful earthquakes two weeks ago have been hit again. The latest two
earthquakes have caused some buildings damaged earlier to collapse. At least
three people have been killed and emergency teams are again searching for
survivors under the rubble. A senior NHS doctor in England is warning that
online gambling has created a significant public health crisis. The clinical
lead of the NHS Northern Gambling Clinic, Matt Gaskell, says the industry is out
of control because gambling is easily accessible and glamorised and there's no
public health messaging about the risks. Typically our service users are
gambling from the moment they wake up in the morning in their bed, they take
their phone into the bathroom with them, they take it in the car when they're
even driving to work or on public transport. They're gambling at work, the wide
availability of the products, the way the industry is advertising and marketing
to people create a significant public health crisis and that's what we have. The
government is expected shortly to publish its planned changes to the gambling
laws. It's thought one of the proposals will be that gambling companies must pay
a levy to fund education, research and treatment. UK companies that took part in
a big trial of a four-day week say the experiment has been successful and
they're making it permanent. 61 firms from a fish and chip shop and a brewery to
software developers took part in the pilot in the second half of last year.
Almost all of them say they're keeping the new working pattern. The biggest
benefits were to staff wellbeing. Sick days were down by more than two-thirds
and workers reported being less stressed, less tired and happier overall. One of
the companies that's keeping the four-day week is the environmental consultancy
Tyler Grange which have six offices around the UK. Simon Ersel is its managing
director. I'd be pretty, pretty silly to change it now, wouldn't I? I've got a
happier team. We're making more money, our clients are happier. It's been pretty
revolutionary and pretty wonderful. We are 22% more productive. In four days we
produce 2% more than we used to in five, which is pretty remarkable I think. A
BBC investigation has found that a quarter of grammar schools in England have
fewer than five percent of children from low-income families. Since 2016, most
grammar schools have altered admission policies to give pupils from
disadvantaged backgrounds a better chance of getting a place. The investigation
suggests that in some cases the measures made little difference. Now Sarah
Keith-Lucas is back with today's weather. Thanks Caroline. Well, we're looking
at a fairly mild, cloudy but largely dry day ahead today with lighter winds than
we had yesterday. Best chance of seeing any brightness will be towards the east.
So let's look first at South East England, Eastern England, the Midlands, North
East England and Eastern Scotland. A mild frost freeze starts the day here.
Quite a lot of cloud but it will break up through the day and we'll see some
sunny spells coming through, particularly for the likes of Aberdeenshire,
Eastern Scotland in general where we could see temperatures as high as 15,
possibly 16 degrees but elsewhere bright spells breaking through and highs 12 to
14. For the South West of England, Wales, North West England, South West
Scotland and Northern Ireland today, again a lot of cloud and it's low cloud so
it's bringing some mist and hill fog, drizzly outbreaks of rain at times as well
and temperatures still mild around about 11 or 12 degrees. Lastly today's
weather for Northern Scotland and we're going to see the breeze picking up
through the day on and off outbreaks of rain but they should tend to ease
through the middle part of the day and top temperatures here around about 10
degrees. The outlook then for the rest of the week will have a cold front
pushing its way gradually from west to east tomorrow so some rain for all of us
turning a bit colder and then high pressure builds leaving things dry towards
the weekend. Thanks Sarah. Time now for a look at the papers. Pictures of
President Biden and Zelensky on the streets of Kiev are on several front pages.
The Guardian's correspondent in the city describes Mr Biden's surprise visit as
arguably the most consequential made by a US president to a European country
since the end of the Cold War. The Daily Mail calls Mr Biden's trip a daring act
of defiance. For the times it was symbolic proof of Russia's failure. But the
former US National Security Advisor John Bolton writing in the Daily Telegraph
argues that NATO leaders have little reason to pat themselves on the back. He
says that the West, having failed to deter Vladimir Putin from starting the war,
now lacks a strategy for victory. Mr Bolton says NATO should provide more aid to
Ukraine instead of fearing that Mr Putin could expand the war. The Financial
Times highlights a warning from the Dutch military intelligence that Russia
might attempt to sabotage its offshore wind farms in the North Sea. The head of
the intelligence agency said a ship had been detected trying to map energy
infrastructure in recent months and was escorted away by the Dutch navy and
coast guard. According to the Times, Rishi Sunak has been told that some
ministers are preparing to resign. If a deal he is trying to reach with the EU
risks Northern Ireland's place within the UK. The Prime Minister spent several
hours yesterday meeting Eurosceptic Conservative MPs trying to address their
concerns about a new agreement on post-Brexit trade arrangements for Northern
Ireland. A minister said some of his colleagues in the government would quit if
Mr Sunak attempted to push through a deal that undermined sovereignty. An
editorial in The Guardian says the Prime Minister is taking a risk by doing the
right thing and seeking to normalise relations with the EU. Resolving the
situation in Northern Ireland, it argues, would grease UK EU trade and help the
British economy recover faster. But the paper says Mr Sunak is leaving his right
wing exposed, as hard-line Brexiteers and his political enemies, most notably
Boris Johnson, lie in wait to pounce. Daily Mail likens the Prime Minister's
position to that of a tightrope walker without a safety net. The paper says,
with Labour's support, he could push through a deal that isn't acceptable to the
democratic unionists and many of his own backbenchers, but that could also be
his political suicide. Photographs of Nicola Bullier are on the front pages
again after police confirmed that her body has been found. The headlines in The
Sun, The Daily Express and The Daily Mail quote her family's statement saying
that she can rest now. The Times says the Queen consort has backed a new award
scheme for the coronation to honour unsung heroes who volunteered to help their
communities. The public are being encouraged to submit nominations in eight
categories, among them supporting older people, crisis and welfare, and
sustainability and the environment. The bank HSBC says its quarterly profit
almost doubled in the final three months of last year, but overall in 2022 it
earned about 7% less than in 2021. Here's Katie Silver with details of that and
a round-up of the other business news. With better than expected quarterly
earnings, Europe's largest bank says it's on track to deliver higher returns
this year than last. The lender aborted earnings before tax of £4.3 billion last
quarter, up from £2.25 billion a year earlier, and beating expectations. On a
yearly basis though, its profit dropped £1.2 billion primarily due to a loss it
made selling its retail banking operation in France. The mining giant BHP's
profits fell by almost a third in the six months to December, as China's strict
zero Covid policy dented its demand for iron ore. The world's largest listed
mining company said it also faced higher costs because of high inflation and a
tight labour market. BHP says it now plans to sell off two more of its
Australian coal mines as it moves towards servicing the renewable energy sector.
In just over an hour we'll hear how the UK government borrowed during January.
In December the figure was £27.4 billion, a record high driven by the cost of
subsidising energy for households, and high interest payments on government
debt. Continued high inflation is likely to weigh on today's reading. On the
markets last night on Wall Street, the Dow Jones finished up 0.4% at 33,826, and
the FTSE 100 lost 10 points, finishing at 8,014. In Japan a little earlier, the
Nikkei 225 was trading down 0.1% at 27,502. In the currency markets, the pound
is trading at $1.20. Against the euro, sterling is at 1.13. That makes a euro 89
pence. Liverpool take on Real Madrid in the first leg of their last 16 tie in
the Champions League this evening. With more on that and the rest of the sport,
it's Andy Barwell. The Liverpool boss Jurgen Klopp feels this evening's
Champions League round of 16 first leg clash, at home to the newly crowned FIFA
Club World Cup winners Real Madrid, has come at a good time for his team. Klopp
says Liverpool need to play super games over the two legs to reach the
quarterfinals. It's Eintracht Frankfurt at home to Napoli in the night's other
Champions League clash. Liverpool FC owner John Henry from the Fenway Sports
Group insists that the club is not for sale, but they do expect some outside
investment at Anfield. Watford moved up into the Championship playoff zone with
a 3-2 success attempt at West Bromwich Albion. At the four-team women's
tournament in Spain, Scotland play Wales this afternoon. England are already
through to the semi-finals at the women's T20 World Cup cricket in South Africa,
but they will secure top spot in Group 2 and avoid defending champions Australia
in the last four, so long as they don't suffer a heavy defeat to Pakistan today.
Finally, a glance back at some of the stories that were making news on this date
in the past. A year ago, three days before the start of the Russian invasion of
Ukraine, Vladimir Putin recognised the independence of two separatist areas of
the country and ordered Russian troops to be sent there. In the run up to the
Brexit referendum in 2016, Boris Johnson ended weeks of speculation and
announced that he would campaign to leave the EU. The American businessman and
adventurer Steve Fawcett became the first person to fly solo across the Pacific
Ocean in a balloon in 1995. He landed in Saskatchewan in Canada after taking off
from South Korea. In 1972, President Nixon arrived in China at the start of a
week-long visit aimed at ending decades of frosty relations between the two
countries. The American civil rights leader Malcolm X was shot dead in New York
in 1965. His supporters hailed him as a courageous campaigner for the rights of
African Americans, but critics accused him of preaching racism. On this date in
1952, Winston Churchill's government abolished identity cards in the UK.
Britain's first commercial cinema opened in Regent Street in London in 1896.
Several dozen people each paid a shilling to see short films by the Lumiere
brothers. And the world's first railway journey took place in Wales in 1804,
when a self-propelling steam locomotive built by Richard Trevethic travelled
from the Penadaran ironworks to Abercannon. And that's the end of News Briefing.
Now on Radio 4 it's time for Prayer for the Day with Hope Lonergan. Good
morning. I've been attending Narcotics Anonymous meetings for a few years. They
usually take place in environments that are emblems of social need. Churches,
council-owned multifunction rooms and Quaker meeting houses, which as a
practicing Quaker is awkward for me, stillness on Sunday, NA on Tuesday. Their
rooms with scuffed carpet and fluorescent tube lighting. In the lobby is a
cubicle containing the final work in payphone in Essay. There's a serving hatch
where soul sick people pass through all steer biscuits and cups of coffee which
are almost devoured by the attendees who are still raw, active addicts. Cup and
all. These are rooms that writer and music journalist Ian Penman might describe
as Little Englander stodged with everything revivalism. I've read about rooms
like these in a hundred years of NCVO and voluntary action which was started by
philanthropist Edward Vivian Deamonn Burchill. It's the best of democratic
localism. Community spaces where people can loosen the knots of their existence
or establish a mini symposium to reflect on bus timetables or acrimony between
two warring neighbours. If his dog barks after midnight one more time he's going
to become part of my crazy paving and there's something to be said about the
healing potential of group confession. At NA there's different viewpoints,
different coping mechanisms about a shared communal malady. You can focus group
your pain with this in mind. God thank you for keeping me clean and serene and
thank you for underlining the moral imperative that drives us to help each
other, especially the ones disadvantaged by the greed of others. Go lightly.
Amen. That was prayer for the day with Hope Lonergan and if you've been affected
by addiction a list of organisations that can help is available at bbc.co.uk
slash action line or you can call free at any time to hear recorded information
on 08000 155947. That's 08000 155947. Now on farming today with Anna Hill why
peppers, tomatoes and lettuces are lacking in the supermarkets as shoppers face
a salad shortage. Good morning. Bad weather in Spain and poor returns for UK
growers mean salad shelves are now empty in many UK supermarkets. Should we stop
expecting out of season produce in our shops? We'll have more on that a little
later. First though all week we're talking about reintroductions from birds and
mammals to insects and plants. Juniper was once a familiar sight on the
downlands of England but with changes to land use and agriculture the shrub is
scarce. It's a protected species now. Conservationists are reintroducing it on
the chalklands of South Wiltshire. Matt Pitt from the charity Plant Life has
been working with volunteers to plant juniper on farmland in the Wylie Valley.
This report from Rebecca Rooney. A bit dry so I'm just having a bit of water.
These are cuttings that were taken from junipers that are growing in the
vicinity. Hiya. Just those two trays. Okay. And it's about a 10 minute walk to
where we're going to be planting. And how did you decide where they're going to
be? I mean it's a big landscape. So we use historic records to find where
juniper was growing in the past. My name's Carol Lodge helping with the
planting. Yeah my colleague of Matt's. Watch the bobboi. Watch the white. A
flock of sheep here. We have to protect them from sheep and things. Yeah most of
these junipers are being planted back out into bits of chalk downland. These
areas do get grazed and the junipers when they're this tiny are quite
susceptible to being nibbled particularly by sheep. So we are going to be
putting some protection around them. Bring them this way a bit. Okay yes you're.
So Carol when you plant them what kind of spot are you looking for and what we
have to do? We're going to separate these out so that we try and always have a
male near a female. And we're going to plant these near the scrapes. And when
you say scrapes that's literally an area of the slope where there's no soil. The
top soil's been scraped off to reveal the chalk below. The juniper seed was
actually spread on these scrapes so we're trialing two different methods of
regeneration. Basically the new plants will grow from the seed. We're also
planting out some juniper around the edges. We're trying to kind of give it a
helping hand really here. Are those skylarks we can hear? They are skylarks. So
nice sound isn't it? Let's take a small bit and because the ground's not frozen
today it's really nice conditions for planting. And if you need a bit more soil
Jason there's on these lovely mole hills so you just grab a little bit of soil
off there if you find you haven't got quite enough. Okay, wow they are prickly.
I mean these junipers have been reared from cuttings but taken away to a
nursery, brought back but what are your concerns as a conservation with that
method? So juniper is being affected by a plant disease. It's a phytophthora
which is affecting juniper and it's killing it. And this is across the UK. So
the concern about moving plant materials is that you can also move the plant
disease at the same time. So we were obviously very careful when we were taking
the cuttings and considering the biosecurity of this. We also tested the plants
before they were planted back out into the countryside for the disease to make
sure that we didn't have the disease in the cuttings that are now being planted
out again. But I think going forward we've kind of really thought that actually
this is not a very good way of doing things and the main part of the project is
actually creating the right conditions for juniper to naturally regenerate which
is these big scrapes. So that's a more kind of natural way of restoring these
populations back into the countryside. I mean if the landscape and the way it's
used is changing why bother reintroducing juniper if it hasn't really adapted to
the modern face of South Wiltshire? I mean juniper is probably one of these kind
of iconic species of our southern chalked downlands but the reason I suppose
we're doing this is partly because of its connection socially and culturally to
these landscapes but also it supports a whole host of other wildlife as well. So
in the region of sort of 50 insects are supported by juniper and around another
sort of 40 fungi and various other species are directly supported by juniper as
well. So it kind of sits in this kind of wider ecosystem. Matt Pitt from
PlantLife. An international investigation by scientists to combat a new wheat
disease which has devastated crops in South America and Bangladesh has found
part of the answer in grains gathered by British Embassy staff from around the
world 150 years ago. Using brand new gene data analysis called Agren Sec, the
scientists are now well on the way to tackling wheat blast, a fungal disease
which can cause 100% crop loss in severe cases. I joined Professor Paul
Nicholson and Dr. Sarnu Arora at the John Innes Centre in Norwich. First Paul
showed me the seed bank where millions of samples of grain and peas are kept and
where he stores the Watkins collection of wheat grains that he's been working
on. Well we've come into a pretty cold storage centre here. These boxes that you
can put out in these little packets inside actually contain the seeds. Why did
you want to look at the Watkins collection? What was important about that? He
put out a letter to British embassies across the world and asked that people go
into the markets and collect local grain and that was all collated and held in
Cambridge. The disease that we're specifically targeting in this instance is a
very new disease and we wanted to be able to go back to examine all the
diversity that was available before breeders really selected. Now the new potent
disease that we're talking about is called wheat blast. It's been around since
1985 and in disease terms that is recent. They think what has happened is that
wheat formerly was protected against this disease because all of the isolates of
the pathogens on wild grasses contained little proteins that wheat could
recognise. What happened in 1985 was that Brazil appears to have imported a wild
grass brachy area for forage use for its cattle. Unbeknownst to anyone sitting
on the grass was a pathogen, a blast isolate which could infect the brachy area
but not the wheat. It met up with an equivalent isolate sitting on grasses in
Brazil. Unfortunately, their progeny no longer have those essential recognition
points and so wheat unfortunately could no longer defend itself and the work
we've been doing is to try to identify what were those genes that were involved
in protecting wheat for all those centuries and that have now been overcome.
Well we're now going to go to the glass house where you've been actually growing
resistant wheat. The sun is shining through the roof and this very, very tall
wheat in front of us and with this is Dr. Sanu Arora and you are the person
who's been working on the technical side of getting those genes into these
plants. With the recent reduction in the cost of DNA sequencing, you know, we
can get tons of data on our computers so I have developed technologies to
process this data very quickly and that would help us to land into the regions
in the DNA that we are interested in. Edgelopstoschei, the goat grass, is a
progenitor or an ancestor of the D genome of the wheat. So I used this diversity
collection of Edgelopstoschei which is collected from different countries around
the Caspian Sea area where the hybridization of the genome has happened. We were
fortunate to actually sequence this collection and then use our genomic tools.
So you were looking at goat grass but you were finding what you wanted in there.
So basically these two genes that we have found in this study, they are located
on the D genome of the wheat and D genome is contributed by this goat grass. You
can find the same genes in the D genome as well as in the Watkins collection. So
your goat grass and your Watkins collection from years ago had the same gene.
Yeah, that's true, which is very exciting from the evolution perspective. Dr.
Sarnu Arora there and Professor Paul Nicholson from John Innes Centre. Social
media has been awash with pictures of empty supermarket shelves where they
should be salad, nothing but gaps. The problem seems to be country-wide and
across all stores, from the discounters to the big supermarkets. Jim Monaghan is
Professor of Crop Science at Harper-Adams and he's been investigating the
shortage. So the crops we're talking about would be salad crops like tomatoes,
cucumbers, peppers but also lettuce. At this time of year, most of our crop will
be coming from Almeria in the southeast of Spain and also over the Straits of
Gibraltar into Morocco. And the weather they had there, they had a very warm
December. It was so hot that it impacted the flowering of those crops. So you
had fewer fruit developing and then they've had freezing temperatures for the
last couple of weeks. And that's just meant that crops are standing still and
haven't progressed. Now we've also seen some tweets from Lee Valley growers
saying that growers decided not to plant here in December and January as usual
because the prices offered weren't high enough. How typical is that for UK
growers? Well it's been a really difficult time. The Lee Valley growers are a
really good example of where small to medium-sized businesses can no longer make
it work. The cost of fuel is very high. If you're going to be trying to put a
crop in early, you need to heat the glass house. I know a number of growers in
the UK who have either not planted, and some have gone out of business, but
others where they've just held back their plantings to try to let the weather
warm up a bit so they have to pay less to heat their structures. Now we've had
some other messages on social media. Olly Harrison, who's a farmer in
Merseyside, has said paying below the cost of production is not a sustainable
business model. The National Farmers Union have also said on social media that
growers' costs have risen and British fresh produce needs higher returns. No
farmer can grow crops at a loss, and if their cost of production out of their
control have increased significantly, they need to see that return, or we won't
have those crops there for us when at sea imports start to become difficult.
I've just been doing some work for Defra. We've been interviewing protected crop
producers, and this is their number one concern. The cost of heating structures
is not being recovered in the prices that they're selling. They're quite gloomy,
and that's alarming when you think that we need to be looking to supplying more
food from the UK to the UK. How is Brexit affecting all this? I haven't spoken
to a business who said Brexit's made it easier. There's a range of opinions to
the extent of the problem. Getting hold of labour has become more difficult.
Moving crop between Europe and the UK has become more difficult. But there are
some other issues which are not Brexit-related. For example, there have been
ferry strikes in France in January and February, and that's another thing that's
compounded these shortages on the shelves. The British Retail Consortium, which
represents large retailers, they've given us a quote saying, "...supermarkets
are adept at managing supply chain issues and are working with farmers to ensure
that customers are able to access a wide range of fresh produce." Do you share
their confidence? UK retailers have shown over many years that they're resilient
and they'll go and find product. But one day they'll go somewhere and say, well,
we're looking to buy a new product and they'll say there isn't any. And that's
an example of what we've got at the moment in southern Spain, because if that's
your major supply area, it doesn't matter how innovative you are, it doesn't
matter if you pay double the money, the crop's still not there. And that's maybe
something we need to be considering as we look to the future with the challenges
of climate change. We can grow some of these crops in the UK, and we could grow
quite a large amount of them, but we need to see more realistic seasonal pricing
reflecting availability. Professor Jim Monaghan and tomorrow will be reporting
from the National Farmers Union conference which opens this morning in
Birmingham. That's all from us today. I'm Anna Hill, the studio manager is Susie
Robbins, and the producer in Bristol is Rebecca Rooney. Now on Radio 4 Tweet of
the Day, Sir David Attenborough presents the aptly named Rybill from New
Zealand. The Shingle riverbeds of a few New Zealand rivers are home to an
inconspicuous yet extraordinary bird, the Rybill. Also known as the Rybill
Plover, this small grey and white wader is unique. It's the only bird in the
world whose bill is bent sideways, and always to the right. Rybills lay their
eggs in sandy spots among raised shingle banks in the fast flowing rivers which
rush down through the valleys of the South Island. Here amongst the rounded
stones they're well camouflaged, but if a female with young is disturbed, she
distracts intruders by pretending to be injured and moving away from the nest in
what's known as a broken wing display. In its gravelly world, the Rybills beak
is the perfect shape for finding food. We are making changes to the way BBC live
streams are distributed via third party services and platforms, and the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds.