TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-10H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Tora Gardner, the studio director, was Nathan Chamberlain. Have a very good
day. Tim Harford's up after the news. BBC News at nine o'clock. The former
health secretary, Matt Hancock, has described as categorically untrue a
newspaper report about his handling of coronavirus testing in care homes in
England at the height of the pandemic in 2020. Daily Telegraph, which has
obtained huge volumes of WhatsApp messages sent and received by Mr Hancock,
claims they show he chose not to follow advice from senior medical officials who
wanted all residents going into homes swabbed. A health minister at the time,
Lord Bethel, says tests had to be prioritised because numbers were limited.
Speaking on the Today programme, he accused the Telegraph of selective
reporting. This is the flaw in this whole debate. We only have a few scrappy,
gossipy WhatsApps. Business was done very formally, with meeting notes, with
policy recommendations, with a box. That is how the machinery government works.
And we don't have that in front of us. And that's why this partial glimpse into
the decision making is so unfortunate, because it gives a misleading impression.
Survivors of the worst rail crash in Greece for several decades have described a
nightmarish 10 seconds when their train hit an oncoming freight service at high
speed. At least 32 people were killed in the accident between the city of Athens
and Thessaloniki. Dozens more have been injured. Rishi Sunak has told
Conservative backbenchers that there's no pressure for an instant answer from
the Democratic Unionist Party, as it considers the government's new deal with
the EU on post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland. The prime
minister said the DUP should be given time and space to evaluate the agreement.
It's been broadly welcomed at Westminster, but criticised by Boris Johnson's
former Brexit negotiator Lord Frost, who questioned whether any fundamental
changes had been secured. Police have spent a second night combing through land
in and around Brighton looking for a missing baby. The child's parents,
Constance Martin and Mark Gordon, were arrested on Monday after going missing
for weeks and are being questioned on suspicion of gross negligence
manslaughter. Detectives accept the child may have come to harm. The Nationwide
Building Society says UK house prices fell by 1.1% in the year to February, as
higher mortgage rates and living costs made homes less affordable. It's the
first annual decline since the middle of 2020. The average property price stood
last month at around Â£257,500. British scientists say artificial intelligence
technology they're developing could improve the way transplant organs are
selected. An algorithm will make the assessment on the basis of photographs.
Currently, surgeons must evaluate the organ themselves. BBC News. This is BBC
Radio 4. Good morning. Our attention is going to be on numbers and nuts over the
next 40 minutes or so. But if that sounds a little bit too challenging for this
time in the morning, there are 22 different half-hour classical mixtapes on BBC
Sounds right now, which should be enough to keep you going until 10 o'clock
tonight. On the other hand, if you are in the mood for numbers and nuts, you're
in the right place. Nuts with Dr Michael Moseley in half an hour. Numbers with
Tim Harford right now. Hello, and welcome to More or Less, your steadfast guide
to the most bewildering numbers. This week, I know how much five grams of sugar
is, but is five grams of cocaine a lot? Curious listeners are asking for a
friend. How much of our rivers and countryside is openly available to anyone to
swim, paddle, or stroll? New figures have recently been released about deaths in
England and Wales. Is the long period of chronic excess mortality finally over?
But first, something has gone viral, which is bad if it's a virus, but
apparently it's good if it's a tweet, although we prefer our viral tweets to be
true. So let's take a look at this one. It says, Why is there such a vast
difference in average energy costs? And then it lists 11 countries, most of them
in the EU, and each with a sum in euros. France and Belgium are both 650 euros.
Spain is 620. Germany, Denmark, the Netherlands, Austria, and Norway are all
somewhere around 550 euros. Finland is 476. Poland is 174. And the UK is at the
bottom of the list with a number way higher than any of the other countries,
2,960 euros. It's more than four times the number for Belgium and France, the
next most expensive countries. Now, it's not at all clear what these numbers are
supposed to represent, except that the question is about energy costs, so
something, something energy bills. What is the tweet actually claiming? And are
we really paying that much more for our energy bills than other countries in
Europe? Reporter Josephine Casley is with me. Hello, Jo. Hello. And Jo, you've
been trying to work out where this comes from. I have. But first, in terms of
who's been sharing it, academics, activists, even Tim Burgess of the Charlatans
and a Labour MP. And it's been used to blame all the things that people like to
blame for things. So Brexit, green policies, the government, and of course, the
BBC for not covering it. Well, we're covering it now. But who posted it
originally? Well, that's not really clear. Variants of this tweet have been
going around since December. The earliest one that I found is from mid-December.
It's a map of northern Europe with numbers on most of the countries. And the
post reads, comparative energy prices, what's going on? So the numbers from the
viral tweet were taken from that map? I think so, although not all of them match
exactly. For instance, Spain isn't on the map at all, but it is in the tweet.
And there seem to be some possible copy and paste errors. But honestly, that's
the least of the problems with this. So that map had a watermark on it for EPEX
spot, which is a clue as to where this comes from. Because EPEX spot is a
wholesale electricity market, meaning that it's a place where energy suppliers
and producers go to buy and sell electricity. Now, I asked EPEX spot, and they
told me that this is indeed their data. But it's not what we pay as consumers.
It's what big energy suppliers paid for electricity. And the numbers in question
were taken from the wholesale prices in one particular hour in the early evening
of December 12. If you keep up to date with energy sector trade publications,
you'll know that that was a wildly expensive hour for the UK because of a killer
combination of cold weather and not enough wind. So these numbers are from one
hour. It's a particularly expensive hour for the UK. And they're from the
wholesale market, where energy companies buy the electricity they sell to us,
rather than the prices we actually pay. Exactly. So in summary, that tweet was
total rubbish. OK, well, let's bin that and move on. Do we have any more
reliable sources that can tell us how the UK's electricity bills compare to
other countries in Europe? This is really tricky. There's no definitive up-to-
date list of prices and bills out there. But one of the best sources that we do
have, which is publicly available, is a project called HEPI, which is funded by
the Austrian and Hungarian governments. It's good to see those two getting back
together, I think. So they publish monthly figures on the tariffs that are
available if you switch provider on the first day of the month. They get the
information from price comparison sites, energy companies, and regulators. And
they take account of measures like price caps, although they don't take account
of social tariffs that are targeted at particular groups. They look at the
prices in capital cities. But they say that this is usually representative of a
country as a whole. For the UK, Northern Ireland has a separate energy market.
So the figures only apply for England, Wales, and Scotland. So this reflects the
tariffs available, but not necessarily what people are actually paying. Yes,
that's right. I spoke to Raffaella Gregoriu, who is HEPI's data analysis
manager, about how Great Britain compares to other European countries for its
electricity prices. It used to be higher during summer in July and August 2022.
It used to be the most expensive country. But the price has been reduced since
then. In general, the price ranking of the countries is very unstable during the
crisis, which was obviously not the case before the beginning of the crisis. So
in the summer, Great Britain had the most expensive electricity prices according
to HEPI's data, which covers the 27 countries in the EU, plus another six
European countries. Right, but since then, the energy price guarantee has been
brought in in Great Britain. Yes, so since then, we're no longer the most
expensive. I asked Raffaella to talk me through their more recent data. As of
January 2023, Great Britain is the 15th in the row in the ranking in terms of
expensiveness, following Italy, Germany, Denmark, and Ireland. If you take an
average for 2022, we're the third most expensive after Denmark and Italy. Which
is a long way from what that viral tweet implied, which is that Great Britain
was four times more expensive than any other country in Europe. Still,
electricity isn't cheap here, it seems. No, it isn't. But electricity isn't the
only component of energy bills. Gas is another important factor. So if we look
at gas tariffs for January this year, we are... Let me count quickly. It is 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 15th. So around the middle, given that we have 33
countries. That's January this year. If we look back at the average for all of
last year, we're also 15th most expensive out of 33 for domestic gas tariffs.
Now, HEPI doesn't include one-off cash refunds and discounts in their headline
figures because it makes comparing countries harder, like the 400-pound discount
that we got here. But they have done a bit of analysis on this. And when they
take refunds into account, for electricity, Great Britain moves further towards
the cheaper end of the ranking. Everything we've talked about so far has been in
cash terms. Can we look at it relative to how much people earn? Yes. So HEPI do
look at it another way as well, which is to estimate gas and electricity bills
as a proportion of disposable income. The most expensive one, as average 2022
price, is Portugal. Then it is Norway, Bulgaria, Denmark, Greece, Cyprus, Italy,
Spain. And then it is Great Britain. And this is for electricity market. So
we're ninth out of 33 countries for electricity. But according to HEPI's data,
our gas bills as a share of disposable income are below the EU average. So to
summarise, that tweet was nonsense. Electricity here isn't four times more
expensive than the next most expensive country. And neither is gas. According to
HEPI's data, in cash terms, Great Britain does have more expensive electricity
than most countries in Europe, but not all. For gas, it's the 15th most
expensive out of 33. But if your yardstick is how much we spend out of our
disposable income, it looks a bit cheaper. Still above the EU average for
electricity, but below the average for gas. Thank you, Josephine. And thank you
to Raffaella Gregoriu. A few weeks ago, we speculated that the state of the NHS
might become the theme of this series. And despite a strong showing by Latin
grammar, we were right. In our first episode, we looked closely at two issues.
The first was a high number of what's called excess deaths in the UK. For the
second half of 2022, 26,000 more deaths were recorded than we would expect in
the last half of a normal year. That's 9% more deaths than is usual. The second
was how many avoidable deaths might be associated with the increasing struggles
in the NHS, which were particularly evident in data showing extremely long waits
for treatment at accident and emergency departments. Both of these issues were
looking bad when we came on air in early January. Excess deaths were rising, and
December had seen dire performance data in the NHS as it tried to deal with
large flu and COVID waves. But since the middle of January, it looks as if
things have started to improve. In recent weeks, excess deaths have been
declining. And after some truly shocking figures from December, waits for
emergency NHS treatment have been shorter. So have we turned a corner? We
decided to go back to the person who first helped us make sense of this data,
Stuart MacDonald, friend of the programme and an actuary at LCP Analytics. I
asked him to remind us how bad the end of 2022 really was, starting with data
from England. So through 2022, we had this fairly consistent pattern of excess
deaths from around Easter onwards and a slow burn problem, not particularly eye
catching, a few percent of excess week after week after week. And then that
situation got really very bad as we got through mid-December, and some of the
factors we've discussed started to play out. We were seeing thousands of excess
deaths arise each week. And what's happened to excess deaths in January? So
January started very badly indeed, with thousands of excess deaths in each of
the first three weeks, between 3,000 and 4,000. Since then, the situation has
improved significantly. Excess deaths falling week on week. And in the very
latest week, just published by the ONS, deaths actually below the normal level.
And this data for excess deaths, that's describing the situation in England and
Wales. What about Scotland and Northern Ireland? That's right. The numbers that
we've talked about so far are for England and Wales. The picture actually is
very similar for Scotland and Northern Ireland. So significant peak in excess
deaths in late December, early January, and improving markedly over the last few
weeks. And between 3,000 and 4,000 excess deaths a week, and this is bad. I
think it's worth making a comparison to some of the worst weeks of the pandemic,
where I think we had excess deaths of around 10,000 a week. So it's not as bad
as that. But these were really acute crises. And the fact that we're even in the
same ballpark is worrying. But you're saying that excess deaths are now, well,
they've gone away. So we're now actually below the baseline. So have we got
through this phase of chronic excess deaths then? Can we put all that behind us?
Well, I can't say with absolute certainty. But I'm afraid I remain fairly
pessimistic. If we look at the baseline that we're comparing to, then this is
the time of year when flu seasons normally occur. So our flu spike and COVID
spike fell in December. Whichever baseline we use, there is an assumption that
flu season would be happening around now. So the baseline is essentially
inflated. And the actual is benefiting from the fact that A, we're not having
flu at the moment. And B, we've just had it. And so some of the deaths that
would normally be happening now have been accelerated. So just to be clear what
we're saying here, normally when we make these comparisons, we're making them to
a baseline. And that baseline in February normally has flu in it, a lot of flu
deaths. And we don't have so many flu deaths right now because, well, because
we've already had them. In December, we had them in early January. So if I
understand what you're saying, that rather flattering comparison is masking the
fact that there actually still is an underlying chronic problem. We're just not
able to see it in the excess death figures at the moment. I think that's exactly
right. And what I would expect to see happen, it's always dangerous to make
predictions. But over the next few weeks, I would expect a similar pattern of
little to no excess, maybe even negative excess. But as we push beyond the point
where flu seasons tend to occur as we get into April and beyond, I think there's
a very real possibility that we see a similar pattern to last year, where the
number of deaths expected each week, according to the baseline, falls away. But
actual deaths observed stay at these relatively elevated levels, winter levels,
and we see a return of the excess. Our thanks to actuary Stuart MacDonald. We're
outdoorsy types here at More or Less. We love anything from strolling along a
country lane to kayaking down the whitewater rapids on the river. And it seems
like our loyal listeners take a keen interest too. I'm just watching the first
episode of Grace and Perry's Full English, where someone states that we only
have free access to 8% of the countryside and 3% of the rivers. Is that
accurate, please? Heather. Dear Tim, whilst listening to One to One with Matthew
Paris yesterday, I heard the interviewee state that we, the public, only have
access to 3% of British rivers. This seems a very low number, unless I misheard.
Is this correct, as I have never had any problems walking near them? A loyal
listener, Steve Hynde. Our Right to Roam correspondent, John Bithrey, is here.
Hello, John. Hello, Tim. Yes, let's wade into this. Both our listeners are
referring to interviews with a chap called Nick Hayes, who's campaigned for a
long time for more public access to Britain's countryside and waterways. Now, if
we take the issue of access to the countryside first, the 8% figure Nick Hayes
mentioned refers to the amount of land in England where we have what are called
open access rights. That means places where we can do things like walk, run,
climb, watch birds, watch other people watch birds, and enjoy a few other gentle
pursuits without having to stick to particular paths. In general, we're talking
about mountainous areas, moors, heaths, and common land, as well as parts of the
glorious English coastline. A lot of this open access is laid down in law in the
Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000, often known as the Right to Roam Act. So
this is separate to our ability to walk along footpaths and other public rights
of way? Yes, that's right. We have an extensive network of footpaths and
bridleways enabling public access to private land. But in general, you have to
stick to the footpath unless you want landowners with pitchforks coming after
you. Pitchforks? I'm not sure that's the tool of choice these days, John. But
both of us are talking like city folk right now. So the 8% of land in England
where we have this open access, where is it? Well, a lot of it is concentrated
in the north of England in national parks, such as the Lake District, the
Yorkshire Dales, and the North York Moors. The Glorious Peak District is in the
heart of the country. But then further south, the national parks are out on or
near coastal areas. For example, the Broads, the New Forest, and Exmoor. Then
there's Dartmoor, which was recently at the centre of a pretty high profile row
over wild camping, something that's not automatically permitted under the Right
to Roam law, but was an assumed right on Dartmoor until a recent ruling in the
High Court. So we like to ask whether a number is a big number on, more or less.
Is 8% a big number in this context? In terms of sheer area, 8% of England is
about 4,000 square miles. 4,000 square miles, that's half the size of Wales. It
is indeed, Tim. But depending on where you live, you might have to travel quite
some way to reach a really large open stretch of countryside where you can
ramble at will. Things are better in Wales, where 22% of the countryside is open
access. Campaigners for greater access, and there are a lot of them about, also
point to Scotland, where the right to roam is far broader. People can access the
vast majority of land with far fewer restrictions. In Northern Ireland, there
isn't a defined right to roam in law, and rights of access are generally much
more dependent on what individual landowners are happy to allow. Let's move on
to the second question then, and this issue of rivers. Do we have free access to
only 3% of rivers? Well, this is arguably the trickier figure, Tim. I asked
around about the source of this 3% figure, and several lines of inquiry led me
back to the organisation British Canoeing, which, as the name might suggest,
promotes that most fun of all the fun paddle sports. I gave British Canoeing a
call and asked them how they'd come up with that 3% figure, and they said they'd
got it from a report on access to waterways for recreational purposes that was
written back in 2000 by academics at the University of Brighton. But what's the
3% figure referring to? It's 3.47%, to be exact, and that's the proportion of
non-tidal stretches of rivers in England that have what's called a statutory
right of navigation. Now, that is one where a public body, such as the
Environment Agency or the Canal and River Trust, have designated under law
stretches of rivers or canals which can be used by the public for activities
such as boating, canoeing or swimming. So what on earth's going on with the
other 97% of stretches of river in England? Well, this is where the water's
muddy, Tim. Campaigners argue that all of our major rivers have a public right
of navigation as an ancient right, regardless of what any public body might say
today. So people can exercise these rights to do all the activities currently
officially restricted to particular sections. They also argue there are rights
in what's known as common law to swim or canoe in rivers if that's happened for
a long time without objection by landowners. And in a more practical sense,
there are lots of places where landowners have given permission or at least not
objected to swimmers, canoeists, and others using the waters. And then there are
also those who argue that if you can walk to or along a river, then you also
have the right to access the water itself. But a lot of this is pretty
theoretical and not tested in law. And then there are the tidal stretches of
river in England, and they don't feature in this calculation at all. Yes, that's
right. And I've had trouble getting a figure for tidal sections of rivers. But
we're looking at many hundreds of miles of stretches of tidal rivers in England.
In general, they do have a statutory right of navigation. But even then, there
are restrictions. For example, since 2012, you need permission from the powers
that be to swim in the Thames in central London. Apparently, we have David
Walliams to thank for that. Damn you, Walliams. I wouldn't be too harsh on him,
Tim. He swam down pretty much the whole of the Thames for charity and then spent
the next day throwing up. Sounds like access isn't the only problem with our
rivers. But overall, John, this all sounds a bit unclear. It is. I think we can
safely say that the 3% figure is at the very lowest end of how we define access
to rivers in England. But coming up with a more accurate figure for what's going
on in every stretch of England's 36,000 miles of river is a very tricky task
because of all the legal and practical issues involved. Thank you, John. And
thanks also to the aptly named Ben Seal from British Canoeing and solicitor
Nathan Wilmot from the Outdoor Swimming Society. You're listening to More or
Less. A couple of weeks ago, Jared O'Mara, formerly the Labour MP for Sheffield
Hallam, was found guilty of fraudulently claiming Â£24,000 in expenses. The money
was stolen to pay for Mr. O'Mara's cocaine habit. Reportedly, he was taking five
grams a day. This led to the following exchange on Twitter. I can't help but
notice how many media types are referring to Jared O'Mara's five gram a day
cocaine habit. As if everyone has the frame of reference to understand whether
that's a lot or a little. It's the Tim Harford rule of data communication.
Explain what the number means and if it's a big number. Looking forward to the
next More or Less, explaining what's a reasonable level of cocaine consumption.
Our editor, Richard Vardin, saw this exchange on Twitter and thought it would be
a wonderful idea for the programme, which might surprise you if you don't know
our editor. Normally, at this moment, I'd be joined by our cocaine correspondent
or our class A reporter. But funnily enough, we've had no applications for these
roles. Nobody on the team wanted to embellish their CV with this story. So we've
instead had to turn to an expert. OK, so my name is Harry Shapiro. I'm the
director of Drugwise, which is an online drug information service. I have to say
I am a loyal listener. Well, welcome to More or Less. I'm hoping you're going to
be able to supply me with some information about Jared O'Mara's drug habits
because I have to say I am clueless. So it was reported during his trial that at
one stage he was using up to five grams of cocaine a day. Now, I know from
measuring salt and sugar, that's about a teaspoon. I've got no idea whether it's
a lot of cocaine. Is it a lot of cocaine, five grams a day? Yeah. I mean, I
think if you spoke to also to anyone in the drug treatment services, you see
people, and most people, I think, would agree that five grams a day is at the
top end of daily cocaine use. I mean, there are lots of sort of caveats around
all of this, as you might expect. So when we talk about five grams a day, do we
really mean every single day? Because people go on cocaine binges, and then they
have a rest and all the rest of it. But if you're just looking at pure quantity,
yes. I would put that under the heading of heavy use. Heavy use, but not
completely implausible. It is conceivable that someone might. Oh, yes. Yes, yes,
absolutely. Yeah, totally feasible. I'm curious, do we know how much the typical
cocaine user does regularly use? Well, at the risk of being facetious, it's how
long is a line of code. It just depends. I mean, I've been experimenting with
flour. Yeah. What's this about flour? What have you been doing there? Oh, right.
No, I just tried to, you know, I think TS Eliot talked about measuring life out
in coffee spoons. But I was just having a look at what five grams of flour
actually looks like. And it's about a couple of level teaspoons. It doesn't
actually look that much of anything. But you are dealing with a powerful drug,
so it is a lot. So if you break down five grams into lines, you're looking at
0.1 to 0.2 grams per line. So five grams works out at something like 25 to 50
lines of cocaine a day. So if you did take five grams of cocaine a day, every
day, what shape are you going to be in after a few weeks or months or years?
What's it going to do to you? Well, apart from any physical risk attached to
that, so you could eat at that sort of level, you could easily have a stroke or
heart attack. From the mental health point of view, your mental health would be
deteriorating. You'd become very anxious and ultimately quite paranoid and
pretty much impossible to live with or to work with, because you literally would
be all over the place. Thanks to Harry Shapiro of Drugwise. And if you can think
of a stranger topic about which to ask, is that a big number? Well, let us know.
There's a new drama on BBC One and iPlayer. It's called The Gold. Gold like
that, you can't control it. And if you can't handle it, then it will find its
way to someone who can. The show's about the Brinks Matt robbery in 1983, when
six men broke into the Brinks Matt depot near Heathrow Airport. Inside, they
discovered 6,800 ingots of gold, collectively weighing three tons. And that was
worth 26 million pounds at the time. If you're wondering if that's a big number,
it is. We're looking for six robbers and three tons of gold. Money like that
will end up in surprising places with surprising people. And the show comes with
a big claim, which pops up on the screen at the beginning. If you've bought gold
jewellery in Britain since 1984, it's likely to contain traces of Brinks Matt
gold. As much as I'd like to believe that, something we know on More or Less is
that all numerical claims that glitter are not gold. So I asked Rob Eastaway,
all-round maths whiz and author of Maths on the Back of an Envelope, to help us
work out if this is in any way plausible. Let's round that up and be generous
and say there's a million gold rings gone into circulation. Now, the thing is,
how many people have bought jewellery since 1983, 84? And I would reckon the
majority of adults, for one reason or another, might well have acquired a gold
bit of jewellery. I mean, that gold was not all turned into jewellery, surely.
Gold gets turned into lots of things, from electronics, lots of Indian
electronics, to fillings, gold teeth, I gather, are still quite popular. Is that
jewellery? But actually, did it stay in the UK? I mean, whether innocently or
guiltily, it will have leaked out of the UK to other people. I'm going to leave
Rob Eastaway with that dramatic cliffhanger. If you want to hear the full story,
you'll have to wait until Saturday, when it will be released on BBC Sounds and
in our podcast, because that's all we have time for this week, and indeed, this
series. You can, of course, subscribe to our weekly podcast on BBC Sounds or
elsewhere, and you can send us your questions and comments to give us something
to think about before our return, when the weather's a bit warmer. Our email
address is moreorlessatbbc.co.uk. Until next time, goodbye. More or Less was
presented by Tim Harford. The producer was John Bithrey. Our Book of the Week,
in a quarter of an hour, explores graveyards around the country, rooting out the
stories of tombstones. This morning, it focuses on the work of the Commonwealth
War Graves Commission, A Tomb with a View, is by Peter Ross. And you can hear
the next instalment straight after Dr Michael Moseley has crushed some nuts. Mm.
We would all like some quick and simple ways to improve our health, but we're
inundated with often conflicting advice. So, if you were going to try just one
thing to improve your mental and physical wellbeing, what should it be? Perhaps
the martial art of tai chi to improve your immune system. Maybe a few nuts to
slow aging. Or how about cleaning your teeth to give your brain a boost? I'm Dr
Michael Moseley, and this is Just One Thing, where each episode, we'll explore
one thing you can start doing today to improve your health or life in ways you
might not expect. So, it is mid-afternoon, and I am craving chocolate, or
perhaps a biscuit. But instead, I'm going for a protein-packed snack that can
protect my heart, may stave off cancer, and give my brain a boost. I am cracking
out the nuts. I've got some walnuts here. Mm, these are delicious, particularly
when you get them fresh out of the shell. Now, nuts often get a bad press
because they are high in fat, and they can cause life-threatening allergies,
which is why they're rightly banned from places like schools and nurseries. But
if, like me, you're able to eat nuts, this is definitely one thing you should
start doing today. Mm. Now, these are amazing little nutritional powerhouses.
When we eat them, we get lots of fiber, and importantly, compounds called
polyphenols, which feed our gut bacteria and can reduce inflammation. Eating
nuts has even been linked to a longer life. They give you lots of good fats, and
we'll discuss some surprising new research on how nuts can trim your waistline
and even boost your brain power. First, though, I'm going to chat with Emma, who
is a journalist from Surrey. Let's see if a handful of nuts a day is just one
thing she can fit into her diet. Hi, Emma. Hi, Mike. Confessions time. Are you a
snacker? Yes, I definitely am. I'm a bit of a chocoholic. Anything involving
chocolate, even if it's chocolate-covered rice cakes or chocolate buttons. I can
feel my mouth salivating. I'm a huge fan. Do you have them in the house? I try
and avoid it, but inevitably, if I've got a big deadline, I'll nip off to the
shops to get something sweet. My eating habits are not as healthy as they should
be, and I tend to crash in terms of energy levels quite regularly through the
day. I think I'm relying too much on sugar. Okay, so, Emma, I'm going to ask you
to do a hard thing. I'm going to ask you to put aside your regular snacks and
have a small handful of nuts a day. So it's about 30 grams if you want to weigh
them out. This is a substitute. This is not in addition. I'll do my best. This
could be a breakthrough for me. I've asked Emma to swap her usual sweet treats
for a handful of nuts every day for a week. We'll see if she's cracked it later
this week. The nutty thing, botanically speaking, is that most of the nuts we
like to eat aren't actually nuts, which are defined as a dry fruit with a single
seed encased in a hard shell. Based on this definition, chestnuts and hazelnuts
are true nuts, while almonds and cashews are classified as drupes. They have a
fleshy outer layer. Whether they are true nuts or drupes, they are still packed
full of good things, like unsaturated fats, fibre and protein, as well as a
number of compounds with antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties, all of
which are good for you. So good, they may even slow the ageing process at the
cellular level by preserving our telomeres. These are the protective caps at the
ends of your chromosomes. As we get older, the telomeres gradually shrink.
Eventually, they get too short to do their job and our cells can't function
properly. The longer those caps are, the younger your DNA is. And several
studies have found a link between eating nuts and retaining the length of these
telomeres. As well as keeping your telomeres in good shape, eating nuts may
reduce your risk of a whole range of diseases, including cancer, diabetes and
heart disease. A five-year Spanish intervention study involving over 7,000 older
adults found that the group who were asked to eat nuts more than three times a
week were over 40% less likely to die from cancer and 55% less likely from heart
disease, compared to the control group who didn't. And that was after
controlling for other lifestyle factors, like alcohol consumption, physical
activity and smoking. Those are some big numbers, and you don't need to go nuts.
A handful a day is plenty. One thing that puts people off nuts is the fact that
some are about 70% fat. But it's unsaturated fats, the sort that can actually
benefit your heart health. A massive study involving more than 300,000 people
found that eating more nuts is associated with reduced weight gain over a five-
year period, as well as a lower risk of becoming overweight or obese. And do
bear in mind, the human brain is about 60% fat. Our brains need fat to work
well. New research shows that eating nuts can actually give your thinking skills
a boost. How? Well, we'll crack into that with an expert in a moment. But first,
let's find out how Emma is getting on. So this is day four of my nut snack
adventure. I'm really enjoying it so far. I weigh out my nuts in the morning.
I've been eating them generally at around 11 o'clock, so as a morning snack. I
do find them quite good to munch on. I have been finding nuts quite satisfying.
Yeah, so midway through, and we'll keep going to the end of the week. It sounds
like Emma has found it easy to swap out her sugary treats for nutty snacks, so
I'm keen to see if she sticks with it. But first, let's choose some nutty fat
with Dr Ziyan Tan from the School of Exercise and Nutrition Sciences at Deakin
University in Australia. Hello there. Hi, Michael. How are you? Very good,
thanks. Now, I can understand why nuts are good for my diet, but tell me why
they are good for my brain. They are good for our cognitive function. So this
was based on a study that we published recently in 2021. We compared the nut
intake and cognitive function of over 1,800 older adults in America. We found
that older adults who consume nuts, about 15 to 30 grams per day, perform
significantly better in terms of their short-term memory, fluency, processing
speed, and also attention. Right, and 15 to 30 grams, that was enough to produce
these changes in their cognitive skills. Why do you think that nuts are good for
the brain? In one study, they found that including nuts into the diet can
actually improve the brain reactivity. They also found that the small blood
vessels in the brain actually have higher elasticity, so meaning that there's
better blood flow into the brain, potentially explaining the benefits. And are
some types of nuts better than others? In terms of nuts, they all have very
similar kind of nutrient profile. So they are all high in protein, they are all
high in unsaturated fats, which are healthy. So, for example, if we are talking
about cardiovascular health, we see the benefits coming from almonds, we see the
benefits coming from peanuts, we see the benefits coming from walnuts and other
nuts as well. So there's no reason to believe that one nut is better than
another. Right, that's interesting, because I always thought that peanuts were
an almost inferior type of nut. Now, one of the ideas that has been around for a
long time is that eating nuts is likely to help you put on weight because
they're so full of fat and protein. And yet your research suggests that's not
the case. That is correct. If we look at the body of research out there, the
body of evidence, they all seem to suggest consistently that including nuts into
the diet doesn't really have much effect on your body weight. In fact, those
with higher nut intake tend to have lower body weight or lower body fat. So
many, many studies have repeatedly shown that incorporating nuts into the diet
doesn't make you gain weight. So why might that be? There are a number of
potential explanations for that phenomenon. We don't absorb all the fat or all
the energy from nuts when we consume them. That's the first reason. The second
reason is that when we eat nuts, we feel fuller and consequently we adjust our
diet in the next meal. The third reason being there are some studies showing
that nut consumption can actually increase how energy is burned in the body when
we consume nuts. Nuts must be one of the tougher foods that modern humans eat.
So I am assuming there's something about the structure, which means we don't
actually absorb quite as much of the fat that's in the nut while at the same
time getting all those benefits that come with the fibre. So if we look at the
structure of nuts under the microscope, we would see something like boxes. So
imagine if you have thousands of shoe boxes put together and within each box you
have fat inside. So in order to access the fat in those shoe boxes, we would
have to go in and break all the shoe boxes. When we chew the nuts, we break the
boxes, we release the fat, but in the process, not all boxes are being broken.
Hence, there's still about 20% of fat left in the boxes that are not accessible
by the body. Right. Now, I have been using nuts as a snack. Rather than reach
for a chocolate bar, I tend to eat a small handful of nuts. I have tried to go
for unsalted, healthy nuts, if you like. I have to say, I found salted nuts more
addictive. So probably the challenge with nuts is stopping, isn't it? Small
handful, fine. Large bowlful, not fine. That's correct. So even though we do see
a lot of benefits coming from nuts, we don't recommend people to go nuts about
eating nuts. We do want people to maintain at a level of about 15 to 30 grams
per day. The one thing that I can say on that is that a lot of the beneficial
compounds are found on the skin of the nuts. So when you prepare your nuts,
whether it's in cooking or in baking or consuming them on its own, make sure
that you consume the skin of the nuts together with the nuts in order to get all
the nutrients or the beneficial compounds coming from nuts. So that's the
science. Now let's check in one more time with Emma to see if she's enjoyed her
nutty week. So it's the end of my nut challenge week and I've really enjoyed it,
actually. I've had them in the morning with some yoghurt, which was lovely. I
think it did help regulate my meal times a bit better. I've definitely found I'm
eating less chocolate. I think my energy levels have improved. I'm not crushing
so much during the day, which is great. So yes, I'm going to try and continue. I
am pleased to hear that Emma has gone nuts for nuts. And as promised, I've been
doing the challenge all week too. I have been snacking on nuts quite a bit, as
well as incorporating more nuts into my meals. So today I'm making an apple
hazelnut salad. As you can hear, I've been slicing the apples and I've got a
packet of hazelnuts here. I'm just going to sort of scatter them around a bit
and grab a few as well. Nibbling on nuts has really given me a boost. It's also
helped me stay away from those mid-afternoon biscuits. I am definitely going to
be sticking to a nuttier diet. So why don't you give it a go as well? Your
brain, heart and even your waistline might thank you for it. So that's it. It's
just one thing you can incorporate into your daily routine, which really could
benefit your body and life. If you want to hear more of the series, why not
subscribe on BBC Sounds? And next week at the same time, Michael wants to spice
up your life, boost your brain, reduce your pain and improve your mood with
turmeric. And in just a moment on Radio 4 Longwave, you can hear The Daily
Service. Here on FM, we have the next instalment of our Book of the Week, A Tomb
With A View by Peter Ross. The Patch on BBC Radio 4. One producer. What was
amazing to me as an outsider was how normal all this was. One random generated
postcode. So I've got to press that? Press that button and a story unfolding
there you wouldn't otherwise know about. What do you sell then? Everything and
anything. Unheard stories from across the UK. What do you do after being a
prison officer? The Patch on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds starts next Wednesday
morning at 9. Well, now on Radio 4, the Book of the Week. As he tours Britain's
graveyards, the writer Peter Ross confronts war, bravery and remembrance in the
company of the Commonwealth War Graves Commission. Andy Clarke reads from A Tomb
With A View. It's known as the Green Isle, but as the boat approached over Lost
Sheel, I could see it was fringed with red. Encircled by ruins, their berries
bright in the late summer sun. The farmer put in at the stone jetty and we
walked up onto the island. This is the way the coffins come. Could one analyse a
footprint and identify grief in its tread? St Finan's Isle, or Ellen Ionin, to
give this place its formal names, would be the place to do it. We were
fortunate. Our business was not the solemn duty of a burial, and the heaviest
thing to carry was a large drum of water for cleaning headstones. I was
accompanying Robert Ross from the Commonwealth War Graves Commission as he went
about his work. The CWGC looks after 170,000 graves in the UK. 21,000 or so are
in Scotland. Over the next five days, Robert would visit, clean and maintain 27
graves, covering Moydart, the Ardnamurchan Peninsula and the Hebridean island of
Egg. He'd make five crossings by ferry, plus short hops in a wee boat to and
from this island. One of the reasons war graves are so scattered in Scotland is
because of air crashes and ships being sunk. Casualties were buried as close as
possible to where they washed ashore. That could mean a tiny graveyard on a tiny
island. The Commonwealth War Graves Commission has to plan how to visit and mark
and then maintain that site. It's chaos colliding with order. The organisation
was established by Fabian Ware during the First World War. Ware was a former
editor of the Morning Post. Too old for active service at 45, he led a volunteer
ambulance unit in France. In October 1914, when inspecting wooden crosses in a
makeshift cemetery, he was struck by the thought of a better, more lasting way
to mark the graves of the fallen. His two central ideas were that the dead
should be treated equally, regardless of rank or station, and that the
headstones should be permanent. Crucial, too, was his belief that bodies
shouldn't be repatriated to the countries they'd come from. They should remain
buried where they fell, beside the men they'd fought with. This was
controversial. Understandably, families very often wanted their loved ones
brought home when possible. But there was a certain poetry in it which embodied
Rupert Brooke's famous line, If I should die, think only this of me, that
there's some corner of a foreign field that is forever England. Forever
Scotland, too, of course, and Wales and Australia and India and the rest. Today,
there are almost 1.7 million Commonwealth war graves and memorials in 153
countries. They're in every continent except Antarctica. And there are two on
the Green Isle. Private Mary MacDonald and Dougal Grant. Most members of the
British Armed Forces who are buried in the UK tend to have succumbed to their
wounds after being invalided back home, or they died from illness or accident
while stationed here. Mary and Dougal were both local to the area, from families
with roots deep in Moydart, so it would have been considered right and proper
that they were buried here. The Green Isle is an ancient Christian site. Finan,
an Irish monk, is thought to have arrived here in the 7th century. As a result,
it became a holy place. It's very small. You could walk its perimeter in 15
minutes, but you never do that. It's too rough and boggy. Ah, here's the first
one, Robert Ross said. He'd spotted Private Mary MacDonald's grave. Mary died in
1944 at the age of 23. The headstone is modern pink granite. I passed her former
home on the drive here, a cottage called Kincara, with smoke coming from the
chimney and pieces of driftwood woven into the fence. It was sad to think of her
leaving that pretty house, never to return. She joined the Auxiliary Territorial
Service, the women's branch of the army. How Mary lost her life on April 26th,
1944 isn't certain, possibly tuberculosis or appendicitis while serving on an
airbase. She was the youngest of five siblings, a Gaelic speaker and reputedly a
great beauty. Her parents and brother John, all of whom she pre-deceased, share
the same grave. The desire to be laid to rest on the island isn't simply because
it's beautiful, but because it links you, body and soul, to an ancient past.
This place may have been made holy by its association with a saint, but it is,
in our time, sanctified by stories. Robert and I walked up over the top of the
island and found the second grave. Dougald Grant lies almost directly beneath a
rowan. The stone is modest, made of granite. Between carvings of an anchor and a
cross is his name, age and date of death, May 23rd, 1916. He was a deckhand with
the Royal Naval Reserve and died, aged 26, in Haslar Naval Hospital near
Portsmouth from measles and pneumonia. His body would have made its long journey
home by train from Portsmouth to Glenfinnan, where the coffin was loaded onto a
little steamer and carried up Loch Shiel. Dougald's father, Peter, was a
carpenter and made coffins. I wonder whether he made his sons. He could have had
no idea, as he shaped the wood, that a century after Dougald's death, the grave
would be tended by an organisation dedicated to remembrance. I joined Robert
Ross by Grant's stone. He had scrubbed it with a stiff brush and was now
repainting the letters. I was curious about all this effort. The dead of the
World Wars died a long time ago. In many cases, it's likely that no family
members visit the graves, yet the CWGC team dutifully work their way round them,
cleaning and repairing. Why go to so much trouble? We do it for the guys on the
ground, he said. You want to pay your respects. Being able to say to somebody,
this is your relative's grave, and we've made sure you can read it, and it's
clean and cared for, and even if you can't come and visit, we'll still go back.
That's special. Richmond Castle, Yorkshire. May 19th, 1916. Three men are in the
cell block. They're singing a hymn. One was a footballer and accounts clerk, the
second a miner, the third a teacher and lay preacher. They're all prisoners now.
Norman Goddy, Alfred Myers, John Hubert Brocklesby, known as Bert. They and
thirteen of their fellows will come to be known as the Richmond Sixteen. They're
conscientious objectors, conchies, cowards to many. They will not fight, and
they won't do any sort of work that helps the fight. They're absolutists. For
this, they've lost their freedom. Approximately 16,300 men expressed a
conscientious objection to fighting in the First World War. 1,300 of them were
absolutists. The group imprisoned at Richmond Castle were a mix of socialists
and committed Christians. How to keep their spirits up? By singing and playing
chess through a small hole between two cells. They also wrote on the walls. We
know this because the writing is still there. The prison block is attached to
the keep. There are eight solitary confinement cells over two storeys, each
about nine feet long by six wide. Inside, the air smells of damp. Graffiti was
everywhere. Written in pencil. Bible verses, sketches of loved ones, lines from
Tennyson, a little pornography, scenes from war. There are more than 2,300
inscriptions dating from the 19th century to around 1970. The best of it is by
the conscientious objectors. The only war worth fighting is the class war. You
might just as well try to dry a floor by throwing water on it as try to end this
war by fighting. On May 29th, the group left Richmond Castle for Laivre and
Boulogne, singing hymns. They knew they might be going to their deaths. The
execution of the Richmond 16 would surely serve as a deterrent for those who
thought to avoid combat. Among their number was Alfred Martlew. He worked as a
clerk at the Roundtree Chocolate Factory in York and was a member of the
Independent Labour Party. His pacifism was rooted in socialism. He believed, he
said, in the brotherhood of man. Before visiting Richmond, I'd made contact with
a relation of Alfred, his second cousin, the Reverend Andrew Martlew, who's a
former British Army chaplain. He first visited the castle in 2003, shortly
before deploying to Iraq. I went there in uniform and blagged my way into the
cells, he recalled. I found it very moving indeed. Growing up, he hadn't known
anything about the Conchi and the family, but he came to admire his relation and
the other men who refused to serve. They were all incredibly brave, he said. I
can't imagine the social pressure they were all under. There was no street in
this country where there wasn't somebody who'd lost a son or a brother or a
father. In France, Alfred and the others were court-martialed and sentenced to
death, but the sentences were commuted to 10 years in prison with hard labour.
The Prime Minister, Herbert Asquith, never comfortable with conscription in the
first place, was unwilling to have his government sanction these executions.
There was, however, a feeling that the men shouldn't escape entirely. Suffering
was in the air, and why should they not breathe it? So, at the end of August
1916, Alfred Martlew, along with other Conchiensi's objectors, was sent to work
in a granite quarry at Dice, near Aberdeen. They slept in tents and worked
breaking rocks. One young man died of pneumonia. A group photograph taken in the
quarry is a portrait of exhaustion. Martlew is standing at the back, looking
thin, tired and cold. It's possible to feel sympathy for these outcasts while
acknowledging the greater hardships experienced by those who went to fight.
Though the Flanders trenches were hell, the work camp sounds a sort of
purgatory. When it closed at the end of October, Martlew was given other
employment, but he became upset that the jobs he was being told to do had a
military purpose. Feeling that the government had betrayed him, he went on the
run. Back in York, where he'd lived and worked, he told his fiancÃ©e Annie that
he was going to give himself up as a deserter. In a state of some distress, he
gave her his money and watch. He was last seen alive on July 4th, 1917. Seven
days later, the body of an unknown man was recovered from the River Ouse, near
Bishopthorpe Palace. Alfred was identified the following day. He was 22. He lies
in the churchyard of St Andrew's, Bishopthorpe, North Yorkshire, near the foot
of a young oak. Placed on the earth by his headstone was a small wooden cross.
His blood was shed as a result of the war, and his courage, though not the sort
recognised in silences and gun salutes, was real. Age has not wearied Alfred,
and the years have not condemned him. Quite the opposite. Almost a century after
his passing, he seemed strong and admirable. Was he a hero? His relative Andrew
is sure. Yes, he said, undoubtedly, without any qualification, yes, because his
sort of courage required in the cold light of day and in the dark hours of the
night that you do what you think is right. Alfred Marklue left no mark on the
walls of his Richmond castle cell. I did, however, have a copy of his official
notice of appeal, where he'd set down why he would neither fight nor do any work
that would assist the fighting. His final words were written in a neat, steady
hand. I am prepared to be myself sacrificed rather than be the means of
sacrificing others. Music education in the UK has been in decline for years. If
you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC
sounds.