TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-02H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 It's one o'clock GMT. Hello and Namaste. I'm Divina Gupta and this is Business
Matters on the BBC World Service, where we talk about business stories that are
shaping your world. So on the show, it's a landmark victory for millions of
South Asians settled in the US because Seattle has become the first city in the
country to ban caste-based discrimination. We tell you all about it and how it
impacts workplaces. Andâ€¦ I couldn't believe what was going on and I just worked
24-7, you know, saving my business and helping whoever I could. Broken but not
shattered, how people who had to leave Ukraine because of the conflict are now
rebuilding their lives. Also, coffee with olives? Starbucks is hoping customers
will say yes. All that on Business Matters after the latest news. BBC News, I'm
John Shea. The head of the United Nations has condemned Russia's invasion of
Ukraine as an affront to the world's conscience. Antonio Guterres was speaking
at a special meeting of the UN General Assembly in New York. It's debating a
motion calling for Russia to pull out of Ukraine immediately. The Kremlin's
ambassador accused the West of wanting to defeat Russia at any cost. The
European Union's Foreign Affairs Chief, Joseph Borrell, said EU support for
Ukraine will continue until Russian forces leave. The first obvious step for
peace is for Russia to stop its attack. It must end all hostilities and withdraw
its forces and military equipment for Ukrainian soil. And it must do it
immediately, completely and unconditionally. And until then, the European Union
will continue to give Ukraine the support it needs to defend its population. And
it's also in accordance with United Nations' charter. The Biden administration
says it's extremely concerned by levels of violence in Israel and the occupied
West Bank. The State Department spokesman Ned Price made the remark after a raid
by Israeli troops in Nablus left 11 Palestinians dead and about 100 wounded.
Several Palestinian gunmen were among those killed, as were a number of
civilians. Mr. Price called for calm. We had productive conversations in recent
days with the parties and U.S. regional partners in support of efforts to
prevent further violence. We are deeply concerned that the impact of today's
raid could set back efforts aimed at restoring calm for both Israelis and
Palestinians. Today's events further underscore the urgent need for both sides
to work together to improve the security situation in the West Bank. Iranian
state television says a militant linked to an outlawed Kurdish group has been
executed. Arash Ahmadi, also known as Sakut, was convicted in 2018 of killing a
police major. He confessed to the assassination on television, but rights groups
say such admissions are often the result of torture. A court in California has
sentenced a man convicted of killing the American hip-hop star Nipsey Hussle to
a minimum of 60 years in jail. Eric Holder shot the rapper four years ago in Los
Angeles. He was found guilty in July of first-degree murder with additional
sentences for using a gun and wounding two other men. District Attorney John
McKinney said Nipsey Hussle was a role model to the community. Nipsey Hussle
meant a lot, not just to L.A. County and the nation in some sense and had fans
around the world, but to the community where he was from. He was a leader. He
was an inspiring figure. He was neighborhood nip. The Grammys didn't mean
anything. The art, the record sales, the money didn't mean anything to the
people there. He meant something to them. This is the latest world news from the
BBC. Vigil have been held across Portugal in support of victims of sexual abuse
committed by members of the Roman Catholic clergy. Organizers said they wanted
to express shame at recent revelations about the abuse of nearly 5,000 children
over the past 70 years. Alison Roberts reports. The vigil in Lisbon, hundreds
stood in silence to show their solidarity with victims. In other major cities
there were similar gatherings. They were organized by Catholics who said that
they wanted to pray for forgiveness from the victims and their families for past
passivity and omission on the part of the church, failing in terms of vigilance
and attention to them as children. Last week's report shook many in the church
and society. The Portuguese Bishops' Conference, which commissioned it, is to
gather next month to debate it and seek ways of offering justice to victims.
Severe weather warnings have been issued for parts of New Zealand's North
Island, which are still recovering from a cyclone earlier this month that killed
at least 11 people. Heavy rain and thunderstorms are expected in Hawke's Bay and
the Coromandel Peninsula. Cyclone Gabriel was the deadliest storm in New Zealand
for decades. The British government has announced plans to make major changes to
the way English football is governed. The proposals include setting up an
independent regulator. It would have the power to stop unscrupulous owners
buying clubs and to block teams from joining breakaway competitions. An attempt
to establish a European Super League two years ago angered fans, forcing the
idea to be abandoned. New research suggests that people who regularly use
laxatives could be at far higher risk of developing dementia. A study by Chinese
scientists found that people who used them on a daily basis were over 50% more
likely to develop dementia than those who did not. The scientists say it's
possible that changes to microbes in the gut may affect the brain. And that's
the latest BBC World News. Hello and namaste. I'm Davina Gupta and you're with
Business Matters on the BBC World Service. It's a show where we talk about
business stories that are shaping your world. So thank you for your company at
this hour. It's all 105 GMT here in Salford in the UK and with me in the gallery
are Peter, Alex, Lucy and Andy. So wherever you are in the world, do drop in a
hi or tell us what you would like us to talk about at world.business at
vbc.co.uk. We love to hear from you. So here's what's coming up from Nigeria. I
think Nigeria has a lot of opportunities, huge, huge opportunities. Foreign
investors are coming in to invest in Nigeria. They are looking at the number
data does not lie. We find out what young entrepreneurs are hoping for this
election season in our special coverage. And if you're waking up and smelling
the coffee in your part of the world or staying up late like me in this part of
the world, would you want this? Do you consider serving any coffee with olive
oil in it? Olive oil? Well, that's Starbucks new bet. Let me get a guest,
Mohammed Al-Asar, commentary editor with Fortune magazine who's joining us from
here in London. Hi, Mohammed, how are you? Hi, Zaneer, I'm okay. How are you? So
chai or coffee for you? Both. Both. And coffee with olive oil for you? Not yet.
Okay. I love converting. Not yet. Well, I don't know how I'll feel about it. I
usually try and mix up my coffee with ghee, which is sort of an oil. I don't
know how many people actually do that, but I come from India. So for me, that's
like something which I like to do. But well, taste buds are taste buds. We talk
more about that, Mohammed. But let me take you through the big news that we've
been talking about, which is impacting millions of people from South Asia
diaspora in the US and has wide ranging implications across workplaces in the
country. Seattle has become the first city to ban the caste based discrimination
in the US after a vote by the local council. This system, which is from India,
dates back over 3000 years that divides Hindu society into rigid hierarchical
groups based on their birth. It has been constitutionally banned in India. But
let's speak to our guest who is joining us at the SA from the US, Shama Savant,
council member for the Socialist Alternative Party. She introduced the
legislation. Hi, Shama. How are you? I'm good. How are you, Dovina? I'm really
well. Thank you for speaking to us. But Shama, before we get talking about the
implications of this, for many people around the world who don't know about the
caste based system, could you briefly tell us what it is? Yes, caste, the caste
system was developed by class societies in South Asia over 2000 years ago. And
just like racism didn't develop in the United States because Americans are just
bad inherently, it developed as a conscious strategy by the early capitalist
class in order to for them to be able to justify the absolutely horrific
transatlantic slave trade, which required them to manufacture false notions of
black inferiority. Similar processes happened in earlier class societies like
feudalism in the South Asian region, where they needed the ruling classes needed
to divide the oppressed masses, the exploited masses and do a divide and conquer
strategy. And Ergo, you have a caste system where some people are just deemed
inferior by birth. There's no truth to this idea, but it's a manufactured
strategy. And that to this day has been perpetuated and now currently under the
capitalist system. So what I tell people in America is if you marched with the
Black Lives Matter movement, if you care about a society, you know, building a
society free of racism, sexism and other types of oppression, then you should be
paying attention to our efforts to address caste system. How widespread is it in
the US, Shama? Because one would imagine it is a high income country. It's a
country which is a dreamers country as well. There are people from different
backgrounds that come there. How widespread is this in South Asian diaspora,
which is about six million people? Yes. So you're right, Devina. I mean,
obviously the caste system, since its origin and its context is South Asian, it
doesn't affect everybody as a whole. We know American working people as a whole.
Obviously it affects the immigrant community workers who hail from the South
Asian region and related regions around the world. So as the concentration of
those immigrant community workers has expanded in the United States, you're
seeing more and more of these cases. And actually now it's a widespread system,
but it's widespread among those community. But just to give you a statistical
sense of how crucial this is, if you look at the issues of trans discrimination
against the trans community and how important of an issue it has become overall
in the discourse around LGBTQ discrimination, trans community members are
comprised of 1% of the overall US population and compare that to the fact that
oppressed caste members within the South Asian community, they comprise of 5% of
the overall South Asian immigrant community here. So you can see this
statistically. It's actually a very important question for us to address. So
what has changed then now, Shama? Because at workplaces, what kind of
discrimination was seen? Because there were several testimonies that were made
when this legislation was being passed. And how are these workers protected now?
So it's not like the workers will be protected overnight. This is a historic
ordinance. Absolutely. As you said, Taveena, this is the first city in the
nation to legally ban caste discrimination. And actually, as far as I know, it
is the first city globally outside of South Asia to take this step. And in fact,
our ordinance has been supported also by Ashwini Keppi, who is Dalit herself,
and who is the United Nations' repertoire on racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia, and related intolerance. And the impact of this is going to be that
the law, when it goes into effect a month from now, will allow people who are
facing workers, who are facing caste oppression in their workplace, to have
private right of action, meaning they can sue the corporation in the courts. And
just to give you an example of why that's important, we're seeing hundreds upon
hundreds of workers, for example, in the tech sector, companies like Microsoft,
Google, Amazon, Facebook, IBM, Cisco, many hundreds of oppressed caste workers
are talking about how they are facing discrimination at the hands of their
dominant caste South Asian bosses. So what we need to do is to build a movement,
again, to fight to enforce this law. It's not going to happen automatically.
This law itself was not won automatically. It was socialist and South Asian
community members and union members fighting to win this and be forced to
Democrats to pass this. And so we are going to have to fight to win the case in
the courts as well. The companies that you mentioned, of course, they've always
maintained that they have diversity and inclusion as part of their agenda, and
they have legal protection in place as well. But obviously, it's very difficult
for anyone to voice discrimination at workplaces. And until the time you don't
voice it, obviously the action against such system is very difficult because
non-South Asians actually don't know much about this. So when you've been
working with such people who have faced this discrimination, do they feel now
empowered to talk about it or there's a long way even after this legislation
that you're looking at? You know, both things are true at the same time. Yes,
there is a long way, and I want to talk about that in a second, but without a
doubt, what we have won yesterday is truly historic. It wouldn't be an
exaggeration or hyperbole to say that. And you can't overstate the significance
of this because imagine this is the first time ever in history outside South
Asia where the law will actually recognize, yes, there is discrimination on the
basis of caste. That itself is the first step forward without which we, you
know, everything else is a non-starter. But then going forward, we will, as I
said, have to fight to hold corporations accountable. And you're right,
corporations, you know, in response to massive anger against racism, sexism and
other types of oppression under capitalism where millions of people speak up
whether it's the Black Lives Matter movement or the MeToo struggle, corporations
and corporate bosses, you know, they're forced to pay lip service because they
need to appear like their compassion. But in reality, if you ask people all
across America who have corporations actually change racist practices or sexist
practices, they haven't. So we really need to keep building a fighting movement.
And that's why here we're launching a workers' strike back national movement to
take this fighting strategy forward. But, Shama, this particular legislation has
also been opposed by within the community. There have been many Hindu-American
groups who argue that this ban is not necessary. In fact, it's unfairly singling
out and targeting an entire community on basis of their ancestry. And they've
also said that it may deter companies from hiring South Asian workers. There is
absolutely no truth to these, what I would call actually not even. I mean, there
were 100 organizations who have actually written about this. They were, they
were, but they're all right wing organizations. Yes, it's no surprise. When we
fight, when the left and when progressives and when young people fight for
something truly meaningfully progressive that is actually going to make a shift
in the status quo, expect that the right wing and the entrenched role will fight
back. The Seattle City Council approved the ordinance six is to one. So there
was opposition as well. Yes. But why would you be surprised by that? Of course,
when we're doing something truly meaningful, there will be opposition. But
what's important is the movement was so strong that it forced six Democrats to
vote yes. And in reality, the organizations that you're talking about, the
organizations that oppose this, they are deeply right wing like the Hindu-
American foundation, like the coalition of Hindus of North America. If you go
and look at their websites, it's not just that they're opposing this ordinance.
Their entire agenda is far right and reactionary and very aligned with the
Bharatiya Janata Party and Narendra Modi regime. This is a right wing regime in
India. And so these are these are again, these are your views. But Shama, very
quickly, because we are short on time, but just wanted to ask you if this fight
is going to be taken to other parts of the country as well. Do you see more
cities now at least discussing and debating this legislation? Hundreds of
thousands of people around the nation have reached have been reaching out on
social media because they are electrified by the victory. We have one. It's
almost surreal to people that we have won this. And in fact, it has garnered
international attention. I mean, we're talking on BBC Radio in the UK. So
clearly, it has captured the imagination of many, many people who are fighting
for a better society. But we won't be able to win this automatically in other
cities, even here in Seattle, like you said, there was opposition. We won
despite that, because we built a fighting movement. We are going to need that
kind of a fighting movement in other cities as well. So that's why I invite the
listeners to join workers strike back. Well, Shama Savinde, council member for
the Socialist Alternative Party joining us. Thank you so much for those views.
In fact, just also add that Washington, D.C. based Hindu American Federation has
said that while the ordinance's goals were praised worthy, it unfairly singles
out and targets an entire community. But Mohammed is still with us. Mohammed,
what are your views on this legislation and the larger discussion about whether
legislation is only the legislation is enough for cultural change that's
required at workplaces when it comes to discrimination practices? Well, Dvina,
first of all, I think it's a reflection of the kind of the outsized impact that
South Asians and Indian born employees and executives have had on corporate
America. We're talking about maybe for the Indian born population, 1% of the
U.S. population who run companies that represent 10% of the market. So it's a
very big issue. It's a very big issue right now as well because especially in
the tech sector, many people are facing layoffs and their immigration status
usually depends on their job, etc., etc. And there are fears that there will be
discrimination when people are laid off. So it's definitely a hot topic. Not one
I'm an expert on, but it is causing the anxiety in the workforce and that's
never good for any company. Well, we continue tracking this story, but you can
read more on this on BBC.com slash news. Now moving ahead, the head of the
United Nations, Antonio Guterres, has condemned Russia during an address in New
York. It's ahead of Friday's first anniversary of the invasion of Ukraine.
Ukraine is hoping an overwhelming majority of all countries will back a UN
General Assembly motion calling on Russia to withdraw from Ukrainian
territories. Mr. Guterres said the attack had undermined the UN Charter. The one
year mark of Russia's invasion of Ukraine stands as a grim milestone for the
people of Ukraine and for the international community. That invasion is an
affront to our collective conscience. It is a violation of United Nations
Charter and international law. Meanwhile, the leaders of nine European countries
on NATO, that is North Atlantic Treaty Organization's Eastern flank, it's a
conglomeration of 30 countries of Europe and North America security alliance.
They have held talks with the chief of the alliance and US President Joe Biden.
All nine want a greater security presence to deter Russian aggression. And all
this week, we've also been looking at the impact of the Ukraine war on
businesses, people and the global economy. An estimated eight million people
were displaced by the conflict. Many business owners have now been forced to
adapt in order to carry on working. Konstantin Kiliagit is one of them. He's
been talking to my colleague Alex Bell about the challenges that he's faced. I
didn't really choose to leave Ukraine because on the nights when the war
started, I was flying from Sri Lanka to Kiev and never made it. The airspace of
Ukraine was already closed and I was thinking what to do. And then I remembered
that I had this apartment in Berlin that just stood there empty. And I went
straight there. And then my girlfriend's pregnant already. At that time, it took
her 40 hours to get out of Kiev with a train and join me in Berlin. Wow, so you
never got the chance to go back to Kiev. But your girlfriend was already there.
That must have been a frightening couple of days. It was frightening, you know,
two months because I couldn't believe what was going on. And I just worked 24-7,
you know, saving my business and helping whoever I could, my teammates. That's
when I also started blogging about the need to work with Ukraine and to buy from
Ukraine and vendors as a way to support our country's economy. Sure. And this is
really what you're all about, isn't it? Because you have your main business in
IT, but since the war started, you've been focusing on resilience and also kind
of campaigning for people to work with Ukraine and buy from Ukraine. So tell me
a little bit about how that works. Well, it works in such a way that Ukraine is
getting a lot of macroeconomical aid from outside. But this is something to keep
the economy at the high level going. And this money never make it to small
businesses, to older people who grow their own vegetables for sale or beekeepers
who sell honey. And the only way to support this kind of people is to pay
salaries in Ukraine so that your employees can go to the market and buy from
them, for example. And thinking about your main business now, you run an IT
services company. How have you managed to keep that business running and stay
resilient? So what we did, and before the war, we said that everyone has $2,000
for relocation. And we either compensate them afterwards or we give them
beforehand cash or something so they just have this money set aside if something
happens. When it began, the entire team was 40% functional. The first week of
the full scale invasion, in two weeks we were already at 80% and in the month we
were back at 100%. That is remarkable resilience, I must say. But your business
must have suffered constantly. What has the damage been to your business? Well,
the damage is that we cannot use our offices anymore. One of our offices is in
Zaporizhia, which is very close to the front line, about 40% in Russia claim it
to be their territory. Also many teammates had to leave their homes, also
including myself. Well, you can listen to the entire series on Business Daily.
Just search for Business Daily wherever you get your podcasts. And Alex Bell is
here with us in the studio who's actually been speaking to a lot many more
people who fled from Ukraine. Alex, how's that experience been? And tell us, how
were you able to find them and the entire process of just getting to them and
telling their story to the world? Yeah, well Davini, you mentioned there are
eight million refugees who have been displaced. That equates to around one in
every four people who've been uprooted in some way since this war began a year
ago, this Friday. And these people have stories in every corner of the world. We
heard Konstantin there. I also spoke to a couple, Vladimir and Regina, who you
might have heard on the programme yesterday. They had to flee their home twice
in the last 10 years, once due to Russian separatists taking over their land
during the 2014 annexation of the Donetsk region. Then they had to leave Kiev
when Russia invaded the country fully in 2022. So they're now finding it very
difficult and demanding to run their garden centre business remotely from
Australia. We also heard stories from people like Anastasia. She woke up on the
Friday that Russia invaded, unaware that anything was happening, to the sound of
bombs. She left behind a career as a trained lawyer and then moved to the UK and
she's now running a furniture cleaning business there. So that's a case of
someone who's really had to adapt. And Konstantin, who you just heard there, has
done more than just keeping his business running. He's also selling t-shirts on
the side. It's a testament to the Ukrainian refugee spirit. Remarkable stories
there, Alex, and Mohammed, coming to you because that's the question everybody's
asking when you hear these stories, that what will it take to end this war? How
much more can the global economy support it? How much more? So the global
economy has adapted to an extent in terms of, for example, replacing some of the
commodities that Russia provided on the international market, some of the
energy. Of course, there is immense suffering in both countries, especially in
Ukraine. But some sectors like IT, the Ministry of Digital Transformation in
Ukraine, has provided really outstanding leadership to keep them going and to
support their exports. So that sector has been very resilient. And they got a
lot of defense work as well. That the humanitarian situation is where things go.
Absolutely. And when you see the headlines that have come today that China has
now been supporting Russia and sort of directly condemning it, you have the
China's top diplomat Wang Yi in Russia at this point of time. How do you view
that development? I think China's trying to promote its own kind of peace plan.
Ukraine is being cautious with it. The US is very cautious. But at the end of
the day, there will have to be political settlement, whether the conflict is one
on the ground or not. There will have to be negotiations at some point. But most
people expect Russian assault in the next few days, it doesn't look like we're
getting closer to a solution. Well, Mohammed, be with us. We're going to take a
short break on this side of Business Matters. Alex, thank you for getting us
those stories as well. On the other side, we have much more to discuss,
including whether you'd like to have coffee with olives. Well, you can look for
more episodes in Business Matters. Just search for Business Matters wherever you
get your podcasts from. It's always available there. But for now, we take a
short break and our team will see you on the other side. So be with us and keep
sending us your views on world.businessatbbc.co.uk. This is the BBC World
Service meeting the Vietnam War veterans who left America and retired to the
country they fought in. 50 years ago, on the 29th of March, all American forces
will be withdrawn from South Vietnam. Today a small group of US veterans now in
their 70s have returned to live there permanently. I was expecting people to
hate me when I came back. People welcomed me like I had just left the day
before. I am now from and I'll be finding out why they choose to retire in
Vietnam. You're ashamed of what you've seen and what you did. I say this is the
only thing that makes sense, me living in Vietnam. I came back to find the war.
I kind of explain it as when you're a little kid, you've got a monster under the
bed. I had to look under the bed and the monster wasn't there. No place like
Nam, Saturday at 12 GMT. You're listening to Business Matters from the BBC World
Service with me, Devina Gupta. Coming up in the next half hour. If you're waking
up and smelling the coffee in your part of the world, would you want this? Do
you consider serving any coffee with olive oil in it? Olive oil? Starbucks new
bet on coffee with olive twist in Italy. Will it pay off? That's all after the
news. BBC News. John Shea, the head of the United Nations, Antonio Guterres has
denounced Russia's invasion of Ukraine as a violation of international law. A
motion demanding the immediate withdrawal of Moscow's forces is being debated at
a special session of the UN General Assembly. Moscow's ambassador told the
gathering that Ukraine's allies were prepared to plunge the entire world into
war. The United States says it's extremely concerned by violence in Israel and
the occupied West Bank. Earlier on Wednesday, a raid by Israeli troops in Nablus
left 11 Palestinians dead and about 100 wounded. A US court has sentenced a man
convicted of killing the hip-hop star Nipsey Hussle to at least 60 years in
jail. Eric Holder shot the rapper four years ago in Los Angeles. The Attorney
General of Ecuador says she'll ask for corruption charges to be brought against
the former president, Lenin Moreno. He denies the accusations, which are linked
to the construction of a huge hydroelectric plant. Vigilates have been held
across Portugal for victims of sexual abuse committed by members of the Roman
Catholic clergy. A report published last week found that nearly 5,000 children
were abused over the past 70 years. Severe weather warnings have been issued for
parts of New Zealand's North Island. Heavy rain and thunderstorms are forecast
to hit areas that are still recovering from a cyclone which killed at least 11
people. British and Irish political leaders have condemned the shooting of an
off-duty policeman in Northern Ireland. He is in critical condition after being
attacked at a sports complex on Wednesday night. The UK's Prime Minister said he
was appalled. The British government has announced plans to make major changes
to the way English football is governed. The proposals include setting up an
independent regulator which could block teams from joining breakaway
competitions. It would also have powers designed to stop clubs going out of
business. BBC News. Welcome back to Business Matters. I'm Devina Gupta with our
guest, Mohammad Al-Asar, who is a commentary editor with Fortune magazine. And
on this half of the show, we are talking about a special coverage from Nigeria.
I think Nigeria has a lot of opportunities, huge, huge opportunities. Foreign
investors are coming in to invest in Nigeria. They are looking at the number.
Data does not lie. What young entrepreneurs are hoping for this election season,
just in a bit we'll be talking about that. But before that, Mohammad, because
you said that you are equally comfortable with coffee and with chai as well,
we've had a bit of discussion in the gallery out here. And we think that the
mixture of both could really work like you take your spices, you put it in
coffee and you have a new flavor. Who knows this could be the new pathbreaking
one, because one word which has been trending on social media in Italy is
oliata. And that's because the world's largest coffee chain Starbucks says it's
launching a line of olive oil infused drinks in Italy. So if you're hearing
this, if you're waking up in any part of the world and or if you are still
trying to have coffee and going to work, would you like this or not? Think about
that, because this is what the coffee drinkers of Manchester near our office had
to say to BBC's David Harper. Would you consider selling coffee with olive oil
in it? No, there's just that's just outrageous. There's no way. Starbucks say
that they're going to start selling coffee with olive oil. They say it's got an
unexpected velvety buttery taste. Well, all the best to them, but that's not
that's not proper coffee. It's no way. Would you try it? I could potentially
give it a try, but I'm gonna I have like a special like a flavor already in my
in my head and I don't think I would like it. Olive oil. I wouldn't. I've never
heard of that. I just think it would be a little bit strange and I don't think
it would mix well. I mean, I won't knock it until I've tried it, but at the
moment it just sounds a bit that sounds bizarre. I don't think I would like it.
I would prefer my coffee to be sweet, not buttery. So, Mama, there you go. Most
of them don't like it. But let's talk about why Starbucks is doing this, because
you have this largest coffee maker, largest coffee maker in the world in a chain
from the US, which the largest coffee chain from the US, which is trying to
establish itself in Italy when it entered and opened its first store in 2018.
There were Italians that called for boycott of Starbucks at that time. Do you
think this is the strategy which is right for that country? I mean, I think the
plan is to deploy the 25 stores that Starbucks has in Italy or something and
then deploy it in the US. And that's where they see, I think, the big market.
But more importantly, I think it signals that Starbucks wants to do more
successful local adaptations like it did in China, because it's facing some
pushback in the US. There's a big union movement. Howard Schultz has talked
about it, and he's not very happy with it. He feels it's a failure of the
culture that employees even need to unionize. So he's focusing on what made him
initially successful, which is innovation, the culture of the company and how
unique it is. Well, it's interesting because the idea for Starbucks actually
struck Howard Schultz when he was in Italy. I think it was in late 80s. But this
idea is not new, is it, Muhammad? I remember from India, it was in early 90s
when another US food chain, McDonald's had entered the country and they tried to
adapt to the local cuisine. And that was called localization in a way. You had
global food adapting to local taste buds. So this would be patties made of
potatoes and peas with lots of spices. Life of course was off the menu, but you
had chicken, which was laced with spices and extra spices was again another
flavor. So this kind of adaptation to local food, it's been quite interesting.
It's been successful, successfully done by, as you mentioned, McDonald's in
many, many markets, by Starbucks in China. The company itself is also becoming
more global. And we were just talking about South Asian born executives and
Indian born executives. And Indian born CEO is going to take over Starbucks in
April. Just shows how the really globalization isn't unraveling or anything.
It's all coming back together. Have you seen and noticed this in your native
country as well, Egypt, Muhammad, that you would have different kind of global
chains coming in there, try and adapt to the local cuisine and then they're
identified as local chains. In Egypt, it's a hard competition for these chains
because they have to compete with the streets with, I'm sure in India as well.
So they have to keep people interested and cater to their tastes. So if it's too
bland, right, people are not going to buy it. They always come up with
innovations that then spread and you see the knockoff version in the local cafe
to a cheaper version than the international chain of the Mac Flaffle or whatever
contraption they come up with in each market. Well, the term drink olive oil
actually started trending on TikTok last year with supporters saying that it has
anti-inflammatory properties. And I mean, that's another way in which people are
looking at this drink, that it could be infused with health benefits as well.
But paying for a cup of coffee, I think that would be what I would look at the
price point of this, looking at the cost of living crisis, the high inflation.
Would you have customers lining up for it? Well, you have something sometimes in
downturns, some sort of lipstick effect where the customer will not go for the
big ticket items and instead indulge in small things like a fancy cup of coffee,
for example, instead of going to the restaurant. All right, Mohammed, be with us
because I still have Alex Bell here in the studio. So Alex, would you go for
this coffee? Do you know what? I'm going to go out on a limb here and say I
would probably give it a go. I think olive oil goes with most things, doesn't
it? It does. I mean, and it depends on whether you could make it work for your
taste buds or adapt to it. I don't know. It's one of those things that you would
feel that you're able to experiment with. But would you pay for it? Is the pulse
also a point regularly? I mean, will it come into your budgetary expenses? Now,
I'd like to try before I buy, I think. Yeah, that could be another way of
getting into it. But now it's time for Toolbox, which is an ongoing series on
business matters about making difficult workplace conversations easy, where we
invite you to share your experiences with us and our guests. So if you have a
story, you can write it and you can also send us your questions at
world.business at BBC.co.uk and you can get featured on the show. So this time
we have this interesting story. Hello there. My name is Inigo Alparais. I'm 36
years old. I'm a Spanish guy living in England for the last 12 years, and I want
to talk about the experience I had with a Paris Meli co-worker. That was 14
years ago. I still remember perfectly fine. How was that smell? We were working
security cards in the stadium, and sometimes we were unlucky that we were paired
together. The smell was like if you leave the fridge open for a month and then
you try to smell it. So it was very intense. And the poor guy who also has, he
didn't respect the personality space. Let's put it that way. So he will have the
use of smacking you in the bag, getting very close. And he will always talk very
close to your face. So yeah, it was instantaneous. We will always know when he
was there. Did you try and talk to him in ego and tell him that you were feeling
uncomfortable? He was such a lovely guy, apart from that, that we usually didn't
have the heart. He used to be very sensitive and get offended very easily. He
would not get angry, but you can tell the sadness in his eyes. How did this
impact your work? Honestly, after a couple of hours, you sort of become not very
sensitive anymore. But the problem is, as I say at the beginning, I still
remember the smell. That's what I want to know, the situation and the workplace.
That is Inigo Alvarez, who has contributed on the story. But well, can I ask if
you've been ever in that situation? I haven't been in that situation. It's a
difficult one. Yeah, I think we've all been in situations where we've had to
kind of broach a difficult topic with a colleague and give them some maybe not
so pleasant feedback. But feedback is different on this. Alex, you were talking
about how you worked at different places. And without taking names, what's been
your experience around this? No, of course, without naming names. And it's not
in the BBC, Davina, just in case you were worried. Hang on, I was just
wondering, you and I are just in the same studio. But before coming to the
studio, I did spray some perfume. So, I mean, I'm definitely conscious about
this. No, I've worked in all manner of jobs, actually. Some are quite outdoors,
some have been quite active and people have kind of had body odours there. And
it's been a little bit awkward. But it's a difficult thing to raise, isn't it?
You know, you don't want to offend someone. I guess you've got to put yourselves
in their shoes and think if someone took me into a quiet corner of the office
and said, look, there's a problem with your body odour, would I be offended? I
think most of us probably would. So it's not an easy one to broach. But is it a
cultural thing as well, Mohammed, that the way you give feedback as you talked
about and especially for a sensitive subject like this, I mean, in certain
cultures, definitely you would feel that it's rude while in other cultures it
may be accepted. Yeah, I think it's also kind of the moment where you should
maybe check if your colleague is doing OK, if they're not burnt out. Someone's
negligent with their personal hygiene can be a sort of mental health problem,
etc. So it's really context heavy, this one. I think I would prefer if I'm in
their shoes to be direct. I would probably want to get it direct, yes, if there
is a problem, this is the problem. But I can imagine so many people, Alex, who
would feel that, yeah, but they would not even realise that there is a problem.
And that sort of also disturbs the workplace productivity. When you went through
this sort of an experience, did it impact the way you would work or where you
would approach work or even think about work? Well, I was lucky because at the
time it was just a job in a petrol station, a gas station when I was a teenager,
and it was only for about six hours a week. And so I kind of had a refuge away
from it for most of the time. But I can imagine if you're working at close
quarters with people, a lot of the time it can be quite difficult. But it is a
cultural thing. You know, I think in British workplaces, perhaps, speaking from
experience, people will do anything but directly address an issue with a
colleague. Which is so true. But I do know that this is from another
conversation at workplace that someone actually gifted a deodorant to as many
colleagues. That's another way of saying, hey, use it. We've just given you this
gift. So well, why not use it? But there are personal hygiene standards in all
societies, of course. And there are times when people deviate from those
standards. And you've got to have that conversation. But like your experience at
a patrol pump and the person we speak to in egos experience as a security guard,
sometimes, Mama, there are jobs which are not structured enough that you can go
to a superior. It's also about you don't want the other person to feel that they
are discriminated against by their bosses. And that's where it's difficult. But
in the organizations where you do have HR practices, do you think that's easier
then? I think it's definitely easier in an organization where you'd have better
communication channels and better feedback channels that are established and
that are there. But also, the whole thing about relying on HR structures, et
cetera, rather than people finding a way of reaching compromise with their
colleagues doesn't sit very well with me. I think people's first instinct should
be always to give honest feedback and to give a non-malicious way so that people
can grow. And the office is in a place where our privacy is not respected. I
mean, all three of us have also probably been very noisy newsrooms, for example.
It's just part of the job. And maybe that's why people are running away from
office. And doing remote working. But let's be honest, four work a day pilot,
four days a week pilot has actually happened in the UK, hasn't it? Well, going
for work from home or remote working, yes, be in your surrounding and do as you
please. But well, thanks, Alex, for joining us for that conversation. And,
Mohammed, let's take our audience through what we've been reporting this week,
which is Nigeria, Africa's largest economy, is getting ready for one of the most
keenly contested elections. And with that in mind, the BBC's Africa Business
Journalist, Nketchi Obona, has been speaking to some young entrepreneurs and
those involved in providing skills training in Lagos to see what they believe
the solution is. My name is Rachel Onojah. I'm the director of Lenny Nuts Old
School Africa. My name is Tiwala Al-Anubhijinio, an entrepreneur, inter-tech,
media and food. My name is Florence Tkze, and I'm the founder of Redavia and
entrepreneurs.ng. So let's begin this conversation. Nigeria's unemployment rate
is forecast to reach about 37 percent in 2023. It's already at 33 percent
currently, and yet it has the largest youth population in the world. So what
needs to be done to get people, you know, more into work, particularly when it
comes to young people? So I think for the most part, a lot of our Nigerian youth
have been given this whole dream of, yes, there's a lot of opportunities,
there's a lot of access to work and all of that, but are there necessarily kind
of like skills for these opportunities? Not necessarily. So I think for the most
part, we need to invest more into upskilling our youth. We need to have them
learning more of today's skills. And beyond that, there's going to be a lot of
opportunities that are out there, especially in the tech ecosystem. We have a
lot of like you would hear data on for the next within the next seven years,
right? There's going to be over one point five billion rules. So opportunities
are definitely going to open up. But then are these people ready for it? Do we
have the infrastructure to get them ready for these rules, which is what I think
we should be investing more into basically. OK, so I would say that things have
changed a bit. It started even before Covid and now post Covid rates. I feel
like young people are also not increasing their talent, their skills generally.
So for me, I would say that that's one of the biggest problems with
unemployment. Most people now grow themselves to just have either a particular
skill or they join an industry and they just know about maybe five or 10 percent
of that particular industry. At DOTS Media, it's one of our businesses, for
example, all our team members are built to have over 60 or 70 percent skills
that we need for our business. Generally, that way you are able to run as a one
man team. So I would say that as a solution to bringing down this unemployment
rate, it would be for young people to grow themselves more with these skills
like you necessarily you one person can be an editor, be a graphics person, be a
social media manager. That way you have you have more value to add to the
ecosystem. You have more options of jobs to pick from and all that. So I really
think that that's the solution to unemployment. OK, so like you said, we have
more youth population. That's the number one reason why there is a lot of
unemployment. Secondly, the people who employ this youth are more like a small
and medium scale businesses and there's no enabling environment for them to
thrive and really employ. And that has also really increased the unemployment
rate. And then economic growth is quite slow. There's no faith. And then
political instability businesses are not running as they should. More
importantly is the mismatch. You know, when you graduate out of school, the
skills that you have, those no match the skills that employers are looking for.
So that's why there's this high rate of unemployment. And there are so many
other reasons, but we'll leave it at this. What has your experience been, you
know, when it comes to the type of the job markets that we have and then finding
the right persons to fit a certain role that you are probably advertising or you
want to hire? Would you say that you are finding the right people to match those
skills? Yes, so interesting. We're talking about that just before we got in
here. So I feel like in my 10 years of active entrepreneurship, I would say that
hiring and also staffing, that's my biggest challenge. Maybe not revenue, not
growing the business or it's just been staffing. And it's because it still goes
back to this lack of skills. Like for everybody we interview, you probably have
to run 40, 50 interviews, right? Meet 40 to 50 applicants before you get one.
Not even with our feet, but someone that is close to being fit, honestly in the
country. And adding the all like relocation team makes it worse now. And I feel
like the way we've been able to deal with that or one of the ways we're dealing
with that is also to embrace the new norm where work from home is not a big deal
because with work from home, we're able to have right talents now work for us
from somewhere else. So they don't have to be in Nigeria. They can be in Ghana,
they can be in Uganda and then we're able to, they're still able to do effective
work for us. So that's one of the ways we've been able to. And then Florence,
yes, because I know you want to chip in. All right, so even like what I said
about getting talent from our side, which is like globalization, this is also
something that is causing increasing the unemployment, you know, globalization
because you can get the skills as we are then people in Nigeria, they may not
have access to it. And then talking about how we recruit and how to really get
the right people. One thing that we have come to embrace is that people are
actually free to chat their own parts in life and that you can keep them
permanently in your place. If you understand that, that's the first rule. Then
the second one is when you now get people on board, make sure that you treat
them well, create a very good environment for them to thrive in your
organization and then train. You continue to train the, we've already
established that there's a mismatch in the skill that they have and what the
organizations are looking for. So what we do at Redalia is that we invest in
training. So we bring on someone to train them. We have a lot of online courses
that they go through. And then we also have like always filling up our pipe.
What I mean by that is that we don't wait until we are looking for this skill
before we hire it. So we put out, you could see our ad going on, we're looking
for these skill sets and then we send them questionnaires that they fill up and
then we interview them and then put them on that pipe. When we're not looking
for someone, we can go back and say, are you still available for this rule? Can
we, can you come on board? Despite all of these challenges, you're still
optimistic. I mean, you two are still in business. What still keeps you going
despite all that's happening in Nigeria? Florence. I think Nigeria has a lot of
opportunities, huge, huge opportunities. Look at it. Foreign investors are
coming in to invest in Nigeria. They are looking at the number. Nigeria does not
lie. And then personally, I'm passionate about growing and raising a new wave of
entrepreneurs because I know that funding is not just the only challenge that
entrepreneurs have. They need training. They need the right community. They need
the right everything to run their business, which is what we are providing. So
it really actually makes me glad I'm contributing to the economic growth. If you
want. For me, I would say that sounds cliche as well, but really, really
passionate about this country. Have it deep in me that this country would
eventually work out either ways. I'm just really, really positive about it. And
my point of really is that I would rather build what I'm passionate about in my
own country than somewhere else. And just because I travel well as well, I
believe that the challenges I see that businesses face outside Nigeria is way
more than what we I in Nigeria. Right. For me, I feel like once you travel that
much or you have clients in other countries and you're able to visit and see the
model of how everything works there, you start to appreciate what's happening in
the country more. And finally, to three of you here, we have general elections
coming up where we would have a new president. What would you say is your main
priority for whoever it is that emerges as the president? What are the top two
or three things that you want them to tackle immediately? They get on board.
Rachel. First off, I would really want to see a lot of changes around our
education. Like just like we said, the reason why we have a very high
unemployment rate is because we don't have well skilled youth. And a lot of this
well skilled youth come from the university. Now, how can you build the pipeline
from the foundation? How can you improve the quality of education they have from
the first point of them being in school? Right. So as a business owner, coming
into classes in the university and teaching people what they really need to know
about today's business market. And that would empower them to kind of say, okay,
I'm going out there. I have the skills I need to do better. So our curriculum
needs to improve. First off, I would like to see a lot of infrastructure put in
place. Infrastructure such as power, internet, that would empower businesses to
run more efficiently. Because a lot of the reason why people in tech who my
company actively trained tend to leave is because you could be in an interview
and power goes out. And that is not only embarrassing. It kind of like
diminishes your spirit. Like I want to do better. I want to do so much. But then
infrastructure is not in place for me to do so much better than I want to do.
And lastly would be how can we boost policies that are beneficial for the nation
and for the people who are actively passionate, such as you guys, you're
passionate, but a lot of policies don't necessarily work for you. So how can
there be policies, regulations and also implementation that ensures that you
have the right tools to do your work, you have the right tools to empower more
people to grow more businesses. And with that, I personally feel Nigeria is on
the best part to being better. That was BBC's Africa Business Journalist and Get
Your Bona from Nigeria. And those elections are just around the corner. We will
be having a special coverage on business matters. Before we go, Mohammed, what
are you watching out for Nigeria's elections? I mean, it's a consequential
election for the world economy. Nigeria is Africa's largest economy. The outcome
of this election is still uncertain. Nigeria also plays a very important role in
stabilizing oil markets. So everyone will be waiting for the results eagerly.
Absolutely. But do have your cup of coffee the way we discussed in the beginning
of the show. Thanks, Mohammed, for joining us. And as we say goodbye to you,
just doing a quick check of the markets here. Hang Sing is opened in green right
now. We will be talking more on World Business Report tomorrow at 15. Thank you
for joining us. For now, it's goodbye from Delina. Goodbye from Delina. This is
the BBC World Service exploring the seriously fun work of the Flying Seagull
Project. My name is Captain Bash. Ash has been on a mission to bring fun and
frivolity to children around the world. Children in refugee camps, in orphanages
and care homes. Give them something to wake up excited about. Give them
something to go to bed giggling about. Otherwise, what is the point? Join
Seagulls Child's Play Tuesday at 9.30pm and 20pmt.