TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-05-09H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Our headliners will be Jane Moore, Seb Payne and Katherine Nicholson, and we
lay back for the joy of Sax on Sunday. BBC News at 8 o'clock on Sunday 5th
March. Good morning, this is Alan Smith. Environmentalists are hailing an
historic agreement to protect the high seas, which was struck overnight at the
UN. The Prime Minister has pledged that migrants who come to the UK illegally
will be barred from staying, but has faced strong criticism from human rights
groups. Leaked messages suggest the former Health Secretary Matt Hancock wanted
the announcement of a new Covid variant to frighten the pants off everyone to
boost lockdown compliance before Christmas 2020. After 15 years of talks,
members of the UN have reached a landmark agreement to safeguard the world's
oceans. The treaty will create protected areas covering 30% of the high seas or
international waters by the end of the decade. More money will be spent on
marine conservation and new rules introduced for mining at sea. As our climate
reporter Esm√©e Stallard explains, the announcement of a breakthrough came after
a final 38-hour push at the UN in New York. The ship has reached the shore. It
took almost two days of back-to-back negotiations, but countries from around the
world, from China to the Pacific island nation of Palau, finally came to an
agreement on how to protect the high seas. These are the waters that sit beyond
any country's jurisdiction. They cover two-thirds of the world's oceans and play
host to most of our marine life, an estimated two million species. Until now,
all countries had a right to fish, ship and do research there. This has left the
animals and plants living in the high seas at risk from threats, including
climate change, overfishing and shipping traffic. Now nations have agreed to set
up marine protected areas to limit these activities, establish new protections
against deep-sea mining and set up a framework for how any benefits from our
oceans can be shared between rich and poorer countries. Rishi Sunak has said
he's committed to ensuring that people who come to the UK illegally are removed.
As the government prepares to unveil new legislation this week to try to address
the issue, it's expected the plans will include measures to block the asylum
claims of anyone arriving on small boats. The Home Secretary, Suella Braverman,
has suggested the British people are sick of inadequate action on migrant
crossings. But charities say the proposals are vindictive and extremely
concerning. Our correspondent Simon Jones reports. The Home Secretary, like her
predecessors in the role, is talking tough. Enough is enough. The British people
want this solved, she told The Sun on Sunday. But Suella Braverman is promising
to tackle the crossings once and for all. New legislation is expected to place a
duty on her to remove to Rwanda or a safe third country anyone who arrives on a
small boat as soon as reasonably practicable. The message was reiterated by the
Prime Minister, who told the Mail on Sunday that people coming to the UK
illegally would not be allowed to stay. But the pledge is not straightforward.
No migrants have been sent to Rwanda and plans to do so are currently on hold,
facing legal challenges and there is no returns agreement in place with the EU.
The charity Freedom From Torture said the proposals would do nothing to reduce
what it called the chaos and incompetence of the asylum system. The former
Health Secretary, Matt Hancock, is facing claims he wanted to use scare tactics
to force people to comply with coronavirus lockdowns in the latest leak of
WhatsApp messages from the Sunday Telegraph. In one conversation, he describes
how the announcement of a new variant of Covid would frighten the pants off
everyone. Mr Hancock has described the leaks as a partial, biased account to
suit an anti-lockdown agenda and believes there's no public interest case for
releasing the messages as they'd already been passed to the independent Covid
inquiry. Here's our political correspondent, Helen Catt. The exchange published
by the Sunday Telegraph took place on the 13th of December 2020, by which date
the World Health Organization said that more than 1,000 cases of the so-called
Kent variant of the virus had been detected. Mr Hancock and an aide are seen
discussing when to announce its existence. The aide seems to suggest rolling the
pitch for a potential lockdown in London with the new variant. Mr Hancock
replies, we frighten the pants off everyone with the new strain. The proportion
of cases in the capital linked to the variant had risen steeply in preceding
weeks. In a separate exchange the following month, the head of the civil
service, Simon Case, talks about a fear-slash-guilt factor as being vital in the
government's messaging. The paper accuses Mr Hancock and his team of a kind of
project fear. A former adviser to the health secretary, responding to the
publication of his own messages, told the BBC that promoting caution had been
basic common sense. China's government has set a modest target for economic
growth this year at the start of its annual parliamentary session in Beijing.
The gathering is also being used by President Xi Jinping to further consolidate
his power, as our China correspondent Steve Macdonald reports. At the Great Hall
of the People in Beijing, Premier Li Keqiang told nearly 3,000 delegates that
China overcame great difficulties last year and that it succeeded in maintaining
an overall stable economic performance. However, the government here has been
criticised for prolonging strict measures as part of its zero-Covid approach
that hit large sections of business and smashed the livelihoods of ordinary
people. This year's new growth target has been set at around 5 per cent, after
the economy expanded 3 per cent last year. Over the next nine days, this
gathering will place a range of Xi Jinping loyalists into senior government
roles, sparking fears of an echo chamber where China's leader won't receive the
fearless and frank advice he needs to hear. Regulated rail fares will today go
up by 5.9 per cent in England and Wales, their steepest rise for more than a
decade, despite record poor reliability. The increase will add hundreds of
pounds to the cost of many annual season tickets, even though the government
says it's intervened to keep the rise below inflation. Here's our transport
correspondent Katie Austin. The annual hike in rail fares is normally pegged to
the Retail Prices Index measure of inflation the previous July, which stood at
12.3 per cent this time round. The government described the 5.9 per cent cap on
price rises as a fair balance between passengers and the taxpayers who help pay
for services. The cap applies to around 45 per cent of fares, including most
season tickets. But the increase follows a period in which train cancellations
have reached record levels and there have been regular strikes on the railway.
Anthony Smith from the Watchdog Transport Focus said too many passengers were
not getting a value for money service. A 15-year-old is in hospital after being
found with serious stab wounds in Greater Manchester. Police believe the boy was
injured outside a McDonald's restaurant in Salford last night. Officers have
been granted enhanced stop and search powers and are appealing for witnesses.
Donald Trump has revealed he plans to stay in the race for the US presidency
next year, even if he's charged in connection with one of several criminal
investigations into his activities. Speaking at a conference of conservative
activists in Washington, he claimed he would end the Ukraine conflict in a day
and prevent a third world war. He also told delegates he wanted to avenge his
defeat in the 2020 election. In 2016 I declared I am your voice. Today I add I
am your warrior. I am your justice. And for those who have been wronged and
betrayed, I am your retribution. I am your retribution. I'm not going to let
this happen. Licensing hours in England and Wales are being relaxed during the
coronation weekend. Venues will be given permission to keep serving customers
until one o'clock in the morning between Friday 5th May and Sunday 7th. Now for
a look at the morning papers. The Mail on Sunday leads with Rishi Sunak's pledge
on tackling the small boats. On its front page it says the measure will help
place a clear, sharp distance between the government and Sir Keir Starmer. The
Sunday Express says that senior aides in the Home Office have been working in
secret to draw up legislation which can slam a brake on what it calls the
abusive human rights laws to frustrate attempts to deport illegal migrants. But
according to the Sunday Times, the government's legal service has suggested the
first deportation flights to Rwanda won't happen for more than a year because
the scheme will be tied up in the courts. The Observer reminds its readers that
the number of asylum applications relative to population size in the UK remains
well below the average for the EU. It calls the latest plan cruel and says it
won't achieve anything other than making ministers look tough at the expense of
vulnerable refugees. Several front pages cover Prince Harry's virtual fireside
chat to promote his memoir. Harry's Blast... Charles is the Sunday Mirror's
headline. The paper reports that the prince said he and the royals just didn't
speak the same language. The Sun on Sunday quotes Harry as saying he was brought
up in a broken home. And there's scope for an ET breakthrough, according to the
Sunday Mirror. It says a top Cambridge University scientist, Dr Emily Mitchell,
has suggested that powerful devices such as the James Webb Space Telescope will
allow us to spot signs of alien life in the next few decades. Another expert,
Professor Didier Queloz, is more pessimistic. He believes we may find a planet
with qualities like ours, or maybe we'll find out that most planets have no
atmosphere and realise that we are lucky on Earth. And that's our look at the
Sunday papers. With Alan Smith. Thanks Alan. Now on Radio 4, it's time for
Sunday worship, which comes from Edinburgh and continues the theme for Lent,
drawing from the Lord's Prayer. Today the words, As it is in Heaven. Good
morning and welcome to the Jesuit Church of the Sacred Heart in Edinburgh. I am
Father Adrian Porter and we're joined by Edinburgh University Chamber Choir for
Sunday worship. This weekly gathering before God, with our prayers of petition
and hymns of praise, is important in the lives of Christians. It gives us a
point of reference in the busyness of our week. We bring everything from the
preceding days back to God in thanksgiving and where needed ask for forgiveness.
And we take away from this worship God's blessing, inspired and refreshed for
the challenges of the week ahead. Today Christians mark the second Sunday of
Lent, a time of reflection and repentance lasting 40 days and 40 nights, and
which leads to the celebration of the resurrection of Jesus at Easter. And so
with joyful hearts, let our souls sing to our Saviour God. O Lord, my God, when
I in awesome wonder and state of awe the world's eye has now made, I see the
stars, I hear the rolling thunder, I bow throughout, alleluia, Christ is made.
Then sings my soul, my Saviour God, to Thee, how great Thou art, how great Thou
art. Then sings my soul, my Saviour God, to Thee, how great Thou art, how great
Thou art. And when I think that God his Son was slain, sent him to die, I scarce
can take it in, that on the cross my burden proudly bearing, he led and died to
take away my sin. Then sings my soul, my Saviour God, to Thee, how great Thou
art, how great Thou art. Then sings my soul, my Saviour God, to Thee, how great
Thou art, how great Thou art. When Christ shall come, this shall be my
probation, and take me home, that joy shall fill my heart. Then I shall bow in
humble adoration, and then proclaim, my thought, how great Thou art. Then sings
my soul, my Saviour God, to Thee, how great Thou art, how great Thou art. Then
sings my soul, my Saviour God, to Thee, how great Thou art, how great Thou art.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God the Father, and the
communion of the Holy Spirit be with you. And with your spirit. We come into the
presence of the God who, his Son not sparing, sent him to die on the cross, my
burden gladly bearing. Mindful of our unworthiness, and seeking God's pardon for
the burden of our sin, we pray in humble adoration. Lord Jesus, who came to
reconcile us to the Father, and to one another, Lord, have mercy. Give me grace
of eternal rest. Give me grace of eternal rest. Christ Jesus, you heal the
wounds of our sin and division. Christ, have mercy. Christ, have mercy. Lord
Jesus, you intercede for us with the Father. Lord, have mercy. Give me grace of
eternal rest. Give me grace of eternal rest. May Almighty God have mercy on us,
forgive us our sins, and bring us to everlasting life. We pray the Collect for
the second Sunday of Lent. Let us pray. O God, who have commanded us to listen
to your beloved Son, be pleased, we pray, to nourish us inwardly by your word,
that with spiritual sight made pure we may rejoice to behold your glory, through
our Lord Jesus Christ, your Son, who lives and reigns with you in the unity of
the Holy Spirit, God for ever and ever. Amen. In our first reading from the book
of Genesis, we are at a turning point. For the previous 11 chapters of the
story, human beings have rebelled and turned away from God, preferring their own
company. But at last, God finds a righteous man in Abram, willing to listen to
God's call to depart for a new life in a new land. The Lord said to Abram, Leave
your country, your family and your father's house, for the land I will show you.
I will make you a great nation. I will bless you and make your name so famous it
will be used as a blessing. I will bless those who bless you. I will curse those
who slight you. All the tribes of the earth shall bless themselves by you. Abram
went as the Lord told him. The word of the Lord. Thanks be to God. When shall I
behold your face? When shall I receive your grace? When shall I your praises
voice hear? Come before you with rejoicing. Wintertide's old lamentation, Love
I've built by night and day. In my deep humiliation, Where is now your God, they
say? When thy sorrows weigh on me, Then I bring to memory how, With drums I
would assemble, Shouting praises in your temple. Send your light and truth to
lead me. Send them forth to be my guide. To your mountain let them bring me, To
the place where you reside. Then your gold I will not need, And before your
throne appear, To my Saviour praise his name with a humble and joyful singing.
In the Gospel reading appointed for today, Jesus is at the end of a long stretch
of teaching and healing in the towns, villages and countryside. He goes up a
high mountain, taking only his closest disciples. Mountains are important places
of the presence of God, where God speaks to his people. The Lord be with you.
And with your spirit. A reading from the Holy Gospel according to Matthew. Glory
to you, O Lord. Six days later, Jesus took with him Peter and James and his
brother John, and led them up a high mountain where they could be alone. There,
in their presence, he was transfigured. His face shone like the sun, and his
clothes became as white as the light. Suddenly, Moses and Elijah appeared to
them. They were talking with him. Then Peter spoke to Jesus, Lord, he said, it
is wonderful for us to be here. If you wish, I will make three tents here, one
for you, one for Moses and one for Elijah. He was still speaking when suddenly a
bright cloud covered them with shadow. And from the cloud there came a voice
which said, this is my son, the beloved. He enjoys my favor. Listen to him. When
they heard this, the disciples fell on their faces, overcome with fear. But
Jesus came up and touched them. Stand up, he said. Do not be afraid. And when
they raised their eyes, they saw no one but only Jesus. As they came down from
the mountain, Jesus gave them this order. Tell no one about the vision until the
Son of Man has risen from the dead. The Gospel of the Lord. Praise to you, Lord
Jesus Christ. Not far from my parents' home was a piece of common land which was
for us children a place of infinite adventure and imagination. A forest where,
rumor had it, monsters lurked. A purple river which, we were told, you could
follow down to the sea. A vast echoing cavern, pitch black and dripping with
water, through which you had to run as fast as you could to avoid being eaten by
the dragon. In reality, it was the sort of scrubby in-between land that exists
on the edges of many cities. The liminal meeting place of suburban sprawl and
the countryside for real, neither one thing nor another. The forests were, in
reality, those tangled thorn bushes. The river, a small winding brook, often
dried up and often polluted by discharge from a nearby engineering works. And
the cavern, a dank railway underpass. But of course, none of that reality
mattered to us as children. In the middle of this place was a steep hill, a sort
of small escarpment that led up to the railway line. And it was here that I
would often come as a teenager, in the years after the magic of the surrounding
scrub had revealed its ordinariness. Clambering up that hill where there were no
paths and where the bushes were at their thickest and thorniest, with shallow
roots in the thin, stony soil, took me to a place that remained special despite
adolescent cynicism. It wasn't quite in the clouds, it wasn't anywhere near the
clouds, but it was a long way above the paths and tracks below, the meandering
brook, the occasional passerby. And it afforded fine views where the scrubland
gave way to neater hedgerows and ditches, and clumps of ancient trees, old
tumble-down farm buildings, and a patchwork of fields gently rolling towards
big, distant skies. In the evening twilight, it was as magical as the adventure
land of childhood that it had replaced. Up here there was silence, apart from
the insistent chorus of crickets in the summer, and if you ignored the deafening
screech of the occasional passing train. It was a place where you gained
perspective, where things could be seen in their proper proportions, where the
pieces of life's jigsaw began to fit together and to make sense. I knew that
this place had been named in the Doomsday Book. This place had been known for a
thousand years. I guess my father had told me that. He was interested in such
things. And just as he passed on to me this sense of the importance of place, so
I supposed, and despite never having encountered another living soul there, my
perch atop this brambled hillside had been visited by generations before me, and
would continue to be so for a thousand years hence. In the Gospel for today,
Jesus goes up a hill, a pretty spectacular one from Matthew's account, the sort
of high mountain where God is to be found. He takes with him his three closest
associates, Peter and Andrew, the fisherman brothers who were the first called
to be his followers, and John, who too left his boat and his father and followed
Jesus. It is here that Peter and Andrew and John first see things in
perspective. Jesus is seen in the company of the two great figures of the Old
Testament, Moses, receiver of the ancient law, also given on a mountaintop like
this, and Elijah the prophet. Moses and Elijah represent the fullness of God's
revelation to his people, and they sum up the Jewish religion that Peter,
Andrew, and John, and Jesus, shared and practiced. Here on the mountaintop is
seen all that has gone before in the remarkable story of God's chosen people,
Israel, stretching back nearly 2,000 years. And here in the same moment on the
mountaintop are Andrew and Peter and John, who will be the first members of the
community which will follow the teachings of Jesus and which will call itself
Christian. O my soul, why are you grieving? Thy despair has failed in me. Put
your hope in God, believing He will still your refugee. I again shall praise His
face for the comfort of His face. He will show His help and favour for He is my
God and Saviour. Jesus Himself is transfigured in a blaze of light. His face
shone like the sun, and His clothes became as white as the light. And they
understand Him to be the hoped-for Messiah, the glory of God, the human face of
the Father in the Son. For that brief moment, and the Gospel writer Matthew is
very careful to tell us the place and the time, for this is not a dream or an
imagining, but something in real time, a real place. These three disciples, with
their feet firmly planted on earth, see things as they are in heaven. In the
language we use to describe our religious experience, we call this an epiphany.
And there are several epiphanies in the Gospels. When the three wise men follow
the star to Bethlehem. When Jesus is baptised by John in the river Jordan. When
the sun is eclipsed at His crucifixion, the earth quakes, and the centurion
declares, truly this man was the Son of God. Epiphanies show how thin the
barrier between heaven and earth really is. We pass within a hair's breadth of
God every day, but we're usually too busy to notice. When we do trouble to stop
and notice, it is shown to us what it will be like when God's nascent kingdom on
earth is eventually transformed into the way God's kingdom is in heaven. What is
begun in heaven is fulfilled on earth. It shows us how glimpses of heaven can
break through into our earthbound lives at unexpected moments. It shows how
there is always more to everything and everyone than we dare allow. As
Shakespeare's Hamlet tells his friend Horatio, there are more things in heaven
and earth, Horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy. The world is indeed
charged with the grandeur of God. O my soul, why are you grieving? Why this wild
head in me? Put your hope in God beneath me. He will still your refugee. I again
shall praise his face for the comfort of his face. He will show his help and
favour for he is my God and Saviour. Peter, always the one to rush into
solutions, to speak before thinking, wants to prolong the moment and offers,
rather impractically, to make three tents for Jesus, Moses and Elijah. But this
reality which has been revealed, the shocking nearness of God, of earth to
heaven, the whole of Jewish history and Christian future brought together in
this moment, is not for the quite yet. Following this epiphany on the high
mountain, Jesus sets out on his path to Jerusalem and to the sacrifice of the
cross, which will make this union of heaven and earth a reality. The disciples
must await his resurrection and the coming of his spirit. We, their successors
in faith, must, by the example of our lives, work hard at bringing goodness into
our world, when so often darkness and confusion edge in and sometimes seem to
prevail. In presenting us with this gospel reading, as the season of Lent begins
to unfold, the ancient tradition of the Church invites us to stop and step back
from the busyness of our everyday lives and to climb our own hillsides. We too
can see things afresh in a new light, from a new perspective, without our
thoughts being drowned out by the constant noise, for our eyes as well as our
ears, with which contemporary life besieges us. The disciples see Jesus
transfigured and they hear the voice of God. Both their eyes and their ears bear
witness to this epiphany. When God breaks into our lives, things change,
sometimes radically. In our reading from the Old Testament, Abraham leaves
everything behind, his country, his family, his father's house, and strikes out
into an uncertain future in the sure hope that the God who has called him will
lead and sustain him in his journey. This simple story comes after the first 12
chapters of the book of Genesis record the different ways in which human beings
turn away from and reject God, the God who created them. In obeying God's
instruction, Abraham, not yet Abraham, for renaming was a sign of God's special
favor for those who respond, thy will be done on earth. Abraham journeys to a
land, the promised land, the holy land, where God's kingdom will be first
established and worked out and ultimately spread through the whole world. So
Abraham went as the Lord told him and consequently was made a great nation and
his name became a blessing. Let our prayer today be the words of the psalm we
have just heard sung. Send your light and truth to lead me, send them forth to
be my guide. To your mountain let them bring me to the place where you reside.
Let us pray that we may behold God's face as Peter, Andrew, and John did, that
we may have the Lord's help and blessing kept safe from all oppressing. For this
to become a reality in our lives, we need to leave the familiar behind, at least
sometimes, to find our hill, our vantage point, our sacred space. Perhaps it can
even be a railway embankment running through a stretch of unloved wasteland. I
wonder where yours is. Bring us, O Lord God, that aloft so vaguely into the
house of David's home, and enter into that gate. And where the little child is,
there shall be no darkness. No darkness, but light, the light of the eagle. No
noise, no silence, but meek music, the music of the angels singing. The Lord is
coming in eternity. The hour is near. Alleluia, alleluia. The world without end.
Amen. We bring our prayers before you, God our Father, to the house and gate of
heaven. We pray for the whole world, that the conflicts of the nations and the
sufferings of her peoples may be resolved in peace and justice through our
service of compassion, forgiveness and love. We pray for all those for whom life
is overwhelming and who struggle with physical or mental ill health, with
economic hardship or with loneliness and broken relationships. Lord, hear our
prayer. Lord, hear our prayer. We pray for the Church, for all God's people,
that we may hear again the gospel of Jesus Christ and by the example of our
lives bring his ever new hope to those around us. Lord, hear our prayer. Lord,
hear our prayer. Let us pray for our old intentions, for those who have asked
for our prayers and for those who have no one to pray for them. Lord, hear our
prayer. Lord, hear our prayer. We bring all our prayers and petitions before God
our Father in the words that Jesus taught us. And forgive us our trespasses, as
we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil. Amen. In your mercy, Lord, hear the prayers we make in
faith, through Christ Jesus, your Son. Amen. I am the Son of the Father, and I
am the Son of the Holy Ghost. I am the Son of the Father, and I am the Son of
the Holy Ghost. I live in a resting place, and he has made me glad. I heard the
voice of Jesus say, Behold, I freely give. I am living water, thirsty runs to
drink and live. I came to Jesus, and I drank of that life in its stream. My
thirst was quenched, my soul revived, and now I live in him. I heard the voice
of Jesus say, I am his love, not thine. Good works do thee, O watchful eyes, and
all your daily rites. I looked to Jesus, and I found him in the spotless light.
And in that light of light, the world's fields laughing, days gone by. The Lord
be with you. And with your spirit. May the ears of your mercy be opened, O Lord,
to the prayers of those who call upon you, and that you may grant what they
desire. Have them ask what is pleasing to you, through Christ our Lord. Amen.
And may the blessing of Almighty God, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Spirit come down on you and remain with you forever. Amen. ‚ô™‚ô™‚ô™ ‚ô™‚ô™‚ô™ ‚ô™‚ô™‚ô™ ‚ô™‚ô™‚ô™ ‚ô™‚ô™‚ô™
‚ô™‚ô™‚ô™ Sunday worship came from the Jesuit Church of the Sacred Heart in Lauriston,
Edinburgh, and was led by Father Adrian Porter. The Edinburgh University Chamber
Choir was directed by Michael Bawtry and accompanied by Edinburgh's City
Organist John Kitchen. The producer was Mo McCulloch and the lead engineer was
Ken Garden. Next week's service considers the next phrase from the Lord's
Prayer, Give us this day our daily bread, with the new Irish Orchestra and
Singers. Now on Radio 4, A Point of View, a personal essay by a leading writer.
Here's A.L. Kennedy. You will be unsurprised to learn I was a nervous child.
Yes, growing up in the 60s and 70s, I was marinated in fantastic music in a
stable democracy with a fair degree of social mobility, but also I worried about
the sun expanding or contracting, the existence of arithmetic, and the safety of
Laurel and Hardy. I had a birthday party during which we showed, no idea why,
the 1923 Harold Lloyd film Safety Last, during which he was in constant peril,
having accidentally ended up on the outside of a skyscraper. Who knew that was
possible? The other kids howled with laughter. I was bathed in horror sweats and
unable to eat my cake. I had claustrophobia, agoraphobia, coulrophobia, fear of
clowns, gyrophobia, fear of loud noises, linked to globophobia, fear of
balloons, and is any occasion for under fives not seething with balloons? And
the movies of the period, Towering Inferno, a building goes wrong, Poseidon
Adventure, a ship goes wrong, Airport, a plane goes wrong and I wouldn't trust
the airport either, Doctor Strangelove, the China Syndrome, both nuclear weapons
and atoms for peace go wrong, family outings with sugary popcorn in the dark, I
never got popcorn, it wasn't healthy, did not help me relax, TV, it offered the
Waltons, dangerous sawmill, rural poverty, accidents and diseases, Randall and
Hopkirk, 50% already dead, Captain Scarlet, indestructible but in the most
traumatising ways, and the Clangers, they're in outer space, all knitted and
vulnerable and pink. How do they breathe? And of course, all those movies full
of fatal mistakes. But I wasn't just being trapped in a spiral of existential
panic, I was learning too, being taught multiple strategies for personal
survival and even the survival of total strangers. Obviously, I no longer fly,
gravity defying death tubes full of damp snacks and breakable bodies do not
appeal, but when I did fly, I was slightly comforted by wearing natural fabrics
and leather shoes because I know anything else melts and acts like napalm when
your polluting sky prison inevitably catches fire. I also know how and when to
don a life jacket and should my situation worsen, what to wear in the lifeboat.
And I always wore sensible shoes. Creature movies like Jaws seemed less helpful
and more scary, even the book jacket made me uneasy in the bath. Jaws influenced
lots of grown-ups too. Author of the book, Peter Benchley, joined the movie's
director, Steven Spielberg, in regretting that Jaws encouraged humans to
slaughter, even machine gun, a precious keystone species, just in case it might
develop malignant sentience and eat an especially irritating regatta. The reach
and efficacy of Russia's current information war won't shock anyone who knows
what emotionally affecting fiction can do. The film, The Exorcist, didn't just
make people throw up, it increased belief in demonic possession and
coincidentally interacted with revelations about Watergate reaching the public
consciousness, the real-world horror of democracy in the hands of unprincipled
power. So even my exposure to dramas about very improbable catastrophes was
helpful. Peddlers of fake news spin emotionally involving fictions because
they're effective. They help suspend critical thinking and build a faithful
audience. Legal proceedings against online propagandist Alex Jones and now Fox
News, both for defamation, speak to a need for audience retention that
apparently trumps an awareness of truth. And fantasy can make us do very real
things, from buying food supplements to hating strangers to accepting election
fraud intelligence from, for example, someone who says the wind talks to her.
Jaws, like many disaster and horror movies, contains the core lesson whenever
there's a problem, greedy people will ignore it. Corporations, local
authorities, politicians, contractors, people who love money more than, well,
people. Corners will be cut, regulatory loopholes kicked wide open, and before
you know it, Rod Steiger is having a panic attack on a beach, or Paul Newman is
horrified way too late by substandard wiring which will lead to an inferno which
will be towering. Towering Inferno was based on two novels which wondered, as it
turned out quite reasonably, whether ultra-high-rise buildings would present
serious issues if they caught fire. As a kid I assumed the film was just
entertainment and that grown-ups knew homes should be fit for human habitation,
just as beaches should be fit for human use, even if they filled me with the
dread of, somehow, flying sharks. I was sure steps would always be taken to keep
us all okay. What kind of monster would want anything else? And yet, here we
are. Forgetting the Mayor in Jaws was the bad guy, not the people who know facts
and what's going wrong. The movie makers of my youth presented me with bizarre
threats. Killer bees, killer tomatoes, we wish, killer tentacles, apparently.
But would anyone green-light a movie in which two US states are blighted by a
toxic train wreck because maybe legislation to fit adequate braking systems
wasn't just delayed but rolled back? Or a pandemic flick where, in multiple
countries, people with the power to help defraud emergency funds provide
ineffective protective gear? Where some American politicians keep quiet about
COVID briefings and buy shares in body bags? Structures that are unfit for
purpose are a wonderful movie staple, but in reality they're a nightmare.
Turkish President Erdogan gained power on promises of reconstruction after a
1999 earthquake which killed almost 18,000 people. But corners were cut,
loopholes exploited, and building regulations waived. Tens of thousands of
buildings in an earthquake zone weren't up to standard. With over 41,000 dead in
this year's quake, some Turks aren't just grief-stricken, they're outraged. And
would audiences believe a plot involving a London tower block wrapped in
cladding that helped it burn? Horror movies, disaster movies, they're exciting,
but you don't want to live there. Regular inspections of infrastructure can
prevent mass casualty events, things people don't enjoy, like being poisoned by
unsafe food, unsafe water, having storm drains haunted by demonic clowns who do
things with balloons. Transparency in business and governance and prioritising
people over money gives more of us more chances to live and work undisturbed. No
crumbling cellar steps, no poorly maintained zombie research labs, no
undiscovered vampire lairs, so no avoidable days off work or embarrassing new
lusts for brains or blood. And in an apparently chaotic Britain, life might be a
cinematic thrill ride, it could be exciting to cut corners on regulations that
make sure food, air and water are what we expect. Sea kayaking might be more
intense if I don't know whether I'll come home with E. coli or hepatitis. I
mean, which cinematic experience am I being offered here, Mary Poppins, or House
of a Thousand Corpses, because only one of those lets me get on with my life and
non-balloon-related hobbies. And even without high-level negligence or
malfeasance, life has disasters, bankruptcies, tornadoes, shipwrecks, and
sometimes we have heart attacks and sometimes we are broken-hearted, and who can
say which is worse? If we're lucky, our home isn't engulfed by war, famine,
despotism, natural disasters. Those four horsemen ride together for a reason.
Big problems do not arrive alone. Even if you avoid war, famine, conquest, life
is frail and ends sadly, so why wouldn't we want to minimize all other threats?
For teenagers now, facing climate catastrophe, watching movie teenagers get
picked off in creepy summer camps, creepy houses, creepy games, surely art is
echoing potentially doomed futures. It can get disheartening when life seems
like only the bleakest movies where good is weak, evil triumphs, and terrible
things happen. But those films we've all watched have more lessons. They suggest
ways to survive. Don't despair. Don't panic. Don't be selfish. Don't split up.
Do be organized. Do be calm. Do help each other. In fantasy as in reality,
that's when humanity survives. Curlews nest on moorland or open farmland, but
then move to inland marshes or muddy estuaries where they probe for food with
their very long, curved bills. They can reach the prey that other waders can't,
digging deep for lugworms and cockles, which they locate with the flexible tip
of their bill, which is richly supplied with nerve endings. Curlews are a great
source of food for the Curlews. They're a great source of nerve endings.
According to legend, St Bino dropped his book of sermons into the water off the
coast of Wales. A Curlew rescued the book and brought it safely to the shore. In
gratitude, St Bino prayed for the protection of the Curlew. And this is why,
some say, finding a Curlews nest is so difficult. Certainly, Curlews are now
scarce as breeding birds in many places. But the UK is a vital wintering ground
for flocks of Curlews from as far away as Belgium and Russia, probing our
coastal mudflats and thrilling us with their mournful cries. CURLEWS SQUAWK And
in tomorrow's Tweet, the wildlife sound recordist Chris Watson will be
presenting the Sootie Shearwater.