TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-01H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at midnight. This is Tina Ritchie. The main nursing union in England
has called off a strike for next week saying pay talks with the government
tomorrow represents a significant step forward. But teachers have vowed to go
ahead with industrial action after rejecting a government ultimatum. President
Biden has insisted that NATO will never be divided and its support for Ukraine
won't waver, hours after President Putin used a major address to again blame the
West for the conflict. One of the leading candidates to become Scotland's first
minister, Kate Forbes, has denied her campaign has been derailed by her views on
gay marriage. Supermarkets have begun imposing limits on the sale of some fruit
and vegetables because of shortages caused by bad weather in parts of Europe and
Africa. And the leader of Northern Ireland's largest unionist party says key
issues need resolving before he'll back a new deal changing post-Brexit trading
arrangements. The Royal College of Nursing has suspended a 48-hour strike
planned for next week in England saying it will now hold intensive talks with
the government. The Health Secretary Steve Bagley will meet representatives of
the union in the morning. In a joint statement after months of a bitter dispute,
the two sides said the discussions would focus on pay, terms and conditions and
reforms to enhance productivity. The conciliatory approach comes after the
government told the independent pay review body that it could offer NHS staff a
3.5% rise in the next financial year. Other health unions say they're
disappointed they haven't been invited to negotiate with ministers. Here's our
health editor, Hugh Pym. The sticking point in England has been paid for the
current financial year ending next month with ministers at Westminster insisting
the wage award would not be increased. The RCN response was to carry on with
strikes. Now the union, which said the Prime Minister had intervened to start
the new process, seems to have been reassured that everything's back on the
table. Neither side will say what numbers will be discussed or what might be
offered for the next financial year. NHS providers representing trusts said
hospital leaders would be relieved and the talks offered a glimmer of hope.
Other health unions are frustrated they haven't been invited to join the process
or told what might be on offer. Two unions representing ambulance staff have set
strike dates for next month. Another, Unison, is set to announce further action.
A spokesperson said meeting one union alone would do nothing to solve the NHS
pay dispute. The General Secretary of the RCN, Pat Cullen, believes a deal can
be reached. I think this is a significant step forward. Every nurse in England
today can breathe a sigh of relief and more importantly our patients can. So
let's get round the table tomorrow. I'm very confident with the move from
government and certainly we will do our very best to make sure that a fair pay
deal is obtained. Teachers in England in the National Education Union will go
ahead with a strike next week despite an ultimatum by ministers who said
negotiations could continue only if industrial action was paused. A stoppage
will also take place in Wales. Our education editor, Braman Jefferies has the
latest. The government says it can't negotiate with the National Education Union
unless strikes upward on hold. The next one will affect schools across the north
of England next Tuesday. The NEU's General Secretary, Kevin Courtney, told the
BBC the union sincerely regretted the disruption to parents. He said they were
willing to meet ministers at any time but the 3% suggested for next year would
still be far below inflation. Although inflation is falling, forecasts for
inflation for next September are still above 3%. So that's another pay cut for
teachers on top of all the pay cuts we've had so far. That isn't the way to
attract teachers into the profession or to keep them in the profession.
Independent research by the Institute for Fiscal Studies found pay for
experienced teachers has fallen by up to 13% in real terms since 2010. The pay
for new teachers in England will keep up with rising costs as it's due to go up
to Â£30,000. Ministers have also presented evidence to the pay review bodies for
millions of other public sector workers who they suggest should receive below
inflation wage increases next year. Under their proposals, judges, police
officers and dentists in England would be entitled to a 3.5% salary rise. The
review bodies can recommend a higher award but the government will make the
final decision. The diplomatic standoff between Moscow and the West has become
more entrenched after the presidents of Russia and the United States set out
their contrasting visions of the conflict in Ukraine. Vladimir Putin set the
tone this morning during his State of the Nation address in Moscow. He accused
Western elites of starting the war to inflict a strategic defeat on Russia.
President Putin also widened the divide between Russia and the United States by
announcing the suspension of the last remaining nuclear arms agreements between
the countries. Our Russia editor Steve Rosenberg was following the address in
Moscow. For Vladimir Putin, the invasion of Ukraine has not gone at all
according to plan. But remorse, regret, there's no hint of that. At an
exhibition hall by the Kremlin, President Putin took the stage and took aim at
the West. He repeated the Kremlin's false narrative that Western nations are
responsible for the war in Ukraine. They started it, he said, Russia's using
force to finish it. There is no sign that Mr Putin is looking for an off-ramp.
Russia suspends its participation in the New START Treaty, he announced. New
START is the last remaining nuclear arms control treaty between Russia and
America. It limits nuclear arsenals and enables on-site inspections of strategic
nuclear weapons. Andrey Kalestikov of the Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace believes it's a dangerous move by Mr Putin. In order to avoid nuclear war,
it's better to have a framework. But losing this framework, we are witnessing
the real threat of a nuclear war. But in the hall, Russian parliamentarians and
officials were more than happy with what they heard, supportive of a president
who favours confrontation over compromise. An opposing vision was then set out
by President Biden in Poland's capital Warsaw. He struck a defiant tone, saying
Russia's invasion of Ukraine had unified the West and NATO, and once again
pledged unwavering support for Kiev. The American president went on to paint the
conflict as a generational struggle for freedom. In Warsaw, here's our North
America editor, Sarah Smith. President Biden came to Warsaw to talk not just to
the Polish people, but to all the NATO allies who are supporting Ukraine, to
implore them to stick with their commitment to defend democracy and freedom, no
matter how long this conflict lasts. The decisions we make over the next five
years or so are going to determine and shape our lives for decades to come. And
while decisions are ours to make now, the principles and the stakes are eternal.
The choice between chaos and stability, between building and destroying, between
hope and fear, between democracy that lifts up the human spirit and the brutal
hand of the dictator who crushes it. He rejected Vladimir Putin's assertion that
the US provoked this war, condemned what he described as war crimes and
atrocities committed by Russia, and declared that Moscow will never be
victorious in Ukraine. Mr Biden seized the war as a fundamental battle of values
that will shape the world for decades to come. He needs his allies to be equally
committed if he is to prevail. The President spoke at length about Poland's
generosity towards the Ukrainian people, underlining how the conflict had
strengthened relations between Warsaw and the White House. Our Eastern Europe
correspondent, Sarah Rainsford, has this assessment of Poland's role in the
response to the conflict. The embankment in Warsaw was decorated with three
flags today. Those of the United States and Poland, and the bright blue and
yellow of Ukraine. It was a sign of the joint cause that has brought Washington
and Warsaw closer together. So much that President Biden called their
relationship critical, and then repeated that word four times. People here in
Poland feel the threat from Russia differently. It's closer, it's on their
border, and there's history, the long years of communist rule. So there's been a
huge humanitarian response to the Ukraine war, with support and shelter for
millions of refugees, many of whom still live here a year on. Poland has also
become a vital logistics hub. All the weaponry for the Ukrainian front line goes
through here. And the government has pushed reluctant allies to send more,
including battle tanks like the Leopard 2 that could help break the stalemate in
the Donbass. The Ukrainian soldiers training on those tanks here should be ready
in a few weeks. For Poland, it is all about crushing what President Duda called
Russia's brutal aggression in Ukraine. But at the same time, this country is
clearly relishing its new role, as power in Europe has taken a tilt towards the
east. China's top diplomat Wang Yi has told senior Russian officials in Moscow
that the relationship between both countries is rock solid. The Chinese
government has expressed concern that the conflict in Ukraine could escalate and
spiral out of control. Our China correspondent, Stephen McDonnell, reports from
Beijing. The war on the ground may be between Ukraine and Russia, but in China
the war of words is between Beijing and Washington. The Chinese government has
consistently blamed the US and its NATO allies for the ongoing conflict. When
the flagship television news bulletin here covers the war, the state-controlled
outlet routinely says the United States is manipulating events in Ukraine. It
never speaks about an invasion and doesn't even call this a war. However, in
Beijing today, China's foreign minister, Qing Gang, did predict rather ominously
that the situation could become much worse. He didn't mention the US, but it was
pretty clear who he was talking about. Researchers in America have already
accused Xi Jinping's administration of supplying the Russian military with dual-
use equipment like fighter jet parts and jamming technology. The Chinese
government has argued that it's neutral, but it's unclear what it might do to
prevent a humiliating defeat for Vladimir Putin on the battlefield. As the first
anniversary of Russia's invasion of Ukraine approaches, leaders on both sides
appear further apart than ever. Our chief international correspondent, Lisa
Dusette, is in Kiev. She assesses the impact today's speeches could have there
and beyond. A year ago, President Zelensky warned a war in Ukraine would not
stay in Ukraine. Today's rival narratives from Moscow, Warsaw and Beijing have
emphasised this yet again. They've also highlighted the continuing concern about
an ever more dangerous escalation. President Putin's decision to step away from
a nuclear arms control treaty has removed a key pillar in the world's vital
security architecture. And today's belligerent tones underline how the divide
between world powers grows ever deeper, with both sides now bent on achieving
victory, ideally this year. Although here in Ukraine, this still seems like a
war without end. The many other countries around the world suffering the
consequences of this conflict are watching with alarm. President Biden's comment
that this war will define the lives of generations to come underlines how this
confrontation in Ukraine will have far-reaching and lasting consequences. And
only one year into this war, that wider impact is still hard to foresee. One of
the contenders in the Scottish leadership contest, Kate Forbes, has lost the
backing of several government ministers at Holyrood because of comments she made
about gay marriage. The finance secretary, who's a committed Christian, revealed
that she would not have supported same-sex unions if she'd been in parliaments
when the legislation was passed. Ms Forbes said people wanted politicians to
give straight answers and that much of the angry reaction to her remarks was
confined to Twitter. More from our correspondent in Glasgow, James Shaw. It has
been a torrid 24 hours for Kate Forbes. Shortly after launching her campaign,
she did a series of interviews in which she said she wanted to be honest with
people about her views. On gay marriage, she said she would defend people's
rights under the law, as it now was, but would have voted against it when it was
debated at Holyrood in 2014. My approach is to defend your right to live and to
love and to do so without fear or harassment. And I would hope that you might
afford me the same right to practice my faith. Her views unleashed an angry
backlash on social media and three SNP ministers, Claire Hocky, Richard Lochhead
and Tom Arthur, along with the convener of Holyrood's health committee, Gillian
Martin, said they could no longer support her. The MP Hannah Bardell, who
describes herself as a proud lesbian, contrasted Ms Forbes' position with that
of other leading figures in the party who also have strong personal beliefs,
including another leadership candidate, Umsa Yousuf. They haven't allowed their
conviction and their devotion to their faith to get in the way of supporting
equality legislation on same-sex marriage, on trans rights, that will be to the
betterment of everybody in our society. The third candidate, Ash Regan, supports
gay marriage but opposes the Scottish Government's gender reform legislation
because she believes it could be exploited by abusive men. Supermarkets are
limiting the sale of some fruit and vegetables because of shortages which are
expected to last for weeks. Tomato supplies in particular have been affected but
Asda is also restricting other products, including cucumbers and lettuces, to
three of each per customer. Morrisons is introducing similar measures tomorrow.
Here's our business correspondent Theo Leggett. Bad weather and high energy
costs have combined to produce shortages at a time when consumers were already
facing steep price increases. At this time of year, much of the fresh produce we
buy, such as tomatoes and peppers, comes from southern Spain, but harvests have
been affected by cold weather. We also get supplies from Morocco, but stormy
weather and flooding have affected farms there and made transport more
difficult. Farmers here and in the Netherlands would normally be growing their
own produce in heated greenhouses, but many have delayed planting crops to keep
their energy bills down. All of this has pushed up prices and limited supplies.
Andrew Opie is director of food and sustainability at the British Retail
Consortium. We've got very unseasonable weather down in southern Spain, southern
Europe and into North Africa, exactly the sort of place we source lots of
imports of fresh produce like tomatoes and peppers at this time of the year. So
that means some problems with availability, but supermarkets are pretty adept at
meeting these challenges as we saw during the pandemic. The situation is likely
to ease later in the year when the weather warms up and produce grown here
becomes more widely available. But in total, we produce only about a third of
what we eat. At a conference today, the president of the National Farmers Union,
Minette Batters, said that had to change. The rhetoric of successive governments
that we are a wealthy country, we can just import our food, must be exposed as
naive in the extreme, in a rapidly and challenging world. The UK is not alone in
experiencing shortages. Retailers in Ireland have reported similar problems.
Elsewhere in Europe, there appear to be fewer empty shelves. Industry sources
say this is because retail chains are prepared to pay more for the supplies they
need than their UK counterparts and then pass that cost on to the consumer.
Rescuers are continuing to search through wreckage and rubble after another
series of tremors hit Turkey and northern Syria last night. Two weeks ago, major
earthquakes killed more than 40,000 people. Our correspondent Anna Foster is at
a makeshift shelter in Adena in southern Turkey. As the ground started to shake
once again, millions of people gathered up everything that was precious to them
and ran. Hundreds came to this sports centre, bedding down on blankets spread
across a volleyball court. For many, like Felice, it brought back painful
memories of the first quake two weeks ago. I'm concerned for our future. I'm
afraid for our children. I don't want them to be orphans. And mentally, I'm
upside down. Almost half a million people have now left the earthquake zone in
southern Turkey. There's growing pressure on authorities to care for those who
aren't able to flee. Adena's mayor, Zaydan Karala, visited survivors here and
promised to help. People filled this place up and thousands were on the streets
again. It's our job to erect them tents, provide them blankets and food. Many of
the buildings which collapsed in the latest quake were already empty, damaged
beyond repair by the first one, which killed more than 40,000 people. Most of
the new injuries were caused by panic. Some people jumped from windows to try
and get to safety. In the midst of the fresh trauma, there are still moments of
hope. In northwest Syria, an orphaned baby who made headlines around the world
has been adopted. A fra was born in the rubble as her mother died, with rescuers
cutting the umbilical cord. Thousands of people offered to give her a new home.
Now her aunt and uncle will raise her alongside their own baby daughter.
Cousins, now sisters, a final memory of the lost mother whose name she now
bears. Northern Ireland's largest unionist party has said key issues still need
to be resolved before it would support any new deal Rishi Sunak reaches over
post-Brexit trading arrangements with the EU. The DUP's leader Sir Geoffrey
Donaldson was speaking after meeting with several dozen Tory MPs, who indicated
they wouldn't back an agreement if the unionists weren't satisfied. Here's our
political correspondent Damien Gramaticus. Rishi Sunak may have thought he was
on the verge of a deal with the EU, but he's run into the combined disapproval
of the democratic unionists and some Tory MPs. The DUP leader Sir Geoffrey
Donaldson, after meeting the MPs, said he was delighted with the support they'd
shown. He claims the current arrangement agreed by the UK after Brexit, where
Northern Ireland follows EU single market rules, as in his words, created a huge
problem for Northern Ireland's ability to trade with the rest of the UK. He
didn't provide evidence, and the UK's own internal market rules state that all
products from Northern Ireland can move freely within the UK. But Mr Donaldson
wants businesses in Northern Ireland to be able to follow UK law when producing
goods for the rest of the UK, and EU law for goods heading to Ireland or other
EU countries. That would imply a wholesale revision of the agreement with the EU
known as the Protocol, not just the refinements to the way it's implemented Mr
Sunak has been negotiating. The EU has said it is open to finding practical
solutions to help businesses, but not to changing what was negotiated after
Brexit. Scientists have criticised the government for taking back more than a
billion pounds, which have been earmarked for scientific research. The UK was
meant to be involved in the EU's Horizon programme, which encourages innovation,
including in the field of tackling climate change. Britain's participation had
been held up because of arguments surrounding the Northern Ireland Protocol.
When Rishi Sunak was Chancellor, he promised the funds would be spent on
research, even if the dispute continued. Here's our science correspondent,
Pallab Goshe. The Treasury had allocated the money for the UK's membership of
the Horizon programme, or for a British alternative if the dispute of the
Northern Ireland Protocol could not be resolved, which had been a stumbling
block to membership of the EU research programme. But on page 300 of a Treasury
document, it was revealed that the money had been taken back, despite promises
that it would remain available for research, even if membership of the Horizon
programme was not possible. The move has led to an angry reaction among the
research community, with the President of the Royal Society, which represents
the UK's leading scientists, questioning the government's commitment to making
the country into a science superpower. Professor Sir Adrian Smith also called
for the Â£1.6 billion to be reinvested in research in the coming years. BBC News
understands that British Steel will announce, as soon as tomorrow, it's closing
its coking ovens in Scunthorpe, with a loss of 300 jobs. The ovens turn coal
into coke for use in the Lincolnshire plant's remaining blast furnaces. The
change would mean British Steel importing coke. It isn't clear when the closures
would come into effect, or how many compulsory redundancies there will be. The
media regulator has written to ITV and Sky News, asking them to explain the way
they covered the disappearance of Nicola Bully, who went missing more than three
weeks ago while walking her dog in Lancashire. Ofcom said it was extremely
concerned to hear complaints from relatives of the 45-year-old who accused the
broadcasters of making direct contact with them after her body was found on
Sunday. Our media correspondent David Siliter reports. Yesterday, Nicola Bully's
family said ITV and Sky News had in the hours after the discovery of her body
ignored their request for privacy. Her relatives criticised the broadcasters and
some newspapers, describing their actions as shameful. Ofcom, which oversees
television, says it is extremely concerned by the comments and has written to
ITV and Sky to ask them to explain their actions. It's understood Sky had what
it considered to be an open two-way dialogue with Ms Bully's family since she
was reported missing, and that it believed it had treated the family with
respect and privacy. ITV hasn't commented. The broadcasting code lays out rules
for privacy and how the media should respect people who have endured a tragedy
or are in a state of distress. The act gives the regulator the powers to find TV
companies who breach the code. Ofcom says it will assess whether any further
action is required. Eight Metropolitan Police officers have appeared before at
disciplinary hearing accused of sharing sexist, racist and homophobic messages
in a WhatsApp group. It's claimed they also posted offensive material about
Harvey Price, the disabled son of the media personality Katie Price. The seven
men and one woman were part of a Safer Neighbourhood team in Bexley in south-
east London. Six have already left the force. Our Home Affairs correspondent
June Kelly was at the hearing in west London. In what was described as a toxic,
abhorrent culture, the eight officers, seven men and one woman, were part of a
WhatsApp group for two years. Between 2016 and 2018, they're said to have shared
messages, memes and videos using language to offensive to report. The hearing
was told there were exchanges applauding violence against women and claims that
officer had got away with rape. A picture of a child in a Nazi uniform was
posted. Someone was compared to a Holocaust survivor and there was talk of
naming a dog Auschwitz. It was also suggested that a dog could be called Fred
after the serial killer Fred West. The most senior officer, Luke Thomas, who was
a sergeant, left the force last weekend, one of six to have resigned. In a
statement, he acknowledged he could have changed the culture of the group. The
officers are all accused of gross misconduct. Four have admitted this, three
have admitted the lesser charge of misconduct, one hasn't engaged with the
disciplinary process at all. The hearing continues tomorrow. A safety report has
revealed that the pilot of a light aircraft continued to fly it, unaware that
his colleague in the cockpit had gone into cardiac arrest and died. The incident
happened in Lancashire last summer. Tom Harrigan has more details. The pilot had
asked the man, a 57-year-old flying instructor, to join him on the plane at
Blackpool Airport in June because poor weather conditions meant two people were
needed on board. Once in the air, the instructor's head rolled back. But the
pilot assumed he was pretending to be asleep as a practical joke. As the plane
turned, his head slumped onto his colleague's shoulder. But the pilot still
thought he was joking and continued the journey as planned. He landed safely
before realising something was wrong and called for help. The instructor, who'd
passed a medical just four months earlier, was pronounced dead at the scene. The
Air Accidents Investigation Branch concluded that current medical assessments
for air crew were adequate but said it was lucky the instructor was flying with
the qualified pilots, as on another flight the outcome could have been
different. In the city, the 100-chair index ended the day down, 37 points at
7,978. On Wall Street, the Dow Jones closed down 697 points, or 2.06% to 33,130,
partly because of fears the Federal Reserve would again increase interest rates.
On the currency markets, the pound is trading at $1.21.1 against the euro.
Sterling is at 1.13.8, making a euro worth 87.8p. And now for a first look at
the morning papers. Putin signals the return of Cold War nuclear tests is the
Times' take on the Russian President's address. The Daily Mail opts for
President Biden's words for Mr Putin, your lust for land and power will fail.
The Financial Times says the set-piece speeches sharpened the contrast between
the two leaders. Resign if you want to is the message from Rishi Sunak to
ministers, considering quitting over his New Deal for post-Brexit trading
arrangements in Northern Ireland. A source close to the Prime Minister has told
the eye newspaper that the threats of resignation were flippant and involved
junior ministers. Rationing of fruit and veg to last weeks is the downbeat
assessment from the Daily Express. The shortfall is being blamed on bad weather
and transport difficulties in Spain and Morocco. In the Telegraph, the British
Growers Association has accused supermarkets of being overly reliant on foreign
suppliers. The Daily Star is equally unimpressed, describing the crisis as the
thin end of the veg. Football, Liverpool's Champions League campaign, has
suffered a blow in the first leg of their round of 16 ties. They were humiliated
5-2 at home by Real Madrid. The English side had gone 2-0 up before the Spanish
champions came back. One of France's last surviving female resistance fighters
from the Second World War, Simone Seguin, has died at the age of 97. She was
made famous when photographs of her carrying a submachine gun during the
liberation of the town of Chartres were published in the American press. Our
Paris correspondent, Hugh Schofield, reflects on the life of a woman who was
acclaimed as one of France's war heroes. This brave and beautiful girl is a
veteran of partisan fighting. Born into a farming family near Chartres, Simone
Seguin joined the French resistance in 1944, and when Chartres fell to the
Allies in August of that year, she was there with the Liberators. American war
correspondents knew they had a good story when they saw this 18-year-old blonde
in shorts and Schmeisser machine pistol bringing up the rear of a party of
German prisoners. Her picture went round the world once, and then again when she
took part a few days later in the liberation of Paris. Her role in the
resistance was a minor one, and after the war she returned to obscurity,
becoming a paediatric nurse, but her image became one of a handful that helped
define the war in France, and the heroic role of some of the French in bringing
the occupation to an end. The headlines again, the Health Secretary Stephen
Barclay is to meet representatives of the Royal College of Nursing in the
morning after the Union suspended a strike planned for next week in England and
said it would begin intensive talks with ministers, and President Biden has
reinstated her some wavering support for Ukraine and vowed that Russia would
never win. BBC News Read tonight by Tina Ritchie Now, have a look at the
weather. Here's Darren Bette. Hello there, it's been a very dry month,
particularly for some eastern and central parts of England, but there is some
rain developing in the next 24 hours. Together with that rain, things will turn
a bit cooler. We started the week with temperatures of 17 degrees. It will be
quite a bit cooler than that over the next couple of days or so as we change the
wind direction. The cooler air is coming in on more of a north or northwesterly
wind that will follow a bound of rain that moves away from Northern Ireland and
trudges eastwards through the rest of the night across Scotland. Some of that
rain heading into Wales and western parts of England and ahead of that band of
rain we're going to find some showers moving into south east England and across
east Anglia as well. For many it's going to be cloudy through the rest of the
night so temperatures will be around 5 or 6 degrees, but the clearer air, colder
air will push in from the north west into many areas during Wednesday. We start
the details though for Wednesday across Scotland with some rain to begin with in
eastern Scotland that will clear away in the morning and then Scotland will see
some sunny spells but also a scattering of showers on that northwesterly wind
and the showers could be of a wintry flavour over the high ground. Already got a
cooler breeze blowing into Northern Ireland by the morning and here we'll see a
mixture of sunshine and a scattering of showers. For England and Wales we start
cloudy. There's the chance of some rain through the day across some northern and
eastern parts of England. The rain in Wales, the Midlands and the south west
will change to more broken cloud and sunny spells but also a scattering of
showers. Temperature wise it is going to be cooler, typically around 7 to 9
degrees. Could still make 10 or 11 in east Anglia and the south east. The wetter
weather that does develop in England and Wales will push away southwards
overnight. There's the risk of something a little bit wintry over the Brecon
Beacons and the mauls of the south west. But as we head into Thursday we're
going to find the next band of rain coming into northern parts of Scotland with
the wind strengthening as well. More cloud getting blown into Scotland and also
Northern Ireland through the day. England and Wales should see a good deal of
sunshine but start cloudy across southern parts of England. A bit of rain in the
air as well. That should tend to move away sunshine later in the day. Now on
Radio 4 we continue our Book of the Week. Super infinite. Catherine Rundle's
biography of the poet John Donne. The reader is Blake Ritson. In one way, and
one way only, it was an auspicious beginning. John Donne was born on Bread
Street in central London from one end of which you have a clear and easy view of
St Paul's Cathedral. He was born in sight of both his future job and his final
resting place, which must be rare. In every other way it was a hard time to come
into the world. It was 1572, month unknown, and a Catholic plot to assassinate
Queen Elizabeth I had just been foiled. The Duke of Norfolk was executed for
treasonous, poopish machinating, and it was a bad year in which to be an English
Catholic. Donne's mother, Elizabeth Heywood, was the great niece of the Catholic
martyr Thomas More. She sounds to have been formidable, unafraid to assert
herself a woman of whom it was whispered erroneously that she carried the head
of Thomas More in her luggage when she travelled. Donne's father, also John
Donne, was warden of the ironmonger's company. The family had once owned
magnificent estates before they had been confiscated by the Crown in the various
Tudor shakedowns of Catholic landowners. When Donne was four, Donne's father
died, and his mother married again to John Simings, a physician. It might sound
a gentle, upper-middle kind of upbringing, but to be born a Catholic was to live
with a constant, low-level background thrum of terror. It was in the spring of
1574 when Donne was a toddler that disaster first came for the family. His
mother's uncle, Thomas Heywood, was suddenly and without warning arrested. A
house on Cow Lane, close to Donne's own home, was raided. Officials discovered
Thomas, a priest and former monk, along with diverse Latin books, beads, images,
palms, chalices, and such like. At the time, the penalty for being a Catholic
priest was to be hanged, drawn and quartered, which meant being stretched, hung
until almost dead, and then having the arms and legs severed from the body while
crowds looked on. It's unclear exactly what happened to Thomas, but tradition
holds that he was executed as his family looked on. The punishments of Catholics
were designed to be as performative as they were cruel. In response, the loyalty
of families like Donne's, necessarily driven underground, were con
correspondingly strange and lurid shapes. The Thomas More tooth and the head it
came from is a vivid example. After Moore's death, his head was put on a pike
for several weeks at London Bridge. His formidable daughter, Margaret Roper,
bribed the executioner, whose job it was to take down the heads and throw them
into the Thames, to give it to her instead. She pickled it in spices, and when
one of the teeth worked loose, she gave it as a secret relic to Jasper and Ellis
Haywood, Donne's uncles, both of whom were Jesuits, a then newish Catholic
missionary order. There was a story that once, when the two uncles were going on
separate journeys, unable to decide who got to take the tooth, it fell asunder
and divided of itself. Not just Catholic, then, but super Catholic, the kind of
Catholic which relishes the theatre and paraphernalia of martyrdom. Self
bifurcating molars and state-endorsed torture. These were the things of Donne's
early years. It was a darkly particular way to grow up, not only the terror and
injustice, but the strangeness of it. How unhinged the world must feel that you
are persecuted for professing that which you believe to be the most powerful
possible truth. Not strange as in unfamiliar, for being killed for your religion
was hardly new. Strange as in unmoored-from-all-sense, reason, sanity. John
Donne's mother almost certainly did not, in truth, carry Thomas More's head in
her accoutrements. Margaret Roper had it until she died in 1544 when she left it
to her husband, who was buried with it. It is unlikely that he would have loaned
it out like a library book. Donne was not sent to school, but instead educated
at home. His friend and biographer, Isaac Walton, tells us that he learnt fluent
Latin and in 1584 he enrolled with his younger brother Henry at Hart Hall,
Oxford University. Their ages were given as 11 and 10, respectively, although in
fact they were both a year older. Donne was unlikely to have been lonely there.
He had Henry, his familiar companion, to bicker with and protect. They had a
well-off aunt, a Mrs Dawson, whose husband Robert kept the blue boar in on the
corner of what is now Blue Boar Street and St Aldeats. The Dorsons would have
welcomed the boys, Catholicism and all. And soon Donne had friends. There was
Richard Baker, grandson of the first ever Chancellor of the Exchequer, and there
was Henry Wharton, Baker's roommate. It was to Wharton that Donne wrote, Sir,
more than kisses, letters mingle souls, for thus friends absent speak. After
about three years at Oxford, Walton said Donne took his magpie mind to
Cambridge, although no record of Donne being enrolled there for a degree exists,
and when we next see Donne, he is in London in 1591. He chose to follow in the
footsteps of his magic-toothed ancestor Thomas More by enrolling at the Inns of
Court, specifically Lincoln's Inn. But the 20-year-old Donne did not go to the
inns intending to become a lawyer. He went to be among rich, sharp-witted young
men who also did not intend to become lawyers. Here Donne seems to have joyfully
erupted out of the solemn hardships of his youth and into the delight and noise
of London. Though not rich, he had come into a moderate fortune from his father
â enough to eat and drink and dress well. He was elected the inn's Master of the
Revels, in charge of putting on pageantry and wild parties for his fellow-
scholars, with raucous singing and drinking and dancing of the Galliard, the
finest fashion at the time. The dance, which involved a series of enormous leaps
and small hops, kicks and spins, was Elizabeth's favourite. She was said, even
in her fifties, to dance six or seven Galliards in a morning. The space in which
Donne lived would have been small. He shared his bedroom, and probably the bed
itself, with a friend, Christopher Brooke, but each had a tiny study of his own.
Still more than a cell, with a set of shelves for books, a stool, and a table.
During his time at the inns, he began the writing of five long satirical poems,
mocking with a young man's fury the corruptions of the church, the bar, the
court, and they give a good sense of what his life looked like. Sattar I
imagines a fellow-student bursting in on him. Away, thou changeling motley
humorist, leave me, and in this standing wooden chest, consorted with these few
books, let me lie in prison, and here be coffined when I die. It was from that
room, tiny as a standing wooden chest, that some of Donne's earliest poetry
came. His earlier poems are often shot through with throwaway jokes, sallies
against boredom, which allowed him to show to his new-found friends that, though
he might have less money and fewer acres than them, yet he had a faster wit. The
voice is more conventional than the later verse would be, but even in the early
work there is that same presence, bold and ornery and intricate, that we find
later. Donne knew that he had the seeds of something original, that what he was
doing with the English language was fresh and different. In a sonnet to Samuel
Brook, his roommate Christopher's little brother, he writes, I sing not siren-
like to tempt, for I am harsh. His voice was starting to take shape. Donne
sounded like nobody else. The majority of his fellow poets were obedient to
forms and rhyme schemes inherited from the classical greats and from European
traditions of courtly verse. Think of Walter Raleigh writing to Queen Elizabeth.
If love could find a quill drawn from an angel's wing, or did the muses sing
that pretty wanton's will? Many of Donne's readers who came after him have, for
this reason, disliked his work. In the way he would dislike a tooth in a basket
of flowers. Samuel Taylor Coleridge, for one. Donne, whose muse on dromedary
trots, wreathe iron pokers into true love knots. But for Donne, divergence from
the accent and peculiar breaks in form contained the very stamp of what he
meant. They were never aimless. The world was harsh, and he needed a harsh
language. satire 3 is an attack on all authority, a furious bark of a poem that
orders us to doubt wisely. Kind pity chokes my spleen. Brave scorn forbids these
tears to issue, which swell my eyelids. I must not laugh nor weep sins and be
wise. Can railing then cure these worn maladies? Donne did not want to sound
like other poets. Human experience exceeds our capacity to either explain or
express it. Donne knew it, and so he invented new words and new forms to try. He
created new rhythms in poetry. He was an inventor of words, a neologismist. He
accounts for the first recorded use in the Oxford English Dictionary of around
340 words in the English language. Apprehensible, beauteousness, bystander,
criminalist, emancipation in ripen, fecundate, horridness, in brothelled jig.
And for those who bristle against the loose use of disinterested to mean not
interested, rather than lacking a vested interest, Donne was the first to do so,
and we must take it up with him. He wanted to wear his wit like a knife in his
shoe. He wanted it to flash out at unexpected moments. He is at his most
scathing writing about originality and those who would steal the ideas of better
men. But he is worst, who beggarly doth chore others' wits, fruits, and in his
ravenous moor, rauly digested doth those things outspew as his own things. Donne
imagined his own words taken by another. He imagined them chewed up and
expelled. And there his own, tis true. For if one eat my meat, though it be
known the meat was mine, the excrements his own. Why should we all sound the
same? There are parts of us which can be expressed well in neatly rhyming
couplets. There are love-dove pockets in each human heart. But there are
elements of each of us so particular, unwieldy, so without cliche, that it is
necessary for each poet to invent his own language. It is necessary for us all
to do so, owning one's own language is not an optional extra. The human soul is
so ruthlessly original, the only way to express the distinctive pitch of one's
own heart is for each of us to build our own way of using our voice. To read
Donne is to be told, kill the desire to keep the accent and tone of the time. It
is necessary to shake language until it will express our own distinctive
hesitations, peculiarities, our own uncertain and never quite successful
yearning towards beauty. Donne saves his most ruthless scorn for those who chew
other wit's fruit and shit out platitudes. Language, his poetry tells us, is a
set not of rules but of possibilities. Blake Ritson continues to read from Super
Infinite by Catherine Rundle tomorrow. The abridger is Richard Hamilton and the
producer Allegro McElroy. And now the shipping forecast issued by the Met Office
on behalf of the Maritime and Coast Guard Agency at 0015 on Wednesday 22nd
February. There are warnings of gales in Viking, North at Sira, Shannon,
Rockall, Bailey, Faroes and South East Iceland. The general synopsis at 1800.
Low, South East Iceland 983. Expected Norwegian Sea 974 by 1800 Wednesday. The
area forecasts for the next 24 hours. Viking, North at Sira, South at Sira.
Southeasterly 6 or 7. Occasionally gale 8. Except in South at Sira. Veering
North-Westily 5 to 7. Rain, good, occasionally poor. Forties, Cromartie, 4th
Tyne, Dogger. South or South-West 3 to 5. Occasionally 6 in 40s. Veering North
or North-West 4 to 6. Occasionally 7 in 40s. Rain, good, occasionally poor.
Fisher, German Bight. Southeasterly or South-Eastily 3 to 5. Veering Westily or
South-Westily 3 or 4. Then northerly 5 to 7 in West Fisher. Rain, fog patches.
Modder or good. Occasionally very poor. Humber Thames Dover White. South,
veering North-West 3 or 4. Occasionally 5 in White. Increasing 4 to 6 later in
Humber. Rain, moderate or good. Occasionally poor. Portland Plymouth Biscay.
West or South-West 3 to 5. Veering North-West 4 to 6. Then North 3 to 5 later.
Rain, showers later. Modder or good. Occasionally poor. Trafalgar, North-West 3
to 5. Veering North 4 to 6. Showers, good. Fitzroy, North-West 4 to 6. Veering
North 5 to 7. Rain, then squally showers. Good, occasionally poor. Sol Lundy,
Fastnet. North-West veering North 5 to 7. Perhaps gay late later. Put in Lundy,
South-West 3 to 5. Veering North 5 to 7. Rain, then squally showers. Good,
occasionally poor. Irish Sea, South-West veering North 4 to 6. Rain, then
showers. Good, occasionally poor. Shannon Rockall, North or North-West 6 to gay
late. Decreasing 4 to 6. Showers, squally at first. Good, occasionally poor.
Malin Hebrides, North-West 4 to 6. Increasing 6 or 7 for a time. Showers,
squally at first. Good, occasionally poor. Bailey, North-West 6 to gay late.
Backing South-West 5 to 7. Squally showers. Good, occasionally poor. Fair Isle,
South Fairoes. South-Westley veering Westley or North-Westley 4 to 6. Rain, then
showers. Wintery later. Good, occasionally poor. North-Fairoes, South-East
Iceland. Cyclonic 7 to Severe Gal 9. Occasionally storm 10 at first in South-
East Iceland. Becoming Westley or South-Westley 4 to 6. Occasionally 7 in South-
East Iceland. Wintery showers. Good, occasionally poor. Now the weather reports
from coastal stations 42300. Tyre-Automatic, West-North-West 1, rain. 7 miles,
1006, rising slowly. Stornoway, South-West by West 2, drizzle. 24 miles, 1004,
rising slowly. LÃ¶wik, South by West 4, 8 miles 1002, falling more slowly. Wick-
Automatic, West 4, 2 miles 1003, now rising. Aberdeen, South-West 4, 24 miles
1005, falling slowly. Lucas, South-West by West 4, 30 miles 1006, falling
slowly. Boomer, South by East 2, 1008, falling slowly. Bridlington, South-West
2, 1010, falling slowly. Sandeti Light Vessel Automatic, South-East by South 3,
2 miles 1013. Greenwich Light Vessel Automatic, South-East 3, 1 mile 1013. St
Catherine's Point Automatic, East by North 2, 1013, falling slowly. Jersey,
South-West 1, missed. 2 miles 1013, falling slowly. Channel Light Vessel
Automatic, South-West to South 1, 1013. Silly Automatic, South-West by West 3,
rain. 14 miles 1013, falling slowly. Milford Haven, South-West, South-South-West
3, 30 miles 1012, falling slowly. Aberpouth, South by West 3, slight drizzle. 2
miles 1012, falling slowly. Valley, North by East 5, 9 miles 1010, falling
slowly. Liverpool Crosby, South-South-West 1, missed. 3 miles 1010, falling
slowly. Valencia, North by West 4, 11 miles 1015, rising. Ronaldsway, North-West
5, 1008, falling. Mallonhead, North-West 5, moderate drizzle. 4 miles 1008,
rising slowly. Now the weather forecasts for the inshore waters of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland valid for the following 24 hours. The general situation, a
band of rain will move South-East across the coastal waters through Wednesday
with a colder, showery north to northwesterly air mass following from the west.
A ridge of high pressure will build then on Thursday but another band of rain
will affect Scotland in the evening. Cape Wrath to Ratnery Head including
Orkney. South-West 3-5, veering North-West 4-6. Rain then showers, good,
occasionally poor at first. Ratnery Head to Berwick-upon Tweed, South or South-
West 3-5, veering North or North-West 4-6. Rain, showers later, good,
occasionally poor. Berwick-upon Tweed to Whitby, South 3-5, veering North 5-6.
Rain, showers later, good, occasionally poor. Whitby to Gibraltar Point, South
veering South-West 3-4, veering North 5-6, later. Rain, showers later, moderate
or good, occasionally poor. Gibraltar Point, North 4-6. Southerly, veering
South-West 3-4, then North-West 3-5 later. Fair, then rain at times, moderate or
good, occasionally poor. North 4-2, Celsius. Variable 3 or less becoming
westerly, veering North-westerly later 3 or 4. Rain, moderate or good,
occasionally poor. Celsius-built to Lime Regis, South-West 3 or 4, veering
North-West 4 or 5, then North-4 later. Rain, moderate or good, occasionally
poor. Lime Regis to Lands End including the Isles of Scilly. South-West 3-5,
veering North-West, then North-later 4-6. Rain, then showers, moderate or good,
occasionally poor at first. Lands End to St David's Head including the Bristol
Channel. South-West 3-5, veering North-West, then North-later 4-6. Rain, then
showers, moderate or good, occasionally poor at first. St David's Head to Great
Ormhead including St George's Channel. South 4 or 5, veering North-West, then
North-later 4-6. Rain, then showers, moderate or good, occasionally poor at
first. Great Ormhead to the Mull of Galloway. South-West 3-5, veering North-West
4-6, then North-4 or 5 later. Rain, then showers, moderate or good, occasionally
poor at first. Isle of Man, South-West, veering North-West, then North-East
later 5 or 6, occasionally poor at first. Rain, then showers, good, occasionally
poor at first. Lock Foil to Carlingford Lock. West or South-West 4 or 5, veering
North-West 4-6, then North-4 or 5 later. Rain, then showers, good, occasionally
poor at first. Mull of Galloway to Mull of Kintyre including the Firth of Clyde
and North Channel. Westerly or South-Westerly 4 or 5, veering North-Westerly
4-6, then Northerly 4 or 5 later. Rain, then showers, good, occasionally poor at
first. Mull of Kintyre to Ardenmerken Point. North-West, veering North 4 to 6,
rain, then showers, squawly at first. Good, occasionally poor at first.
Ardenmerken Point to Cape Wrath. West 4 or 5, veering North-West 4 to 6,
decreasing 3 or 4 later. Rain, then showers, squawly at first. Good,
occasionally poor at first. Shetland Isles, South-West 4 or 5, veering North-
West 6, decreasing 4 or 5 later. Rain, then showers, wintery later, good,
occasionally poor. That completes the shipping bulletin and brings us to the end
of our day here on Radio 4. Thank you for listening. I'm Amanda Litherland. I'm
here at Broadcasting House in London. I hope that the rest of your night is a
very peaceful one, wherever you are. Yee-bye. Good night.