TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-08H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 From BBC Radio 4, the Shimima Begum story, series two of I'm Not a Monster.
Listen on BBC Sounds. BBC News at seven o'clock on Sunday the 26th of February.
Good morning. This is Lisa Costello. The Prime Minister says Northern Ireland is
unfinished business after Brexit and he's trying everything to get a deal with
the EU. The government has told social housing managers in England they'll have
to sit exams to ensure they have the right skills. Conservationists say the
world's biggest species of frog, which is threatened with extinction, is making
a comeback. Rishi Sunak has said he's given it everything to reach a deal with
the EU on trade arrangements for Northern Ireland. A speculation mounts that an
agreement could be announced as early as tomorrow. The Prime Minister has told
the Sunday Times his goal is to get the job done on Brexit. Under the current
arrangements, known as the Protocol, Northern Ireland follows some EU laws and
goods arriving from Great Britain are subject to checks. Securing the support of
the Democratic Unionist Party for any changes will be crucial for the Prime
Minister, as our political correspondent Ian Watson reports. A deal is
tantalisingly close, but it's not there yet. The Prime Minister has said that
work is still to be done and is taken to the pages of usually conservative
supporting newspapers to reassure critics in his own ranks that any deal
wouldn't be a sellout and to emphasise his credentials as a Brexiteer and a
Unionist. In what might be seen as a swipe at Boris Johnson, who is Prime
Minister, signed up to the Northern Ireland Protocol, Mr Sunak has described it
as the unfinished business of Brexit and has pledged that he will get the job
done. Much of the heavy lifting with the EU appears to have been concluded, but
the bigger prize is to convince the largest Unionist party, the DUP, to return
to a power-sharing government at Stormont. Its leader Sir Geoffrey Donaldson has
warned that the wrong deal would deepen divisions, and a former Conservative
cabinet minister told me that if the DUP were to give the thumbs down, then all
the political capital that Rishi Sunak had invested in reaching an agreement
with Brussels would have been futile. Police investigating the attempted murder
of a senior officer in County Tyrone have arrested a 71-year-old man under the
Terrorism Act. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell remains critically ill
after he was shot at a sports centre in Omer on Wednesday in front of his son.
Police have said the Dissident Republican Group, the new IRA, is their primary
line of inquiry. Five other men remain in custody. Managers at social housing
organisations in England will be required to have professional qualifications
under government plans to improve standards in the sector. The new rules are the
latest response to the Grenfell Tower disaster and the death of two-year-old
Awab Ishak after exposure to mould at his family's home in Rochdale in 2020.
Esselth Karr reports. Social housing managers who inspect properties and oversee
repair and maintenance programmes will have to gain certain minimum
qualifications under new legislation. It's part of efforts to address the
significant concerns raised by the Grenfell Tower fire and the death of Awab
Ishak. Officials say these requirements will bring professional standards in the
sector more in line with other front-line jobs such as social work, health care
and teaching. Under the plans, around 25,000 people working in social housing
will need to gain certification equivalent to a foundation degree. Any landlords
that don't comply could face being fined by the regulator. These changes are in
addition to plans already announced for Awab's law, which will mean social
landlords have to address mould and damp problems within strict time limits. The
former Labour MP Luciana Berger is rejoining the party four years after she left
because of concerns about anti-Semitism. Ms Berger said Labour had turned a
significant corner under Suqir Stalmer. The former Labour donor, Lord Sainsbury,
has also returned to the party with a donation reported to be worth Â£2 million.
Votes are being counted in what's being seen as Nigeria's most competitive
presidential race in decades. Polling was largely peaceful but there have been
reports of violence in places. Our West Africa correspondent, Mayoni Jones,
reports from Lagos. Nigerian voters are waiting anxiously to find out the
results of these general elections. Some chose to stay at their polling stations
overnight to oversee the vote counting. The federal reports of voter
intimidation, including in parts of the southern states of Lagos, Edo and
Rivers. The election was postponed until today, in parts of Bialsa State, where
polling stations were attacked. Many other stations across the country opened
late and some not at all. Despite the violence and disorganisation, there are
early indications that turnout was high. Millions of Nigerians are keen to
choose a president who will help tackle an ailing economy and rising insecurity.
Many young people are hoping a challenge from a former state governor, Peter
Orby, can help break the two-party system which has dominated Nigeria since its
transition to democracy 24 years ago. Conservationists in West Africa say their
efforts to save the world's biggest frog are paying off. The Goliath frog, which
can grow up to a foot long, has made a comeback in its native Cameroon. Our
science correspondent, Helen Briggs, reports. The Goliath frog lives up to its
name, growing to the size of a large cat. It can jump up to 10 feet. But the
world's biggest living frog, which is found only in Cameroon, a neighbouring
equatorial Guinea, is threatened with extinction and is classed as endangered.
The amphibian has been pursued by hunters for its meat and for the pet trade.
Its habitat in the rainforest is being fast destroyed. But five years ago,
conservationists in Cameroon set out to save the species by encouraging local
people to stop hunting the frog and report sightings of it instead. They
suggested snail farming as an alternative food source. Their scheme appears to
be working and new nesting sites have been discovered in rivers and streams.
Cricket and England have been made to work hard on the third day of the second
test against New Zealand in Wellington. The black caps were made to follow on
for the first time at home since 2010 but reached 202 for three, 24 runs behind
the tourists' first innings total. Our sports reporter, Stefan Schimmelt, is in
Wellington. England might have hoped for victory inside three days and it was
still a possibility on Sunday morning despite Tim Sowley blasting 73 in New
Zealand's first innings, 209 all out. The black caps were 226 behind and made to
follow on. They dug in on a pitch with a reputation for getting better to bat
on. Tom Latham made 83, Devon Conway 61 and though the home side lost three
wickets for 18 runs, Kane Williamson and Henry Nichols dropped anchor. England
will return on Monday with a second new ball that is only three overs old. They
are still favourites but it's not out of the question they become the first
England team to lose a test after enforcing the follow on. Time now for a look
at the papers. I'm the PM who will get Brexit done is the Sunday Times headline.
It reports that Mr Sunak's prepared to take on Eurosceptics in his party and
unveil a new deal with the EU on post-Brexit trading rules for Northern Ireland,
with or without the explicit endorsement of the Democratic Unionist Party. In
what it describes as a snub, the Sunday Telegraph says Mr Sunak is poised to
scrap Boris Johnson's Northern Ireland Protocol Bill, which was designed to give
the government power to rip up parts of the Protocol. Writing for the paper, Mr
Sunak says the bill was always a last resort. The Telegraph says he believes the
legislation is no longer necessary as a bargaining chip. The paper adds that
he's facing a revolt and the Northern Ireland Minister and prominent Brexiteer,
Steve Baker, is on resignation watch after being frozen out of negotiations. Mr
Baker has declined to comment. Mr Sunak has also written an article for The Sun
where he argues that the Protocol doesn't work, needs fixing and he is
determined to deliver. The online-only Independent says senior Brexiteers are
split over whether to oppose any deal. It says members of the European research
group of Eurosceptic Tories have said they're prepared to force a showdown vote
in Parliament. The Mail on Sunday says Rishi Sunak has been accused by some
senior conservatives of entangling the king in what it calls toxic Brexit
politics by sending him on a tour to, as the paper puts it, schmooze EU nations.
It says the king's forthcoming visit to Berlin and Paris is being seen as a
charm offensive. The Observer leads on a report that one in 100 police officers
in England and Wales faced criminal charges last year. An investigation by the
paper found the police federation received more than 1,300 claims for legal
support from members facing criminal charges in 2022. It says the federation
refused comment. The Sunday Express reports on a government crackdown on lawyers
representing asylum seekers. Using the phrase activist lawyers, it says several
firms are being monitored for creating work for themselves. The president of the
Law Society is quoted responding that law firms are rigorously regulated and
held to high standards. The Sunday Telegraph reports that Ian Fleming's James
Bond novels have been rewritten to remove a number of references to race. It
says the books, which are being reissued this spring, have been subjected to a
review by sensitivity readers. For instance, in the reworked version of Live and
Let Die, Bond's assessment that would be African criminals in the Golden Diamond
trades are pretty law-abiding chaps, I should have thought, except when they've
drunk too much. The reference to alcohol is dropped and in a scene where Bond
finds himself watching a strip tease at a Harlem nightclub, the audience panting
and grunting like pigs at the trough is watered down to Bond could sense the
electric tension in the room. And that's the news and papers this morning. Many
thanks, Lisa Costello. This is BBC Radio 4, time now for Sunday with Emily
Buchanan. Good morning. On this week's Sunday, the growing number of attacks on
refugees, a senior church leader warns politicians that the language they use
has consequences. We hear about the people leaving Christianity and converting
to traditional African religions. If us attraction might be that it's a
pragmatic and useful religion and. Thousands of schoolchildren from all
backgrounds will soon have access to the expertise of cathedral choir leaders.
We hear more and would like you to tell us your memories of singing in the choir
at school or in your church. Email your stories to Sunday at BBC.co.uk or we're
on Twitter at BBC R4 Sunday. Reaction to that decision by the Church of England
to allow the blessing of same-sex couples has stepped up a gear. A group of
conservative primates has now rejected the authority of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Justin Welby. The renegade archbishops lead 10 of the 42 provinces
in the Anglican Communion and a part of a group called the Global South
Fellowship of Anglican Churches. It claims to represent 75% of Anglicans around
the world, mostly across Asia and Africa. Well, their chairman is Archbishop
Justin Badiarama of the Episcopal Church of South Sudan. How can we agree to
something which is contrary to God's word? And also to tell you one of our pain
was when we saw our brothers, the bishops in the Church of England, apologizing
to same-sex couples, that makes us grieve. Well, that position has been
supported by the Church of England Evangelical Council, which told the BBC that
it's grateful for the clear commitment to orthodoxy within the Anglican
Communion. Lambeth Palace has responded with a statement saying, despite
differences, Christians must find ways to continue walking and working together
as followers of Jesus Christ. Well, joining us to analyse this move is our
religion affairs reporter, Harry Farley. Morning, Harry. Good morning. Good
morning, Emma. Harry, the Archbishop of Canterbury is described as the first
among equals in the Anglican Communion, but he's not really a leader as such, is
he? Yeah, that's right. I mean, he doesn't have any strict authority or strict
power on the other Anglican churches around the world to, as it were, tell them
what to do, to tell them what their teaching is or their position is on
different matters, including on this matter of sexuality. So if you make the
comparison to, say, the Catholic Church, where it is one church and the Pope is
the head of that one church all around the world, in the Anglican Communion,
it's actually 42 separate churches. And as you say, Justin Welby as the
Archbishop of Canterbury is seen as the first among equals. He has a moral and a
spiritual authority, but not a sort of legislative one. And that's actually been
the case ever since the Anglican Communion was set up in 1867, that the
incumbent Archbishop of Canterbury is seen as its spiritual figurehead rather
than a leader. Yeah, so how significant then is this step to reject his
leadership? Well, I mean, it's a good question. It's the first time that such a
large group of leaders of different Anglican provinces around the world have
rejected the Archbishop of Canterbury's role as the figurehead of the Anglican
Communion. So 10 out of the 42 provinces have said they no longer see Justin
Welby as the head of the Anglican Communion. It's worth saying, I spoke to
Lambeth Palace this week and they pointed out that in order for that to become a
formal change in how the Anglican Communion is structured, it would need the
agreement of all the other bodies that govern it. So this is a symbolic move
that I suppose highlights the differences, the deep differences that are within
the Anglican Communion. It's not a formal change for that to happen. All the
other bodies that lead the Anglican Communion would need to agree. So it's not
as you see it then, the beginning of the much talked about and dreaded schism?
Well, I mean, it's, I mean, in some ways that schism has in many ways already
happened in the sense that you have churches that call themselves Anglican
churches that exist outside this Anglican Communion, which is the body of 42
different sort of officially recognised Anglican churches as it were. So in some
senses, you already have that. I think when we're talking about what the
significance of this step is, I think it will depend what comes next in the
sense of do these 10 provinces, do they leave the Anglican Communion altogether
and join sort of, I guess, sort of rival Anglican bodies around the world? And
there's one called Gaffgon currently in place. Or do they say, well, you know,
we're going to stay within the Anglican Communion, we just don't want the
Archbishop of Canterbury to be the head? And actually, that's something that
Justin Welby has acknowledged himself that he said in a speech earlier this
month that he wouldn't cling to power in the sense of clinging to his role as
this sort of figurehead of the Anglican Communion. So that might be a change
that we see that can hold this very different and diverse group of independent
churches together. I mean, it's worth saying that, you know, the Anglican
Communion represents churches on the one hand, you know, who have parishes in
Wall Street and the other hand have parishes in Sub-Saharan Africa. So it's a
very big and diverse body of independent churches with very different views, as
you heard in your queue, on a range of matters, including on sexuality. And just
briefly, what impact do you think this will have on any further steps by the
church to say allow gay marriage in the future? I mean, I think in many ways
this statement is symbolic of the strong opinions and the strong differences
that were already in place. I'm not sure it will stop further moves happening,
but I'm not sure it will sort of add any incentive to do that anyway. It's a
statement that was of a reality that was already in place. Okay, Harry Farley,
thanks so much. The traditional African faith known as IFA, which goes back over
8,000 years, seems to be growing in popularity. Converts include people of
African descent who've grown up within Islam or Christianity, faiths which are
especially disapproving, calling it voodoo or devil worship. BBC journalist
Peter MacJobb, himself an ex-Roman Catholic, has become a devotee and he sent us
this report from a ceremony in South London. Imagine doing this with communion
wine. A priest is spitting gin over a wooden statue of a deity in the hope it
will please the God. Other commenceibles, like colonnades, get chopped up and
thrown onto a plate. How they fall can signify the deity's response and give an
answer to worshippers' spiritual needs. The ancient faith of the Yoruba people
of West Africa, IFA or Isha-Sheh, is all about soliciting divine judgement.
There are multiple deities or Urishas, and the supreme creator of the universe
is known as Elidumari. But many devotees seek advice on temporal matters.
Omobolanle Elayagu is the priestess officiating at today's ceremony. The first
tenet of IFA is what's known as Iwaqbele, which is good character. Do I respect
all the elements that Elidumari has created? Do I respect the Urishas? Do I
respect my fellow devotees? IFA will speak through the priest, giving direct
instructions of what Elidumari says that person needs to do what they need to
not do. For example, people usually come to IFA with issues like, I really like
this guy, is he a suitable husband? Or I'm really struggling finding work.
Crispin Adegun is learning to become an IFA priest or babalau. As he explains,
devotees enjoy a direct relationship with the divine. Generally, when you pray,
the idea is first you give praise to the Urishas, to the ancestors, to the sun,
to the moon, to the earth, then you give thanks, then you ask for forgiveness,
and then finally you ask for the things you're actually praying for. It makes
sense, doesn't it? If you wanted something from your boss, you probably have to
say nice things first. Yeah, exactly. No one owes you anything. But equally,
devotees are relatively free of obligations. I'm originally from Brazil, from
the city of Salvador. I grew up being Catholic, but I don't feel the same
pressure that I feel in Christianity of guilty. Guilt treatment. Yes, and I
feel... Everything is a sin. Exactly. If I's attraction might be that it's a
pragmatic and useful religion, constant reincarnation is a given, so there's no
fear of heaven and hell, and there are no commandments to obey. People with
colonialism now challenge as never before. No doubt some take cultural reasons
to get involved. But in the West, especially, IFA is controversial. Crispin
again. People make offerings to the Urishas, which can be colonn fruits,
flowers, cooked foods, and also animal sacrifice. You say a prayer over the
animal, you offer its blood to the shrine, and then you cook it and you eat it.
What's happening is you're offering the energy of this animal either to clear
away negativity, negative forces, or to bring forth good things. Curses and
divination, effigies and offerings might give IFA an almost occult image in the
eyes of more established faiths. Yet people of African descent are discovering
unity and validation in this long lost tradition. Well Peter MacJobb joins us
now. Peter, you were brought up in a very devout Roman Catholic family. Can you
explain why you decided to leave Catholicism? Yeah, I think just from my
religious experience alone, born in the church, baptized, confirmed, altar
server, at some point I would like to go to the seminary. This is how devolved
my Catholic family is, but at some point, there's just got to be disillusioned
with the doctrine. I was repeating the same thing all over again. At some point
I knew the Rosary, you know, in my head, you know, Divine Mercy, all of that.
But at some point in my quest, it becomes slightly more devolved. I started to
read like church history, you know, and then I came across things like Vatican
II, Council, Council of Nicaea, Trent, just literally seeing human beings making
decisions, things that I thought were divine. So as I grew older, as I became a
journalist and I started to read and travel the world, places that I dreamt of
going for spiritual encounter, I get there and it's just like a tourist center.
So much money comes out of my pocket just to buy like a food magnet from the
Vatican. And so at some point I just felt like this isn't as, you know, edifying
as I thought it would be and I had more questions than I had answers. That's the
way it started. So what sparked your interest in IFA then? I mean, you saw that
you became a bit disillusioned with Catholicism, but why IFA? So from that
moment I went to the evangelical because I felt like maybe I just needed a
spiritual boost. And that was the experience I got from that place was like
money grabbing. So much guilt tripping, money grabbing, you know, fear mongering
of hellfire. So I just stopped going to church period because I felt like I've
outgrown Christianity. Yes, I loved Christianity as a kid. Now I'm outgrown. I
don't really need to go to church anymore. But then I had a chance encounter
with an old friend who said to me, African spirituality is where we all need to
go. It's a direct contact with God, blah, blah. And you know, out of curiosity,
I had to go. And this gentleman told me things about my personal life that
nobody knows, things that I would never dare to share. So he got my attention.
And that's what that journey began 14 years later. What do you say to people who
say, well, oh, it's just voodoo or devil worship? I mean, it's a bit complicated
because you can see how the narrative over decades could inform that kind of
view. However, it's a cultural practice, a few people's religion and their
culture are linked. So the first one side is not devil worship, you know, you
have to come closer to it to see. But also when I look at the history of how
that narrative came through, it was colonials who came in and gave that
narrative, sucked the worship centers, you know, did all the atrocity and then
said, this is how we worship God. But me as an African, I'm thinking to myself,
I know the history of slavery. How can the people who enslaved my ancestors then
tell us how to worship God? This is how the whole journey started. And I kind of
started to lean away from that, you know, almost like a protest. And obviously,
as soon as I go into this spiritual path, and I started to see improvement in my
personal life, then I realized I wasn't alone. Many people like me accept people
in the closet because God forbid you let people know you don't go to church
anymore, you don't believe in Jesus Christ or the afterlife. Yes, it must have
been very difficult for your family. But we'll have to leave it there now,
Peter. Peter MacJobb, thank you. And you can hear Peter's full documentary about
IFA coming out of the IFA closet on the BBC World Service programme Heart and
Soul on BBC Sounds. Children from the Leeds Catholic Cathedral Junior Choir,
part of the National Schools Singing Programme. The programme was set up two
years ago to make singing more accessible to children from diverse backgrounds
in Catholic schools. Now on its second anniversary, it's bringing in a group of
Anglican cathedrals. Simon Toyne is the Music Project Director at the Hamish-
Ogston Foundation, which is funding the project. And Ben Saunders is Director of
Music at the Diocese of Leeds and Consultant for the National Schools Singing
Programme. I asked Simon what difference it would make having Anglican
cathedrals involved. The programme has been running so far through Catholic
Diocese. And as we know, the organisation of the Church of England is somewhat
different. So in the Church of England, our cathedrals are acknowledged centres
of choral and musical excellence with experienced directors of music. But we
really want them to connect with all of their neighbouring schools and to spread
this remarkable choral tradition to every child in the country. What's changing
is the level of access. So, you know, up till quite recently, cathedrals would
recruit from maybe one school, maybe two schools, maybe they'd have a specialist
choir school. But now many cathedrals are looking a lot broader than that. And
how can we really involve young people, children, their parents, grandparents in
the life and the liturgy above all of the church? And of course, what better way
to do that than through the ultimate team, which we call the choir. So Simon,
what has been the reaction so far of the communities where you're intending to
bring the singing programme? I mean, I imagine some would say, look, you know,
do we really need singing? We need a lot of other things, first of all,
particularly in communities where they're really stretched at the moment. Oh,
no, I've been working in state schools and my working life for 32 years. And
I've never met a head teacher who doesn't want excellent music in their schools.
What's not to like? You're getting qualified choral directors visiting your
school every week and developing singing with every child. And that programme,
it's not just Open Our Mouths and Sing. This is really aspirational. The
children themselves tell us that they love singing in a choir because they're
learning new things. But we also see them develop positions of leadership, not
just within the choirs, but within their schools. You know, having to sing every
day develops an extraordinary sense of personal responsibility and that sense of
responsibility to others as well. And of course, singing and making music well
has huge impacts on academic performance and wellbeing and a sense of self
esteem and community. It's pretty well known that a lot of choirs are
predominantly white and that there are a lot of barriers for children from
diverse backgrounds to actually get into them. Do you think your programme with
its limited resources can really change the face of choirs in the UK? Well, we
hope so. We've got pretty sophisticated resources at our disposal to connect the
curriculum to after school clubs and also the resources including transport to
get them from schools into their local churches and cathedrals. But of course,
the great work that's already been going on in Leeds and Bradford, which are
very diverse choirs and creating the choral directors of the future, is we think
the beginning of a very significant movement for choral music in the country.
And Ben, is the actual sound of what is being sung? I mean, we tend to think of
choirs in cathedrals as being sort of singing a lot in Latin. Is the actual
repertoire changing? This is not about changing the repertoire at all. Most of
the great music, the great choral music was written with children in mind,
children singing those top parts. And then as their voices changed, especially
boys, altos, tenors and basses, and it really is returning that repertoire to
children on a very big scale because it's their birthright. You're saying these
children from whatever background can really sing serious grown up choral music.
Yeah, exactly. And we're not doing anything new. We're doing what has been done
by our forefathers and returning that repertoire to the kids. So there's no
element of patronising because the one thing any teacher will tell you, and I'm
sure you realise yourself, is children can sniff out quality and authenticity
straight away. Yeah. And the thing about this tradition, which is unique, is
that children are treated seriously and children always respond to that. You
know, they're given a level of responsibility that isn't really seen in any
other discipline, certainly at school. And you've seen children rise to that.
Yeah, without exception. And the relationships that they build with each other
and with adults as well is one of mutual respect. And where else can a seven-
year-old be in the same room as a 17-year-old and often a 70-year-old making the
same music and involved in the same endeavour? It's incredibly powerful. Simon
Toyn and Ben Saunders. Well, it's 7.30, still to come, how hundreds of people
around the world have sewn panels for a Quaker textile exhibition about climate
change. You can see their work at Westminster. The project has really helped me
make a decision to go somewhere where my carbon footprint will be much lower.
Last week, the world marked the first anniversary of the Russian invasion of
Ukraine. In the run-up, this programme revisited the people of faith we've
spoken to throughout the year. And today, we're exploring how the invasion has
changed the structure of Orthodox Christianity in Ukraine. While some churches
have cut their ties with Russia, others have remained loyal to Moscow. Now, the
Ukrainian government has published a draft bill that would ban the activities of
any Orthodox churches in the country with links to the Moscow Patriarchate. So,
what impact will that have? Ola O'Brien reports. This is the magnificent Lavra
Cathedral in Kyiv. This spectacular building with its gold-topped towers is a
UNESCO World Heritage Site. Last Christmas, this special celebration was held
for a country at war. But it was also a major turning point for the future of
Christian Orthodoxy in Ukraine. Before the Russian invasion, there were two
branches of Orthodoxy in this country. The Orthodox Church of Ukraine formed in
2018 and loyal to the Constantinople Patriarchate and the Ukrainian Orthodox
Church loyal to the Moscow Patriarchate. Although their titles are similar,
their loyalty made them very different. The Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the
Moscow Patriarchate is led by Patriarch Kirill in Russia. Throughout the past
year, much has been made of his close relationship with President Putin. This
cathedral was previously leased to that branch, but that contract was terminated
last December. Which means this ceremony for the first time was being led by the
Orthodox Church of Ukraine. Archbishop Avstrosy Zoria was one of the priests
leading the ceremony. The first time in modern history in this sacred place was
a prayer in Ukrainian language, prayer performed by Ukrainian, not Moscow,
clergy, was like we returning to our home. While President Putin has been quick
to blame the West for the war, he has also often used religious iconography,
citing the Russian world or a risky mere hypothesis as justification for the
invasion. It's the sense that Russia is larger than the present day Russian
Federation and that it has cultural and spiritual influence and hegemony outside
the Russian Federation. That's Dr. Geraldine Fagan, editor of the journal East-
West Church Repoires and an expert in religion in Ukraine and Russia. There are
proponents of the concept of a Rusky mere, the Russian world, who cite a
prophecy by a 20th century elder of the Orthodox Church who actually lived in
Ukraine, who said that the nations of Russia, Belarus and Ukraine are like the
constituent parts of Holy Russia or Svetaya Rus and that they should be kept
together in the same way as the different persons of the Holy Trinity, Father,
Son and Holy Spirit. So they see this parallel between the three nations of
Russia, Ukraine and Belarus and the Holy Trinity. But when Patriarch Kirill
supported the invasion of Ukraine, the Ukrainian branch of his church denounced
him as their leader. Now President Zelensky has gone further. He's proposing a
law to ban places of worship with what he calls centers of influence in Russia
from operating in Ukraine. In January, a draft of that law was sent to the
Ukrainian parliament. There's no point in making a martyr church of any
jurisdiction that is under the Moscow Patriarchate, especially at a time when
this church needs to reconsider its historic role in imperialism and the
principle of religious freedom should be preserved. That's Archbishop Boris
Gudzejak, a senior cleric in the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church. He has
concerns about the impact of a law like this and he knows what he's talking
about. Our church, the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church has been outlawed in the
past. In fact, every time there's a Russian occupation, Ukrainian Eastern right
church gets outlawed, banned, suffocated. So we are very sensitive on this
issue. So could the clergy and congregations formally loyal to Moscow unite with
the Orthodox Church of Ukraine? Archbishop Boris Gudzejak says it won't be easy.
Many members of it may decide to join the Orthodox Church of Ukraine, but you
can be sure that Putin, Patriarch Kirl, Russia and the Russian Orthodox Church
will do everything to undermine any possible union between the Orthodox Church
of Ukraine and the Ukrainian Orthodox Church associated with the Moscow
Patriarchate. Father Andrei Dachenko was formerly a priest in a church loyal to
Moscow, but moved to the Orthodox Church of Ukraine in the 2018 schism. He says
propaganda comes in many forms. I was a priest in Moscow Patriarchate for 21
years and I remember the spreading of Russian narratives. It might be not clear
the strong propaganda, the more hidden ways of just sharing some narratives
among the faithful in the literatures spreading of the churches, even some icons
that are put in churches. But he still hopes that Orthodox Christians in Ukraine
can worship together. I would like for all Orthodox Christian communities and
people to unite in one Orthodox Christian Church of Ukraine, but at least to
unite in the sacraments and to share a holy communion together. If we do this,
the unity on this very deep mystical level will be achieved. Ola O'Brien An
exhibition of textile artworks raising awareness of the threats to our natural
world has gone on display at Westminster. The Loving Earth project was started
by the Quaker Arts Network and features more than 400 panels handmade by people
all over the world. You can see a picture on our website of some of the
collection. Here are some of the contributors explaining why they took part.
While stitching, I let my imagination run wild. This green space could form part
of a green corridor. I could use a crisp packet, turn it into little stars. So
this is a piece that uses felt fabric. It's inspired by the idea of wooden
buildings of concrete that are in construction on nature. This is the Dingle
Chine. It's a small woodland near where I live. The project has really helped me
make a decision to go somewhere where my carbon footprint will be much lower. I
chose the bold contrast and one big word, help. There isn't going to change our
actions. I'm very grateful for the opportunities and the joy of the work that we
did. Some of the contributors to the Loving Earth project. Well, Linda
Murgatroyd is the clerk of the Quaker Arts Network and Ruth Cadbury is the
Labour MP for Brentford and Isilworth and a Quaker herself. Good morning, Linda.
First of all, I was looking at some of these panels. There are flowers, plants,
forests, camels, polar bears, elephants, all made out of scraps of material and
embroidery. Tell me, first of all, can you describe your favorite? Oh, my
favorite. That's really, really, I think it's the diversity that's wonderful.
And it's what people are doing with them, Azing, because combined with the
pictures, everyone's in something. And since there's a space between the
pictures and what they which takes you to a place which is. And I think all of
them have something really quite special about that. Yes. And what was the idea
behind the exhibition? Why did you do it? Well, Quakers don't have a creed.
We're strongly advised instead to listen to the leadings of love and truth in
our hearts and to try and follow them. And that's one of the things we're doing
in our silent meetings for worship. And what that means in everyday life is
going to be different from each of us. I was having great trouble working out
what to do next on the environment. We've had we've been concerned about the
environment for many years as individuals and as a community. And I thought,
well, let's see what if we focus just on one thing so it's not too overwhelming.
We can invite we can think about what that's going to happen. What's going to
happen to that one thing we love in the next couple of decades as a result of
the environmental crisis. And perhaps then we can think about how we're
contributing to that. And if you can work out how we're contributing, then we
can think of something we can do about it. So it might be as one of the people
said, it might be moving so that we're using our lowering our carbon footprint
by not having a car or something like that. OK, well, Ruth Cadbury, you've seen
the exhibition. What did you think? Morning, yes, I saw the exhibition of 60
panels that's up for the next month in Port Cullis House in the heart of
Parliament. It was brought to Parliament by the Speaker, Lindsay Hoyle. And he
saw a display of some of the panels in his in a church in his constituency in
Chorley. And he loved it so much. And because he's the speaker, he has the power
to decide what exhibitions go up in Parliament. And do you think it can make a
difference? Is it going to influence the politicians' minds? I hope so, because
it's 18 months since COP26 when we were talking about the environment and the
and the future of our world all the time in our constituencies and in
Parliament. So to have it there in Port Cullis House, where we pass every day
and have meetings and queue for coffee. And it's a really good reminder. And
it's the messages in it are so they're powerful because of their breadth and
also the beauty of the panels. And I suppose, Linda, it's not only about the
effect on people who look at these panels, but the effect on the people who
actually made them. Does it help people deal with climate anxiety? Absolutely.
To take action helps relieve the stress. If you're becoming part of the
solution, of course, of course you're going to be you're going to understand it
better as well by looking at it. But actually, you're doing something about it.
So people are talking to their families, people are taking decisions, small
decisions and bigger decisions. People are rewinding their gardens, but they're
also talking to politicians about neonicotinoid pesticides, for example. They're
concerned about their own pollution and they might be litter picking, but
they're also concerned about the production of plastic waste and talking to the
companies or politicians that produce it or that regulate it. So Ruth Cadbury,
has it changed you at all? Do you think you'll be taking anything away from this
exhibition that you might do differently? Well, I mean, I have been working on
environment issues since I've been in Parliament and my constituents are often
writing to me. So I think what the panel does to me, the panels do to me in the
exhibition is I think remind me of the why people are inspired to take action
and to it's almost like another dimension from the letters we get and the public
meetings we attend. And I think for the topics, the panels that are in the 60
panels that are up in Parliament, I think really do help. So I think it's a
tickle, it's a reminder as we pass that exhibition every day for the next month
that we cannot forget, we cannot move on to other things and forget that the
environment and the future of our earth is something we must keep at the front,
you know, in our hearts and our work all the time. Great. Well, thank you very
much for joining us. Ruth Cadbury MP and Linda Murgatroyd from the Quaker Arts
Network. I'm sorry, also about the quality of the lines there. And the project
is showing in Port Carlos House in Westminster until the 17th of March. The
press are going to call you all. Yeah, we know. They're going to call you
horses. They're going to call you racing and fashion. But let's keep them any
ammunition. When the headlines come out tomorrow, let them look stupid. Because
we're here because we love our own people. A recording of a rally yesterday in
the Lincolnshire seaside town of Skeg Ness posted on the local news website The
Lincolnite. People are protesting at their seaside hotels being allocated as
temporary housing for asylum seekers. While protesters there were keen to
distance themselves from far right activists, similar protests outside hotels
housing migrants in Kirby on Merseyside and in Rotherham have led to violent
clashes between anti migrant groups and the police. For the asylum seekers
themselves, these are anxious times. Here's Ata, an Iranian asylum seeker who
was placed in a hotel in Skeg Ness and who volunteers at his local church. We
just stay in hotel and actually I'm thankful from your government and your
people to give me a home. But we are not allowed to work. I have lots of friends
in Skeg Ness and in the church I find good and lovely people. But some of us
fight with local people and they beat one of my friends. Somebody broke his nose
and I think people don't have good economy situation right now and they think
government spend lots of their taxes to the asylum and I understand that. But if
I can work here, I can pay tax and I don't want government to help our taxes.
Some people in communities like Skeg Ness and those in the north west say they
are taking a disproportionate number of refugees compared to more affluent
areas. Rosie Carter is the director of policy at Hope Not Hate which has for
decades been tracking far right sentiment in the UK. What we have seen is far
right actors and these kind of anti migrant activists who call themselves
migrant hunters. They have been really using this issue particularly around
asylum accommodation in hotels. So we started to see a lot more activity than we
have seen over recent years where far right has been very fragmented and in
large parts very dormant. But they have really galvanised around this issue. So
they quite often turn up to accommodation sites with cameras. They film
themselves. They create this content online. It feeds into far right channels,
into chat rooms and so on and it starts to agitate offline activity as well. So
they are also using it as a key recruitment tool. You have monitored over 250
visits to hotels where asylum seekers were living over the course of last year.
Are these protesters becoming bolder? Yeah, what we are seeing really with these
protests is a kind of tactic where the far right are an anti migrant activists
are jumping on local issues. So quite mainstream issues. These are issues nobody
wants asylum seekers to be housed in hotels. It is completely unsuitable for
asylum seekers themselves. We effectively have a situation at the moment where
the hospitality industry are running huge parts of our asylum system. So this
quite quickly becomes a point of local agitation where it is unsuitable. So what
we have seen more and more is the far right start to jump on these issues and
agitate locally. So that is what we saw in Kirkby where we later saw quite
violent scenes. The far right had been active in Kirkby quite a lot in the weeks
preceding. They had been leafletting the local area. They had staged their own
demonstration outside the hotel where the demonstration later took place. And
although the demonstration we saw in Kirkby was largely locally led, there were
a lot of local people who were very angry about the situation. It had really
been whipped up by the far right. So we are seeing them seize these local issues
in part to give themselves a more mainstream platform and to try and broaden
their appeal. So what would you like to see? What should happen now? We would
really like to see three things. So we would like to see the media and
politicians take real responsibility and drop this inflammatory language. But we
also know it is within their power to deal with it. So we want to see the
government deal with backlogs and they are taking steps to do this. We are yet
to see how effective that is. But we also need to see more suitable community
based accommodation that comes with integration packages and so on. But thirdly,
while people remain in unsafe and unsuitable accommodation, the Home Office
really need to ensure that the right safeguards are in place. At the moment
there is not enough information sharing between local authorities, between local
police forces and when things start to kick off, there is not safeguards in
place for people. Rosie Carter. Well a Home Office spokesperson has told us the
welfare of asylum seekers in our care is of the utmost importance and any
attempts to fuel resentment towards them are completely unacceptable. They also
say we engage with the local police and other stakeholders to identify any
community tensions and we continually review the security at asylum
accommodation sites with providers. Well I want to turn now to the right
Reverend Aaron Aurora, the area Bishop of Kirkstall. You said that it is the
words politicians use which are particularly inflammatory. Is that really the
biggest problem when there are people arriving in small boats to these shores
and it is just difficult for them all to be housed? I think it is one of the
problems Emily that we have seen. As we have just heard there have been rising
numbers of demonstrations here in Leeds, in Mansfield, in Rotherham, in the
north and yesterday in Skegness. I think what we saw yesterday was an open
demonstration by right wing groups such as Patriotic Alternative calling for and
using the language of politicians as a basis to exploit a crisis for which
asylum seekers are not responsible. I don't think it is new that we find a time
of economic hardship when people look to scapegoat, when they look to scapegoat
others for some of the challenges we are all facing in terms of rising prices
and energy costs. But what is clear is that it is not asylum seekers who are to
blame for that. But what we are seeing is a dangerous rhetoric and a dangerous
rise of far right groups for seeking to exploit those challenges and politicians
in their language supporting that approach. But isn't the discontent sort of
understandable when people clearly aren't happy at the way these asylum seekers
are being placed? And also they perhaps feel unfairly that their communities are
having to house them and are not perhaps more affluent ones? I think the
dispersal issue is absolutely right and it is one that is something that the
government needs to address. But I think blaming asylum seekers in hotels for
being there, when we have a broken system which has failed, that seems to be
encouraging people to go around as we saw in Nozli and in Kirkby, to smash up
police cars, to set vans on fire and to intimidate the asylum seekers
themselves. I think politicians who talk about invasion, who talk about having a
dream that there will be asylum seekers on planes being flown out to Rwanda,
provides a basis for the far right to main street. As Rosie was saying, I think
the danger here is that those who seek division in our communities, those who
would seek to create those wedge issues, are being emboldened by the language of
politicians who are using this as a culture war for political gain. So what is
the church doing then? I mean you have a strong moral as well as a political
choice. How is the church trying to address this problem and reduce the
tensions? I think the church has two opportunities. There is the opportunity to
advocate for political solutions, to support those who have come up with ideas
as we saw last week, of the issuing of humanitarian visas for instance, set
numbers of humanitarian visas for those coming here, also to support as we heard
in the interview from someone from Iran, to have a situation where after a
certain amount of time asylum seekers are unable to work after they have waited
say for six months or a year to contribute to the costs that come up from
administrating the solution and also paying towards being here and the dignity
of work. But fundamentally for Christians, I think there is a sense today is the
first Sunday of Lent, we hear about in our Gospel reading, Jesus facing evil and
I think Christians have a duty to join in and to pray on the streets and to
ensure in the words of Edna Burke that evil doesn't triumph because good people
are doing nothing. Bishop Aaron O'Rourke, thank you very much for joining us.
Well before we go, we asked you for memories of singing in a choir and we've
heard from Oscar Dogg on Twitter who says, my junior school, encouraged music
lessons, had a choir and orchestra, it was a wonderful experience enriching
young lives, opening doors to meet new friends and Mary O'Toole says great that
the new choral program is catching up with Spalding Parish Church which has been
welcoming and recruiting from local comprehensive schools for decades. Well
thank you very much for your comments. I'm Emily Buchanan, William Crawley will
be in the seat here next week. That's it for this week's Sunday. Sunday was
produced by Julia Paul and Dan Tierney, the studio managers were Jonathan Espe
and Karwin Griffith. Now the broadcaster, Hijema Kerny, makes the Radio 4 appeal
on behalf of Raising Futures Kenya. In primary school, Lynette was bright and
dreamed of becoming a successful Kenyan fashion designer when she grew up. The
future was exciting, until she was 11 when her parents died within six months of
each other. Lynette went to live with relatives in Nairobi where she thought she
would be cared for but she was sexually abused and became pregnant. She was
thrown out onto the street with nothing, a young girl alone and scared. She was
selling coffee on the street to survive when she heard about Raising Futures
Kenya. The charity runs free vocational and business skills training for young
people, including young mothers. Lynette joined the fashion and dressmaking
course. Alongside the training she got the counselling she desperately needed to
cope with the grief of being orphaned and then raped by someone she thought she
could trust. She received practical support like cooked lunches and period pads
so nothing stood in the way of her learning. And she had individual care from
her teachers that gave her the self-belief to thrive. After finishing her
training, Lynette worked at a local clothing shop. She earned enough to rent a
room and saved up for a sewing machine to make and sell her own clothes. Three
years on, Lynette runs her own successful business. She has a home for her twins
and she's able to pay for their school fees and for her siblings too. And she
mentors current students to become strong, independent business people too. I
recently spoke with Lynette and reflecting on her experience with Raising
Futures Kenya, she said something profound. She said, I'd never known a love
like it. I've travelled to Kenya and seen the challenges young people,
especially girls like Lynette face every day. The sharply rising cost of living,
unemployment and severe drought have forced people into extreme poverty, making
them vulnerable to abuse and exploitation. Raising Futures Kenya trains and
supports 900 young people every year who've experienced poverty and abuse,
equipping them with skills to find employment or start their own business. Â£25
can fund a month of training, counselling and support for a young person in
Kenya to have the chance of a different future today. You can give now. Just
search online for BBC Radio 4 Appeal or call 0800 404 8144. Or you can write a
cheque to Raising Futures Kenya and send it to free post BBC Radio 4 Appeal.
That's free post BBC Radio 4 Appeal. Please mark the back of your envelope
Raising Futures Kenya. Thank you. Thanks Neil. Good morning. Not a bad morning
for a quiet Sunday. We've got high pressure controlling things quite nicely. The
centre of the high is across Scotland. So western Scotland and Northern Ireland
is where we're likely to see the best of the sunshine. But it has been a cold
start here. Temperatures down as low as minus five degrees. The wind's still
travelling in a clockwise direction. So a north-easterly, a lighter wind than
yesterday. But nevertheless that's going to still push in a little more cloud
across the east coast of Scotland and eastern England. And already we can start
to see some cloud cover and some showers across northern England and maybe into
north Wales as we go through the day. But for central Wales, the Midlands south,
well it's going to be fine settled with some sunny spells. The cloud continuing
to remain well broken. And as a consequence it will be a degree or so warmer
than yesterday. Top temperatures of nine degrees across England and Wales. And
with lighter winds it will probably feel a little better as well. We see more
cloud through the night across England and Wales. So that's going to keep the
temperatures above freezing where we've got the clear skies. Once again a touch
of frost is quite likely. Into Monday, best of the sunshine again across western
Scotland and northern Ireland. We'll see quite a lot of cloud to begin with but
with a bit more of a breeze down to the southeast. Hopefully the cloud will
break up here as well. Highs are seven to ten degrees. That's it. Enjoy your
day. Thanks Louise-Laire. Paddy O'Connell. Good morning. It's great to see you.
Yes, you and Lisa together. It's like a fantasy Sunday brunch. Paddy, did you
know it's 900 years since St David was recognised as the patron saint of Wales?
No. We'll have that for Sunday worship. And then we'll be over to you for
broadcast. We'll never compete. Well, good morning to you. Very nice to be with
you again. The Prime Minister's broken cover to lobby for his Brexit strategy in
the Sundays. You could say it's another crunch week for our relationship with
the EU because that's what we've been saying for about 40 years. The boss of
Ukrainian Railways is our guest. He's apologised for delays to the schedule
after President Biden's journey aboard Rail Force One during a war. Brace for
fruit and veg shortages for weeks, say growers. We've sent our correspondent out
in the Netherlands and she can find tomatoes. I'm Michel Hasaincher.