TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-21H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 begins this Wednesday evening at 8 45 BBC news at eight o'clock almost 60
people have died after a boat carrying migrants sank off the coast of southern
Italy around 80 people survived but it's unknown how many were on board
Manilomissina an MP with Italy's largest party Flatelli de Tella says the only
way to end such tragedies is to stop the boats before they depart Fratelli de
Italia expresses its deepest sympathy for the up-teenth sea tragedy where women
and children are involved even newborn babies it's an endless tragedy that
strengthens our conviction that the only useful way to stop these tragedies is
to stop departures this is the only useful way to avoid deaths at sea. Rishi
Sunak will hold face-to-face talks with the president of the European Commission
Ursula von der Leyen tomorrow with expectations high that they'll agree a new
deal on trade in Northern Ireland negotiations have been going on for months the
democratic unionist party has refused to rejoin the power-sharing executive
because of objections to the current trade protocol police have been given more
time to question a man about the attempted murder of an off-duty officer last
week in total six people have been arrested in connection with the shooting of
Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell in Oma. Israel and the Palestinian
authorities say they'll take immediate steps to end a deadly upsurge in violence
officials at talks in Jordan also agreed to support confidence-building steps
and work towards a lasting peace but the Palestinian militant group Hamas called
the summit worthless football and Manchester United have beaten Newcastle United
2-0 to win the league cup at Wembley Celtic defeated their old firm rivals
Rangers 2-1 to claim the Scottish League Cup at Hamden Park and in a few hours
time millions of people are expected to tune into a boxing match featuring two
fighters better known on social media than in the ring Jake Paul the YouTube and
Instagram star takes on Tommy Fury the younger brother of the world heavyweight
champion Tyson Fury and former Love Island contestant BBC News on BBC iPlayer
step right in perfect timing the east end is ever changing what is this scooter
the order has entered the 1960s early eight years late but the midwives of
Nanata's house are forever constant you have a home here now and purpose and
people who love you call the midwife we will be with you every step of the way
watch on BBC iPlayer last word is at half past eight tonight celebrating the
lives of the American feminist and activist Dorothy Pittman Hughes the Hollywood
star Raquel Welsh the aeronautical engineer Ralph Hooper and the sports
presenter Dickie Davis that's in half an hour on Radio 4 but first here's Tim
Harford hello and welcome to more or less the grammatical stickler of the
statistical world this week our inbox was overflowing with suggested corregenda
and not just about the data datums thing although mostly about that we invite a
computational linguist to bring the data about data and we have a corregendum
about nurses pay we'll also be asking how much money you might raise if you tax
rich Welsh people and are there really 13 million menopausal women in the UK but
first our next story begins as do all good stories with justice secretary
Dominic Raab sending a tweet reoffending rates have fallen by over two
percentage points since the same period last year to 23.1 percent down from
almost 31 in 2009 10 this shows that our investment in drug rehab training in
prisons and offender employment is working and helping make our streets safer
that was in October and the rate now is very slightly higher but overall
reoffending rates are down from around 30 percent 10 years ago into the low 20s
today this all sounds like good news but it's also a bit surprising historically
reoffending rates don't tend to move very much to get a deeper understanding of
what this all means we spoke to Danny Shaw now an independent policing and crime
commentator but for many years before that a home affairs correspondent at the
BBC the reoffending rate isn't really the reoffending rate the reoffending rate
is really the proportion of people who have been released from prison or who are
sentenced at court to a community order or given a fine who within 12 months of
that event commit another offence for which they are convicted or given a
caution within that 12 months or a six-month follow-up period so as an example
if you're released from prison and not convicted of a crime cautioned or given a
police warning within 18 months then you counter someone who is a reoffending
success of course that doesn't mean all these people are back on the straighter
narrow some may be back to their criminal ways but just haven't been caught so
it's not really reoffending it's really reconviction or re-cautioning really
well so hmm i think if the government called it the reconviction rate i'm not
sure they would be bragging that it was falling well that's that's exactly my
point so a six percentage point drop would be significant if it was really a
drop in reoffending but it's actually a drop in reconvictions and re-cautioning
i accept that as a matter of definition what we are measuring is recautions and
reconvictions but i mean do we know that that is because the police and the
courts are being less effective at getting convictions or delivering cautions
rather than because fewer crimes are being committed well i think the first
thing to say is that the government hasn't presented any evidence any cause and
effect evidence to say that the fall in reoffending rates is because of
something that they are doing in terms of rehabilitation or better schemes in
prison or on probation that's the first thing the second thing is if you look at
some separate data from the home office which show the outcomes of offenses so
what happens to a crime after it's reported and recorded by the police in
england and wales what those figures show is that charge rates the proportion of
crimes that result in a suspect being charged or summons to appear in court have
plummeted they have gone down by 10 percentage points from 2014-15 which was a
year when the figures started to be calculated in a different way to the latest
set of figures which for the 12 months ending in september 2022 so 10 percentage
point four from 15.5 to 5.5 crimes resulting in a charge when that's a huge fall
it's a huge fall and you can't have a conviction without someone being charged
so the conviction rate is going to be even lower we've also seen a significant
fall in the proportion of crimes which result in a caution a simple caution
which has gone from 4.6 percent down to 1 since 2014-15 so that's a 3.6
percentage point drop so if the proportion of crimes that are leading to
cautions and convictions is falling then surely that must be having an impact on
the proportion of offenders who are recautioned and reconvicted i mean just to
rephrase those numbers you've got a situation of eight years ago out of every
seven offenses committed one would result in a charge and now it's out of every
20 offenses committed one would result in a charge i mean that that's just
that's an apocalyptic fall it's a huge fall and it's a real worry the well-
regarded crime survey of england and wales suggests that crime overall is
falling as the ministry of justice pointed out to us when we approached them for
comment but this doesn't change the fact that the number of charges and cautions
has fallen dramatically dragging down the charge rate so why is this happening i
think you have to look at the long-term trends and i think what we're seeing
firstly is that there is a changing mix of offenses and so we're actually we're
seeing a record number of sexual offenses and sexual offenses are more complex
in many cases to investigate and to solve they take longer i think one of the
key reasons is that the number of police officers fell dramatically from 2010
when it stood at almost 144 000 across england and wales to 2019 there was a
drop of around 21 000 police officers and that has clearly had an impact on the
police services capacity and capability to deal with these volume of offenses
and a mix of more complex offenses that take longer to investigate and solve
it's always been the case that some people will get away with it and it's always
been the case that you know there are probably some crimes that are just
impossible to solve or you're just not going to get the resources in place to
solve every shoplifting or every minor fraud but to have a charge rate that has
fallen to five and a half percent and a cautioning rate that's down to one
percent really just suggests that criminals have a license to get away with it
our thanks to danny shaw we put his points to the ministry of justice they did
draw our attention to an increase in police officers our 20 000 extra police
officers expansion of electronic tags and work to get offenders off drugs off
the streets and into jobs will help cut reoffending further now you may remember
danny shaw said the number of police officers had fallen by 21 000 so you might
wonder how these figures can both be true the 21 000 fall was a fall in full-
time equivalent police officers between 2010 and 2019 that actually happened the
20 000 extra police officers was a manifesto pledge in 2019 and it hasn't
actually happened yet in the most recent figures from january the government has
so far managed to recruit an extra 16 700 police officers but the ministry of
justice didn't engage with danny shaw's argument that falling reoffending rates
may be a reflection of the police bringing fewer charges and issuing fewer
cautions you're listening to more or less in mid january radio fours any
questions came from newport in wales one of the panelists was vaughn geffing
minister for the economy of wales and he was asked about whether the welsh
government would consider raising taxes to give extra funding to the health
service in wales you talk about 10 years of austerity of course the welsh
government does have tax raising powers it could use to raise more money for the
nhs is that something you're considering vaughn geffing responded the challenge
is that we don't think we can raise enough fairly enough to have a long-term
funding settlement for the service and some of this is about the pay context now
that is both about how would we do that the tax base for higher earnings in well
is actually really small there are 9 000 higher rate taxpayers you'd have to ask
basic tax rate payers virtually everyone to pay lots more phil jones from north
wales was listening and was surprised to hear only 9 000 people in wales pay the
higher tax rate he asked us can this be true well we asked nathan gower more or
less reporter and a man whose name sounds welsh even if he actually isn't hi tim
i should say that i do have a welsh auntie though hello auntie bev focus nathan
focus what is going on here okay prologue the income tax bands in wales are the
same as in england first the basic rate that goes from 12 and a half thousand
pounds up to 50 000 pounds at a rate of 20 then there's a higher rate which goes
from 50 000 pounds to 150 000 pounds at a rate of 40 then finally there's the
additional rate of tax which is the top rate of tax for those earning 150 000
pounds and above at 45 that's fairly new it was introduced in 2010 and before
that the higher rate actually was the highest rate the welsh government has the
power to raise whichever of these different rates it wants it could put the
basic rate up to 21 for example or the higher rate up to 41 but unlike scotland
it can't choose the income levels at which the different tax rates kick in
giving it less flexibility when raising tax revenue okay that all makes sense
but what about this claim that there are only 9 000 higher rate taxpayers that
sounds very low yes that figure is wrong vaughn getting misspoke he should have
said there were 9 000 additional rate taxpayers okay well sounds like an honest
mistake these things have happened especially since the higher rate isn't
actually the top rate of tax anymore so it's a bit of a silly name but it makes
me wonder nathan how many of these 40p rate or higher rate taxpayers are there
in wales there are 166 000 higher rate taxpayers in wales now i know what you're
going to ask is that a big number well not really there are 1.5 million people
who pay income tax in wales so that means only 11 percent of welsh income
taxpayers earn enough to pay the higher rate but if you look at england and by
comparison 16 percent of income taxpayers are in the higher rate tax bracket and
what about the additional rate again wales has a much smaller proportion only
0.6 percent of welsh taxpayers are in the additional rate bracket while in
england that proportion is over three times as large it's two percent wales has
proportionately less income to tax than england what this means is that as
vaughn getting said in order to raise a substantial sum of extra money for the
health service or anything else you'd need to increase tax for those basic rate
taxpayers in fact we can put numbers on this well i think we should we tend to
be quite pro numbers in this program on balance and there's actually quite a
cool website it's from the welsh senate the welsh parliament you can actually
play around with the welsh tax numbers and and see what happens if you raise tax
rates oh nathan with your big beard and your interactive welsh tax websites i
knew you were a rebel from the moment you walked into the bbc what can i say i'm
here to shake things up tim so for example if you theoretically increased the
additional rate of tax that top rate paid by people earning over 150 000 pounds
if you increased it by one p in the pound from 45 to 46 p you'd only raise an
extra eight million pounds in revenue and it's a similar story for the higher
rate tax band adding one p in the pound only raises 37 million right and how
much is the budget for the nhs in wales about 10 billion pounds a year which is
10 000 million pounds so eight million pounds here and 37 million pounds there
it's not really going to touch the sides that's right any substantial increase
from income tax would have to come from increasing the basic rate of tax if you
raise the basic rate by one p you'd bring in an extra 219 million pounds these
figures for extra revenue are best case scenarios assuming people don't change
their behavior in response to the higher tax of course whether you're in wales
england or scotland the same broad point applies if you want to raise a lot of
money you've usually got to put up the rate with the most taxpayers well thank
you nathan and thanks to harry thompson from the institute of welsh affairs for
interrupting his holiday to help with this item oh no the more or less mistake
siren and here comes the editor with a piece of paper what have we got here
seems it's about last week's nurse's pay item in that item we interviewed mark
pearson of the oecd about how nurse's pay compares with other european countries
and with average pay in the uk nurses in europe on average earn about 20 more
than their national average wage whereas in the uk they get pretty much exactly
the average now that's all true but we still think it was a mistake to broadcast
that claim which we did last wednesday because the oecd were comparing means
best practice when comparing salaries is to use the median that's the middle
value and that's because the mean can be and usually is skewed by the very high
paid according to the office for national statistics median nurses pay in the uk
is 37 000 pounds that's 13 above the median wage in the uk which is 33 000
pounds so why don't the oecd use the median for their analysis well they use the
mean because that's what countries agree to share internationally the oecd don't
have comparable data about medians we received an email recently from a loyal
listener who'd noticed a suspicious looking number about how many menopausal
women there are in the uk it's one that's reported all over the place for
example this headline in the guardian let's talk menopause because we are
failing 13 million women and it's not just in the media the number's also on an
nhs england web page about menopause in the workplace it is estimated that there
are around 13 million people who are currently perry or menopausal in the uk
according to the office for national statistics the female population of the uk
is around 34 million so that would mean that the menopause is affecting over a
third of all females josephine castley has been looking into this hello joe
hello um yes i have been and that figure is indeed used a lot the nhs website
does include a reference to well-being for women that's a charity that works on
women's health but when i contacted them they said that they'd never heard of
this figure but i worked out if you go back to the previous census from 2011 and
just count up all the female population over 45 you get a bit over 13 million 13
million the same as the number so the number does seem plausible at least but do
all women over 45 count as menopausal not really but the definition of
menopausal actually is quite unclear let's start with the definition of the
menopause um i know you like your classics and it comes from ancient greek so
maybe you can tell me an ancient greek test lovely so meno must be to do with a
monthly cycle that is periods pause must be uh don't tell me don't tell me um
does it mean pause only a true classicist would have been able to figure that
one out correct um so it's a woman's last period um but you won't know it's your
final period until after it's happened so i spoke to professor maryann lumsden
to help me understand some of these definitions she's ceo of the international
federation of obstetricians and gynecologists it is a curious definition being
retrospective and it is one year after the last menstrual period and so it is
not possible to be quite certain about menopause until one year has elapsed the
menopause then is technically a point in time rather than an interval of time so
what's menopausal well i spoke to several experts in this field and there was a
feeling that the term menopausal is vague and often ill-defined once you've had
the menopause you become post-menopausal in this phase there might still be
health implications from having gone through the menopause the acute symptoms
like hot flushing will usually resolve but there will be other issues that arise
from the menopause okay so this number of 13 million refers to the female
population over 45 and that includes post-menopausal women so we're starting to
count at 45 is that a good age to start good question let's start with the
average age of the menopause the mean age of the menopause is 51 in the uk-us-
europe and that means that women will go through the menopause between the age
of 45 and middle to late 50s but before the menopause you have the perimenopause
which is the period leading up to the menopause one of the cardinal signs of the
perimenopause of course the changes in menstrual regularity and these start
prior to the menopause setting in when the cycle length often gets less and then
it begins to lengthen and then this will prolong such that you get very marked
irregularity in menses different studies have different estimates for how long
the perimenopause lasts and it depends a bit on how you define it but around
four to eight years seems to be average but symptoms such as hot flushing can go
on past the menopause itself and into the post-menopausal period one of the big
studies that's looked at this in the u.s is called the swan study that looked at
how long women reported hot flushes and night sweats for and found that they
occurred for an average of 7.4 years in total gosh seven and a half years it's a
long time it is and other studies have found that to be lower for example five
years one reason that this study came up with a higher duration of symptoms
could be that they had a diverse sample around a third of the women they studied
were african-american and they found that african-american women reported the
longest period of hot flushes and night sweats a median of 10 years so is there
any way of working out from all of that how many women in the uk might be
experiencing these sorts of symptoms well there's not a good estimate out there
for this but we can do some rough calculations using the ons as population
estimates if we assume that women are perimenopausal for about four years there
could be around 1.9 million women experiencing this if we go for seven years of
symptoms you get around 3.3 million women well either way that's well short of
13 million exactly but this is pretty rough and all these numbers are averages
some women experience symptoms for much longer even over a decade and some women
don't have any problems at all their periods just stop thank you both to joe
swine cassley and also to professor mary ann lumsden when i finish an episode of
more or less i get on the train out of london exchanging the city life of mus
urbanus for the rural habits of mus rusticus so to speak but last week as i sat
contemplating sunset over the meadows as carefree as sin cinatus at his plow
more or less team brought me grave news there was unfinished business and
reluctantly i returned to restore order to the suddenly chaotic world of data
that's right our discussion last week on the latin roots of the word data has
thrown the more or less audience into a frenzy should data be treated as a
plural or a singular word is it data are or data is we had many many impassioned
emails sent to more or less at bbc.co.uk so many that we felt we simply had to
revisit the topic here's just a little taste of our inbox over the last week
words are stupid words are fun words can't put you on the run has the bbc told
you to change style don't why should ignorance triumph i'm afraid it often does
language changes get over it it hit a nerve with me largely because i was taught
latin by a master who obviously regretted his choice of career perhaps you could
think of processed data as mashed potato potatoes accountable mashed potato
isn't keep up the good work and stick to your guns the ft should be setting a
good example not to basing our language i still cling to criterion and bacterium
but one listener in particular raised a striking point well it just struck me as
strange that a segment on more or less wouldn't actually have any data on how
the noun data is being used in contemporary english sorry that's dr beth mallory
a corpus linguist at the survey of english usage at university college london i
spoke to her to get an expert opinion on modern trends of usage for the word
data first of all a bit of a grammar lesson if we distinguish between data when
it's used as a count noun and data when it's used as a mass noun count nouns are
words like bean and fact which have singular and plural forms so beans bean fact
facts whereas mass nouns are words like information energy air things like that
so tim you said that you think of data as a count noun so it's the plural of
datum so it would take a plural verb like are or show but i think what made me
get in touch was that i think that for most people data is a mass noun so it's
always used with a singular so it's like what like sand you wouldn't say sands
well you could say sands in if you were yeah exactly if you were in the middle
of the poem ozymandias but generally you would say sand exactly so yeah and i
think something like energy or air would be a good analogy for it so that's the
grammar what about the data okay so i'm a corpus linguist corpus linguistics is
a methodology that uses large electronic collections of what we call naturally
occurring language data we call them corpora so the singular is corpus the
plural is corpora which is slightly ironic another obscure latinate plural for
you there we'll let it pass and we use these corpora to conduct empirical
analyses so that we can draw conclusions about how language is actually being
used in reality so you just got a massive sample of text probably from the
internet right or maybe from books although they're merging together these days
aren't they yeah i mean mostly so the kind of really big modern corpora tend to
be running into the billions so the really big ones that we can use do tend to
be from the web yeah and you can figure out how often people say data is versus
how often people say data are um i suppose i should grip my teeth and and get
you to tell me what what did you find yeah so i mean across the different
corpora that i looked at it's around 80 percent data is versus 20 percent data
are and that seems to be replicated across different verbs as well so things
like data shows versus data show so 80 are taking the trendy view that the
financial times has just taken yes and 20 are stuck in the mud like me
interesting so i did also have a look at some specialized corpora and data does
definitely take a plural verb much more often in genres like academia so in
research and in journalistic english i did find some data on this from the 1990s
and there does seem to have been a change since then so the data i found said
that in academic writing it was 93 percent plural in the 1990s whereas now it
seems to be more like 5050 what does it tell us that the academic corpora has a
very different view to the web in general if anything i think it tells us that
this is becoming quite an elite form so people with a kind of traditional
classical education and an understanding of latin are much more likely to use
the plural verb with with data and that makes it an elite form speaking of the
elite the very best of the very best our loyal listeners have been in touch we
have a new corpora to analyze the more or less inbox they do not see it as
normal people do so two thirds of people who expressed a preference in our inbox
voted for data are and only one third went for data is of course this is an
unusual group and not only is it loyal listeners but it's loyal listeners who
felt that this was the most important thing they could do with their time but
what do you make of that yeah i mean i think there are several things going on
so yes these are people who have been exercised by this segment enough to you
know make note that their preferred usage is the one that's declining it's not
necessarily a representative sample of what's going on in the real world i don't
think yes i did love one listen email not everyone studied latin to know that
the romans used an a for the plural of many words ending in arm bacteria strata
data etc it's time for etymologists stick those irrelevant ancient usages up
their bar that's brilliant our thanks to dr beth mallory from university college
london and thanks to all the aus cultatorres fidelas that's loyal listeners of
course who sent in their ideas and that's all we have time for this week but
please keep those questions and comments coming in even if they're about numbers
rather than grammar they're all welcome via more or less at bbc.co.uk we will be
back next week and until then goodbye and more or less we'll be back on
wednesday morning it was presented by tim harford and the producer was john
bithrie bbc radio 4's award-winning matrimonial comedy returns our marriage
doesn't need rescuing no we're solid as a rock us too you starring roger alam
and joanna lumley why do you always think i don't know what i'm doing i don't
always think that except in this case i do navigating the ups and downs of
married life if you knew back then what you know now would you still have
married me i'm banning you from drinking riocca midweek the new series of
conversations from a long marriage your 6 30 comedy for wednesdays on radio 4
and bbc sounds now on radio 4 it's last word with kirsty lang on last word this
week good afternoon and a very warm welcome to world of sport which today offers
you a very entertaining blend of top level action with classic horse racing
world championship motorcycling tour de france cycling and international
athletics the much loved sports presenter dickey davis whose trademark look and
embrace of fringe sports on icv gained him a cult-like following in the 70s and
80s one of the greatest air and nautical engineers the 20th century ralph hooper
who invented a plane that doesn't need a runway the harrier jump jet and rackel
welsh the hollywood actress who became a 60s sex symbol after playing a
prehistoric cave woman in a fur-lined bikini but first dorothy pitman hues who
brought black issues to the feminist movement in the 1970s born in the racially
segregated south dorothy moved to new york after leaving school to pursue a
career as a nightclub singer but it was becoming a single mother which got her
involved in grassroots politics and she would later convince the newly formed
feminist movement to confront issues of poverty and racism but pippa hues is
probably best remembered for an iconic photograph taken in 1971 which showed her
standing side by side with the white feminist leader gloria steinem it was an
image that inspired her biographer the american historian laura l love it to
write a book about dorothy's extraordinary life there are two women in turtle
necks with their fists raised in the black power fist salute um but one of the
things that i noticed and this was true when they remade the photograph almost
70 years later is that uh dorothy has her hand clenched in such a way in which
the thumb is outside the fist because she is used to sort of the the black power
movement right she's used to sort of throwing that fist in the air steinem has
never done so and so her her finger is on the outside so if steinem had actually
thrown her fist she would have broken her dorothy never let me forget that i
didn't know how to make a fist that i had my thumb out instead of in we did a
version of the same photograph as old ladies and she was still telling me how to
make a fist there were a number of images but this one spoke to a kind of
biracial vision for the women's movement most of the women are in the world are
not white a tiny proportion of us are so it just seemed natural to look at women
as a group and when i was with a group of women that didn't look like the
country to say why and that's interesting that i think because we tend to
associate 60s and 70s second wave feminism in the u.s with with white women but
actually there you know there were quite a few black women involved right from
the start including dorothy pitman hues who who were who were critical weren't
they well absolutely so even though the organization the national organization
for women is named by polly murray an african-american lawyer who cannot get
employment in fact she was the one who came up with the model for the national
organization for women as a lobbying organization dorothy in the same way was a
pivotal figure and at the time dorothy is the much better known feminist at the
time that they meet steinem is a journalist who's much more comfortable writing
something than speaking in public and it's literally dorothy pitman hues who
talks glorious dine him into speaking in public she taught me that i didn't die
if i got up in front of an audience this was crucial she taught me that actually
the whole point was to speak the way we do in everyday life the way we do to
each other the way we do in the street not in an artificial way let's talk about
dorothy pitman hues's early life she grew up in the in the southern state of
georgia at a time when there were jim crow laws that you know mandated racial
segregation and she experienced violent white racism from an early age didn't
she she tells the story of her grandmother who wound up working as a cook where
she would hear about kukluks clan meetings her father at one point was
threatened he was an independent contractor he had his own lumber truck and that
gave him some sense of autonomy outside of the mill structure but he was often
sort of endangered because of that and you know even her own experience right
the fact that she had such a different experience from gloria in terms of access
to education yet in terms of of resources for herself in terms of schooling were
determined by those racist dynamics my name is dorothy pitman hues and i have
three children three children that i love deeply and the one thing i have
noticed is that too many women are being forced to leave their children home
alone while they work to be their families we need child care and we need it now
janelle mornay in the film the gloria's playing dorothy pitman hues her feminism
was rooted in the everyday struggles of working-class mothers and women of color
and in 1966 she founded the west 80th street daycare center in manhattan to help
working parents in her community as a nightclub singer she was at home during
the day and she saw children on her street who were sometimes being taken care
of by young older siblings and so she realized she was also she became a single
mother and so she used her own experience to then create initially a community
center and then during the war on poverty in the 1960s she could get some
funding to create a larger resource center for the office of economic
opportunity under john f kennedy she was always organizing demonstrations to
protest the conditions and welfare hotels for instance i mean just massive
massive demonstrations if you recognize discrimination in one form you're more
likely to recognize it in another but black women have always been in the
leadership of the women's movement i actually think she probably created one of
the first domestic violence shelters in new york city we don't have domestic
violence shelters set up in the united states until the very end of the 1970s
and early 1980s and this would have been in the 60s she was amazing she was
nurturing she was fierce she was clear um the problem as a historian is that she
was not somebody who kept her notes what do you think is dorothy pitman hues's
greatest legacy she put child care into the issue from the very beginning that
reconsideration of how we can understand the push for change right that changed
everything about our lives in terms of the way we think about ourselves we think
about our families we think about work we think about opportunity um i think it
was it was in part her legacy i knew that dorothy was absolutely fearless it was
always clear that if she was running the revolution you wanted to go to it
glorious steinem and the historian and biographer laura l love it on dorothy
pitman hues who's died aged 84 but now we go back to a time which may or may not
have existed introducing the fabulous racquel welsh the sensational star
discovery of this or any other year in one million years bc racquel welsh in her
breakthrough role a cavewoman she only had three lines in the film but the
publicity poster of her dressed in a very small animal skin bikini shot her to
global stardom one million years bc was directed by don chaffey who came out of
the british hammer horror films but he wasn't responsible for welsh's revealing
outfit so he would never give me anything to do you need sort of say well just
run from rock a to rock b racquel don't make a big meal out of it you know and
try to make any intellectual things so i would just get frustrated and i decided
no one was paying attention to anything in this thing anyway and i just sort of
thought that maybe you know i took out my little manicure scissors and just
snipped a little very small little teeny bits off this costume but sort of was
amusing you know and it kind of got sexier and sexier i figured it was one way
to survive a dinosaur movie you know what could i do and no dialogue or anything
sort of grunts and groans and then all of a sudden in the middle of the
production we got a telegram from the censor in in london because we were out in
the canary islands he said the strangest thing is happening can it be the miss
welsh's costume is getting smaller and smaller with each batch of rushes that
arrives in london racquel welsh was born joe racquel tejada in chicago to a
bolivian air and nautical engineer when the family moved to california young
racquel joined a youth theater group but her father was very strict when it came
to her appearance my dad always said you know that i should be very neat in
appearance and i wasn't allowed to wear ruffles or bright colors or have my hair
and curls like a lot of girls so i never really thought of myself as pretty
pretty but when i got a little bit older and the equipment arrived the uh well
then i thought gee this is pretty terrific maybe i ought to try it out a little
you know she got a scholarship to study theater arts at college but dropped out
after a year to marry her childhood sweetheart james welsh they had two children
by the time she was 20 i was just a baby it's just a teenager i had married my
high school sweetheart had two children you know bim bam just like that and uh
you know we just couldn't make it last her break came when the bond producer
cubby broccoli spotted her photograph in life magazine she screen tested the
thunderball but ended up in the sci-fi submarine saga fantastic voyage racquel
welsh spent much of her career arguing with directors who wanted her to take her
clothes off while at the same time accepting her status as a sex symbol with
good humor in her later role she showed an aptitude for comedy winning the
golden globe for best actress in the humorous swashbuckling adventure film the
three musketeers in 1970 she took on her most infamous role myra breckenridge
goulvedale's story of a transgender film critic who aspires to be a hollywood
sex symbol i am myra breckenridge whom no man will ever possess the new woman
whose astonishing history started with a surgeon scalpel i thought the book was
absolutely hysterical i mean it was so funny and i thought it was very
innovative so i was interested in how they were going to do this movie and then
i heard through the trades that annie bankcroft had turned it down so i thought
hmm i wonder what they're going for and a little bird told me i should call dick
sanic so i called dick sanic who i was under contract to fox i said look i don't
know exactly uh what kind of actress you're looking for in this role but i was
thinking if a guy was going to change his sex and wanted to be like a movie star
type of girl don't you think he might want to look like me voted by critics as
one of the worst films of all time myra breckenridge bombed at the box office
racquel welsh's co-star in the film was the legendary may west but the
relationship between the two actresses was by all accounts quite spiky she came
out and she had a long panoir on and she had a very very blonde wig on lots of
eyelashes oh you're a pretty young thing um what did you say your name was she
sort of extended her hand to me and i went to kiss the ring and with that one
false fingernail painted silver fell to the floor and i looked at the hand and i
thought i think she's a man i mean that is one of the persistent rumors about me
and about me too racquel welsh starred in more than 30 films and made countless
appearances on television including the muppet show oh racquel welsh 30 seconds
occurred miss welsh the quality of mercy is not straying it droplets as a gentle
rain upon the players beneath changing your image huh yes well i was toying with
the idea well you do what you want miss welsh on this show you don't have to
dress up in any of those scanty revealing costumes oh thank you scooter well not
unless you really want to you well oh please walk to him what about growing old
do you ever worry about that well i don't like the idea much no because i think
that when you grow older i think you're a little bit closer to checking out and
i don't like the idea of checking out because i have a pretty good life i don't
know life is a funny way of compensating for all those things at least i hope
when i get there that it will the hollywood actress racquel welsh has died aged
82 now stand by for a vertical takeoff the sound of a harrier jump jet one of
two iconic aeroplanes designed by the late ralph hooper the harrier named after
a bird of prey is a veto aircraft that means it can take off and land vertically
without needing a runway his other claim to fame is the rafs hawk used by the
red arrows display team ralph spencer hooper was born next to an raf aerodrome
in hornchurch in east london in 1926 he was the son of herbert a senior civil
servant and his mother was sheila spencer whose forebears included the 16th
century poet edmund spencer so colin chandler was a close colleague and a former
divisional managing director of british aerospace from a very early age he was
fascinated by flight anything that flew fascinated ralph and in his spare time
he learned to fly he was determined to understand what he might have to design
so he was absolutely absorbed in flight it really caught him apparently he
showed early promise as an engineer using his mccarno construction set to link
his alarm clock to his bedroom light was he naturally invented oh very yes he
was yes he was very much so he was such a remarkable man very self-effacing john
fielding emeritus professor of aircraft design at crannfield university where
ralph hooper was one of the first aeronautic design students when the department
opened soon after the second world war he was fascinated by the problems of
aircraft design and he was innovative in how he solved those problems and that's
one of the wonderful things about him but he was inspirational for some of my
students i took them to london to meet him in about five years ago he was very
elderly then and he gave him a master class on aircraft design and they were
fascinated with what will ralph hooper be remembered for most in the field of
aeronautical design most of all for the harrier there was a lot of uncertainty
in the industry in the sort of 50s and he was in future projects at hawker semi
aviation at kingston he began to think that vistol would be a game changer for
military aircraft you know either vertical short takeoff and landing he thought
that would make a difference i was thoroughly bored with what i was supposed to
be doing and started to sketch and see if we could make a useful airplane outfit
in the original form so i think we had three attempts which failed and he got in
touch with the engine company and they were fiddling around with engines with
more than one nozzle normally only got one and they were looking at one two
three he kept working at it and came up with a concept for nozzles from the
engine of course that gives equilibrium to the aircraft if they're spread about
you got that idea going managed to get some funding from the company and others
nato even and the u.s government eventually that led to proving the concept with
with you know with a sort of prototype type aeroplane called the kestrel that
was the birth of the harrier if three other country with an aircraft industry
tried to get a vistol aircraft failed only we had one that's because we had
ralph hooper the harrier can pack a mighty punch with its small arsenal of
strike equipment delivered with the agility of a helicopter and the speed of a
supersonic fighter it was born really in the in the cold war and one of our
fighters and bombers were relied on very long runways which are very vulnerable
to attack so his idea similar to a helicopter well can we take off vertically
and land vertically so in fact harriers could sometimes be operated from middle
of woods where they could not be seen and then they took off vertically then at
a certain point they then transitioned to horizontal flight and then became a
very agile jet fighter the aircraft has been flown at speeds in excess of mark
one powered by bristol siddly pegasus engine and its range is comparable with
conventional aircraft but it has the plus of being able to operate from very
restricted forward strike areas with speed and surprise some believe that the
the harrier was key to to britain's victory in the in the forklans war don't
they i think that's true the seahouse a slightly different aircrafts than a raw
air force if you were in full flight and swivel the engines down it stopped it
stopped in the air but with full power still going so an enemy conventional
aircraft went past and the pilot then quickly got the engines to into reverse
again got behind the enemy aircraft and final missed up squadron leader martin
perd red one bringing the red arrows up the mouth always a huge favorite with
the crowds here you can hear them cheers the red arrows flying team has become
synonymous with big events like the jubilee wowing the crowds with their perfect
formations and black colored smoke and it was ralph who led the design team in
1968 it was a competition and hawkers won it but you know with a very superior
plane and it first flew in 1974 and you know it went on and on and on over a
thousand were built 307 were sold in the united states navy the navy of the
country the most powerful aerospace industry in the world bought a conventional
british jet trainer because it was so good it was a superior design and one of
the ideas that ralph came up with was we should offer guarantees of reliability
and maintainability to the royal air force but we did we got bonuses for
achieving it you seem to be saying that not only was he a brilliant aircraft
designer he was also a good manager a good team leader very much so he's a very
rounded person he wasn't a sort of reclusive often later on um when we were
nationalized we still picked division was formed i was a managing director and
he was a technical director we had to work with another design department from
the north of england bruff in fact the old blackbird company where he started
and he made all that work it was a good manager a good team leader i understand
he was a good ballroom dancer as well yes we used to celebrate contracts we had
a party in a local restaurant down the front upstairs got him on the dance floor
and he was clearly a very good dancer you know the secretaries of dancing were
the men you know i just don't know why he never got married he never he never
answered that question where would you put him in the in the pantheon of british
aircraft designers well i think uh you know the same as um it's a project page
with a camera the same as mitchell with a spitfire so sydney cam with a hunter i
mean ralph is up there among them but if you said that to him he wouldn't know
how to answer aircraft designer ralph hooper who has died aged 96 aged 96 this
week last words also go to hugh hudson who went from directing glossy tv adverts
to making movies his debut feature was the low budget british sporting drama
chariots of fire which won four oscars in 1982 and became a global box office
success and hillary alexander the eccentric ebullient and much-loved telegraph
fashion editor who was one of fleet street's first fashion reporters and is said
to have coined the term supermodel the familiar sound of saturday afternoon
sports on i tv dickey davis was the face of world of sport for almost 20 years
until the mid 80s with his snazzy suits sideburns mustache and trademark stripe
of white hair he became one of britain's best loved sports presenters inspiring
comedy sketches and a satirical song dickey davis eyes the sports presenter jim
rosenthal was a friend and colleague whenever you saw dickey at the start of
world of sport it was come on in come and join me we're gonna have a wonderful
time with that little smile and twinkle and you felt warm and you felt
comfortable and you felt when dickey was there the world was a decent place
england clinching the title they shared last season with 100 record scottland at
the moment in second place having played their three games northern island in
third place with those two points dickey's deadpan introductions to the more
esoteric sporting events was a source of joy to comedians like benny hill we've
got sailing from hailing we've got sledding from reading shooting from shooting
and counting from dickey was born richard john davis in wallacy on the whirl and
went to older shaw grammar school after doing national service he did a variety
of jobs including spending 10 years at sea working on cruise ships where amongst
other duties he would read out bingo numbers it wasn't a traditional route to
sports journalism he used to serve behind the bar in a pub he worked in butlins
as a sort of red coat welcoming people and he worked on the queen mary as a
purser as well and he had a distinctive look about him didn't he he did indeed
and and i think that probably developed over the years really in that jimmy hill
advised him to change his name from richard davis to dickey davis because it
rolled off the tongue and he also dressed very well and very fashionably in
those times although you look back at some of the some of the the jackets and
ties and you raise a quizzical eyebrow these days and they had the distinctive
white bit at the front of his hair as well but nobody really knew whether the
white was natural or and the dark stuff wasn't or vice versa the greatest has a
few words for us too i'm glad my fans in london can see me in my last days as
you see i'm getting old now you're as well as took his man in one round and we
take off with a human fly dickey davis will probably be best remembered for
presenting itv's world of sport for 20 years from 1965 to 85 what did he bring
to that particular role because it wasn't it wasn't an itchy one was it because
he was up against grand stand and then in those days the bb used to buy up all
the rights to major sporting events leaving itv to to cover what one might
politely call more sort of fringe or minority sports fringe or minority sports
at best really yes the bbc ruled the roost and itv had to find something
different had to find alternative sports and had to find someone that the
viewers would like and would go along the ride with and from 12 15 until five
o'clock itv sort of ambushed the bbc and did very very well to the extent that
when the wrestling which the bbc wouldn't touch with the longest bargepole you
could see came on at four o'clock upwards of 10 million people watched if you
watched television at all regularly between 1955 and 1988 you just couldn't
avoid the wrestling it was water cooler tv before that invented water coolers i
was probably perceived as the next presenter and a bit of a threat if you like
didn't stop dickey helping me as much as he could and we went we were going
through the running order for world of sport and we came to the wrestling at
four o'clock and it was typical sort of smart ass where i went oh well that
would be the highlight of my broadcasting career linking to that and dickey
grabbed me by the arm and said look rosie whatever you do do not diss the
wrestling itv start at four o'clock build their audience there upwards of 10
million and it goes all the way through to saturday night that wrestling pays
your wages and presumably for those people who didn't watch itv on a saturday
afternoon back in the 70s and 80s i'll remember dickey from things like fa cup
finals and he did several olympic games didn't he as well oh sure yes i mean
dickey was it did his homework he was he was he was multi-skilled he was an
effortless magnificent all-rounder really and but beneath it all there was a
hard worker too there was someone who never was never unprepared he was a friend
of yours as well as well as a colleague i mean what was he like as a friend what
you saw that was what you got you would always say good morning to everybody in
the office by name he wasn't struck by his own stardom at all you'd never see
dickey davey saying don't you know who i am not a chance he was a very
unassuming man he was a huge star in that time as well and and i think the
outpouring of affection from dickey um since his death was announced it's been
just unbelievable and millions of views on twitter alone that coverage across
the media has been huge and i haven't seen a single negative word about dickey
davey's and that is absolutely remarkable and it's a testimony to the way he
lived his life a real gent a true gent he didn't make many mistakes but he made
one horrendous mistake but he was coming to the end of world of sport and he
said of course tomorrow great lineup on itv we've got some cup soccer for you
and it came out of something completely different and it was it was a long-
standing joke for every piece and what did he say what did he say work it out
it's quite easy and so that that little mistake stuck with dickey but he laughed
at it along with all of us the sports presenter dickey davis has died age 94 and
next week we'll feature the life of another sporting giant football commentator
john matson but this week's last words went to aeronautical engineer ralph
hooper hollywood actress raccoe welsh and the women's rights activist dorothy
pitman hues don't forget to search out the last word podcast on bbc sounds so
last word was presented by kirsty lang and produced by neil george lem sisay is
a one-off are you the poet a woman said to me in the street lem sisay isn't
anyone else now i can say she said that i finally met benjamin zephaniah lem
sisay explores uniqueness you are a visible original apinnacle of miracle we're
talking about being the one and only non-graduate in the room you just said you
failed you are the lord mayor of vanchesta lem sisay is the one and only are you
that poet tony walsh on friday mornings at 11 30 on radio in four