TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-00H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at 11 o'clock. Police say they've found a body in their search for a
missing baby. The child's parents, Constance Martin and Mark Gordon, were
arrested in Brighton earlier this week on suspicion of gross negligence
manslaughter. Detective Superintendent Lewis Bassford and the Metropolitan
Police made the announcement at a news conference this evening. It is my very
sad duty to update this afternoon. Police officers searching a wooded area close
to where Constance and Mark Gordon were arrested discovered the remains of a
baby. A post-mortem examination will be held in due course. A crime scene is in
place and work at the location is expected to continue for some time. Friends of
the former Health Secretary Matt Hancock say he's considering legal action after
the Daily Telegraph alleged that, in the middle of April 2020, he rejected
expert advice to give Covid tests to everyone going into care homes in England.
He denies the claim. The Telegraph has obtained Mr Hancock's WhatsApp messages
from that period. China has criticised the FBI for saying a laboratory leak in
Wuhan was the most likely source of the Covid-19 outbreak. A Chinese foreign
ministry official said the US intelligence community had a history of misdeeds
and deception. The Prime Minister of Greece has blamed what he called tragic
human error for last night's train crash. At least 43 people died and more than
70 are in hospital after a head-on collision. The transport minister has
resigned. Police say they have charged a local stationmaster with manslaughter
by negligence. A full investigation is underway. Scuffles are broken out in the
Israeli city of Tel Aviv between police and demonstrators who staged what they
called a day of disruption to protest against proposed changes to the judiciary.
Police used stun grenades and water cannon and deployed officers on horseback. A
spokeswoman for the Duke and Duchess of Sussex has confirmed that the couple
have been asked to vacate their residence at Frogmore Cottage on the Windsor
Castle estate. It follows unconfirmed reports that the King wants Prince Andrew
to move in. BBC News. This is BBC Radio 4. In a quarter of an hour, John Holmes
is award-winning the skewer. But first, we're off to Manchester to eavesdrop on
taxi driver conversations in this new series of comedy shorts. Where to, mate?
Hello. Hiya. Hiya. You OK with those? You got the cases? Yeah. You alright with
them? He's got them. OK. I don't like to get the bottom of my jeans wet. I
understand that. Yeah. Try this. I've got pleather. You've got what? Pleather.
What's pleather? Well, have you not tried them, these trousers? What? It's like
pleather. Oh, is that a mixture of leather and plastic? Yeah, leather and
plastic. Gosh, I'd never heard of them. Yeah. That's lovely. Can you use wet
wipes on them? You can. You can rub anything on them. Goodness. We're going on
holiday, aren't we? I'll tell her. Manchester Airport, please. Session, OK?
Where are you, 02? 24, where are you? Where are you, 15? Anyone Oxford Road?
Anyone Wilbaham Road? 02? OK, go to Hardy Avenue. She bloody called me three
times already. Windows 98 is quicker than Tariq. If she waits any bloody longer,
you're going to be picking up a ghost. 09, OK, come back now. Hamad, clean your
cab. It smells like the tatti of Tom Salek's. Come on now, best job. Where are
you off to, Noise? We're going to Ayia Napa, somewhere we've not been before.
Gosh, I've heard of that. Do they have, like, big parties late at night? Well,
we won it. Are you kidding? Yeah. How did you win it? Do you want to tell them?
Yeah, so we had this energy drink and... That's not right. It was a whacking
wheel. Oh, yeah. There's a competition on it. I'll tell them. I wouldn't
normally choose to go to Ayia Napa. We always go to Gran Canaria. Yeah. You
can't go wrong with it. Yeah. Oh, we go mad, you know. Yeah. You should see us.
Really? Honestly. He goes to me, do you want a drink? Yeah. I go, what time is
it? He goes, 9am. It doesn't matter, does it? Of course it doesn't matter,
you're on holiday. We're on holiday. You're a different person. Of course you
are. That's what I love about it. Of course you are. Get me air-braided. Get you
air-braided? Got me air-braided. On the beach? Four braids, I was. Oh my
goodness. I can imagine you actually. I was whipping my hair about. Whipping it
around. Then took my eye out. Oh, it's beautiful, isn't it? Yeah. I feel ten
years younger when I go away. Have you had one of those henna tattoos? Oh, yeah.
Beautiful, aren't they? I got one. With a dolphin, weren't it? Big, massive,
leaping across his chest. I've never seen a dolphin one. You've been chased by a
snake. Okay, everybody, whoever brought the mayor back from the opening of Home
Bargains, he's left his giant scissors in the back seat. Yeah, I know what you
mean, mate. Cheers, lad. So you're looking smart there in your suit. Thanks very
much. Important occasion then, yeah? Job interview. Oh, well. It looks smart
enough. It looks all right, doesn't it? I'm not big on fashion, but to be
honest, I like it. I'm thinking, you know, 70s look. Do you need to revise or
anything? Are they good about asking you questions? Do you want to focus on
that? I'll tell you what, let's pretend I'm the manager of this. Yeah, yeah,
yeah. Okay, I'm the manager, right? Tell me about yourself. Well, what's it
going to do with you? No, no, no, no, no. Tell them about the food. Oh, the
food. What's the food like? It's all inclusive. We always have table 16, because
he doesn't like odd numbers. Okay. Oh, they're spread, they have everything. All
kinds of potatoes. They have every type. They have roast potato, jacket potato.
Yeah. You can imagine. Oh, I can. Just mashed potatoes. Did they have dolphin
oil? I don't know what they are. It's the very thin ones. Very, very thin.
They're like crisps. Oh, really? Yeah. On top of something. I can't remember
what. A white sauce. Roast potatoes. It's French anyway. Jacket potatoes.
Saut√©ed potatoes. Fried potatoes. Sweet potatoes. Boiled. Boiled potatoes. Do
they have them tiny ones? Chips. New potato. New potatoes. Leek potato. Hash
brown. Smiley faces. What else did they have? They have mosquitoes in Ayia Napa.
I've not even thought about that. Yeah. I haven't even thought about it. That
spoils things sometimes. They only go for certain types of blood, don't they?
They do. They go for Irish descent a lot of the time. Is that right? Yeah.
They're really anti-Irish. It's like my mum. Is your mum anti-Irish? No, she
does get bitten by mosquitoes. Oh, okay. Zero nine. Sort your tyres. It's like
they've had a Brazilian. Would you say you're a team player? I am a team player
and I can also work as an individual. Do you think you could lead a team? Yes.
Thank you. Now, walk me through your resume. What? Your resume. You know, your
CV. Oh, the resume. Yeah. Don't say resume. It's resume. A CV. Have you got a
CV? No. Okay. I can tell you what I've done. Right. Well, that's good. Right.
First off, I was in the John Doe Persuasion. That was the first band I was in.
Then I was in the Sausage Cat Blues Band. Have you got anything that's not band
related? No. No, no, no. I have. I remember one time I was a lookout. No, don't
mention that. So, they might ask this. What do you think you can bring to this
company? Pastries. I can get a phenomenon as well, you know. Just a big bag of
them. What are your greatest strengths? Apart from you've just mentioned maybe a
few there, but what would you say your greatest strength, sir? I'm just too damn
sexy. I don't know. I don't know. Maybe you shouldn't be going for this at all.
I really don't know. Sometimes, he has a pudding while I'm having a starter.
Yeah. He starts. Start with a trifle usually. He's never back. Everyone's
queuing for starters to budget. He starts a pudding. No queue. It makes me
laugh. No queue. Everyone's queuing. He's clearing up the trifles. He's quite
genius really. Clearing up the trifles. I'll tell you what, the person who first
does that scoop out, that is a nice man. I'm with you. It's like freshly fallen
snow, isn't it? You think, oh, I'm going to be first to jump in that. He's in
it. Yeah. You can tell when it's tin fruit or fresh fruit. Yeah. Because
cocktail fruits, what's all those funny grapes? They're not proper grapes.
They're not grapes. It makes all the sponge too watery. I agree. They're not
olives, are they? But they're like olives. They're not olives, Joe. What are you
saying that was? What a stupid thing to say. But there's as much as I can say.
What a stupid, stupid thing to say. I mean, it's Spain. They might do it
different. But that's culturally insensitive, that. Putting olives in a trifle.
They're not animals, Joe. Just to settle an argument, please. The Sharknado
movie was not based on a true story. I Googled it. Jurassic Park 2, The Lost
World, that was. But not dinosaurs. It was cows. They went crazy. Because some
people like a routine, you know, done in 95. I don't want to do it, mate. I
don't want to do this job interview. I don't want to go. Well, why don't you?
Why are you going for it then? I've got to do it for me nan, you know. Well, do
it for your nan. I mean, it's like me. It's like with my mum. My mum's got no
one. So I do all the shopping for her. And she's in the 70s now. I'm telling you
now, now they're closed to bingo all. All the old people hanging around on the
streets. And they are causing problems. They're left to their own devices. Where
do they go without the bingo? They just sit around in the car park, playing
Daniel O'Donnell all day, just throwing stones at people and stuff like that.
It's ridiculous, you know, because they're all on drugs. Yeah. They're vicious,
man. Yo, Saj, you got to pick up the ASBO lady. Who's that? 19 Wyvern Road. Oh,
no, chief. Kids are naughty, man. I know they're naughty. She got so many kids
all with like weird names. Yeah, man. She names them after trainers. One of the
kids was smoking weed in my car. About six years old she was, I swear to God,
right? And she used like a Pokemon card as a roach material. That'd be Reebok.
Okay, look, pick her up and take her to her ADHD meeting. Eggs fried, boiled,
scrambled. Hollandaise. Hollandaise. I don't think we've had that. Yeah, it's
with post. Has it? When have you had that? When have you had Hollandaise? Oh, is
that when we worked together? Mm-mm. Oh, sorry, I was just going to ask you.
It's all right, you can ask. You can ask. I don't mind. So you've, are you? This
is our second time around. Oh, okay. We've been married before. Oh. I wore the
same suit. You did? So what, did you just miss each other? Not really, no. No.
The marriage ended. I tried the single scene. And that's where you had the
Hollandaise, wasn't it? Yes, it was. And we met by accident, didn't we? What are
the chances of that? On the Tinder, yeah. Well, I didn't. It won my picture and
it won her's either. Gosh. So you've put two pictures that weren't yourselves
and then you've turned up and you are yourselves. Well, it was disappointing,
I'll be honest. But then you think, second time, just looking for someone that's
solvent, really, aren't you, with a basic grasp of DIY. That's absolute, do you
know what, I couldn't have put it better myself. Rule nine, I have a burp
coming. Tell me is this a good one? Oh, I swallowed it, never mind. I mean, if
you've found somebody, don't get on your nerves. Just stick it out now. It's
just a race now, isn't it? Who dies first and who gets the house? That's right.
I mean, if he died, I wouldn't be able to turn on the cell. Exactly. Which is
why I thought, well, you know, one of the reasons I thought, get married again.
How is it feeling? Does it feel different? A lot different for me. How is it
different for you? I just feel as though I can say more. She's very good, me,
no? She's got fire in her. You look at her and you think, I would love to be
that old woman. You know, you still have the fire when she's 80-odd, you know? I
mean, I don't think I want to be like my mum, because she's a bit miserable.
Where's she miserable? She's not been going out as much. Well, you should cheer
her up, man. Get her outside. Break her into it now and then. Drive the car a
couple of hundred yards down the road, let her out, drive off, let her come
home, and then just do it every day a little bit further away. Drive off, she
comes home, makes her own way back. That's how she'll learn how to enjoy the
outside world again. Fabulous entertainment in the evening. Really? What's her
name? She does the cruising. Oh, I know. She went on loose women. She does the
cruising. Oh, you're talking about the Northern lady, aren't you? Jane. Jane
MacDonald. Jane MacDonald, but not her. The drag version of her. Shane. Shane.
Shane MacDonald. Same hair, but beard. Oh, fabulous. Because he does others, you
know, the Bee Gees. You know what? You're stupid, you are. I think sometimes you
just make things up. My husband was like that, you know. What made things up?
Yeah. Was he one of those lamp shaders? What's a lamp shader? You know those men
that do things to you and then say that they're not? Like turn the central
heating up and then say that they're not. Oh, yes. Yeah, but I've read about it.
It's called lamp shading. I need to read up more. Lamp shading. No, it's not.
Gas lighting. That's it. Gas lighting. I got them mixed up. OK, so. Saj, where
are you, man? The Hasbro lady's been complaining. Where's D'Eodora? She just
attacked me again, chief. Attacked me from behind. Strap her into her car seat
like Hannibal Lecter. She's down the crane in my ear, bro. Yeah, well, that's
your fault. You should have patted her down before you got in the cab. She tried
to strangle me with her shoelace. Take the shoelaces off them, don't you, before
they get in the cab. Or you make them wear flip-flops. We tried that. Have you
tried driving with a flip-flop in your face? I swear down, this job is getting
dangerous, bro. Because, like you, mate, you must be... You're the kids of the
70s, you know? Yeah. We didn't have things like internet. We didn't have things
like boosts or anything like that. We couldn't even afford games when I was a
kid. We created our games. We used to play the deer hunter. Yeah, based on the
film, yeah? One of us would be Christopher Walken. Oh, excellent. One of us
would be Robert De Niro. We didn't have guns, obviously. So what we used to do
is get the toaster, two forks, I'd hide the plug, and nobody knew whether it was
switched on or not as you're jamming forks in. You know, it was a bit of fun,
Ty. It was simple fun, wasn't it? Reminding all drivers, no swearing at
customers in any language, even if they are dicks. Have you got your masks with
you for the plane? No. Did you not? I didn't. Did you pack them? Joe... I didn't
pack them. He's doing it again. He's gaslighting me, isn't he? I've had enough
of this. Honestly, I feel like you're ruining me. I'm not. I'm not. I'm not.
I've been on holiday before I've even got there. I'm not, you're not. You are. I
have a nice thing, you decide to ruin it for me. I'm not doing it. You are
doing. I'm not. I've got a couple of masks. In the boot, you can have them. I've
not even worn them. Thank you. Thanks. You're welcome. There we are. You know
what? I was going to buy some perfume on the plane and I don't even think I want
it now. It's very expensive, the perfume on the plane. See what I mean? It's
fierce. OK, we do not take flowers off a bent lamp post, right? They're not free
flowers if they're on a bent lamp post. This is why I can't wait to be old.
They've got a lot of truth about them. They've got no filter. What do you think
the age is? What's that sweet spot? From being a pest to being a character.
Yeah. 68. 68. Which is also the breakthrough year for science fiction. Planet of
the Apes in 2001 came out. 68. Just on the cusp. Yeah. You're not completely
crazy. You have that bit of respect. Leave him. Leave him. He's old. He's paid
his dues. He's attacked somebody. He's set fire to that school. I'm old, I'll do
what I do. Yeah. That could be my life. I could be that character. Get away with
it, mate. You can get away with all kinds. I'm looking forward to it. I'll tell
you what, really am. I don't even know if I want to go now. It'll just take five
minutes. Calm down and think of all the potatoes we can have. But we're not
going there, are we? We're not going Gran Canaria. Cos we're going to Ayia Napa.
Cos we want... I think they'll have potatoes. Yeah, well, we'll see, won't we?
We'll see if they have potatoes. We don't know what they're going to have, do
we? And if we'd have saved up, we could have gone to Gran Canaria and Ayia Napa.
But, no, here we are now, going on a three-day holiday somewhere I don't know.
And... You mentioned the competition. Well, I had to, cos we would have ended up
going on no holiday. Jo. Cos you've lost your job. Just may I ask one thing? Are
you both called Jo? Yeah. Cos I was getting my eye confused. It's been very nice
to mate you. Nice to mate you. Get that perfume in. How much is it? I can't look
at you. Where To, Mate? starred Joanne Wright, Peter Slater, Nina Gilligan, Andy
Salthouse, Keith Carter and Abdul Afzal. It was produced by Karl Cooper,
directed by Jason Wingard and was a BBC Studios production. Now on Radio 4, the
news remixed as a current affairs comedy concept album with some very strong
language, John Holmes' multi-award-winning The Skewer. BIRDS CHIRP Out of the
village, we carry dead. Out of the village, we carry dead. A primitive man lived
and died by his harvest. We carry dead out of the village. Across the country,
fruit and veg aisles are increasingly bare. On an island famous for its fruit
and vegetables. It is our most earnest belief that the best way of preventing
this is to offer to our God of the sun the most acceptable sacrifice that lies
in our power. A lot of people would be eating termites right now. Thank you,
God, and heaven, even these people can't be that mad. Orchards, accept our
sacrifice. We're now joined by the Environment Secretary, Therese Coffey. Oh,
God! Oh, Jesus Christ! Come, it is time to keep your appointment with the wicker
man. No, no, dear God! No, Christ! The Prime Minister is expected to travel to
Disney World in Florida as he tries to persuade a mythical tree-climbing elf to
back his new deal. Northern Ireland is in the unbelievably special position in
having privileged access to the European Union single market. Nobody else has
that. Well, we used to. Remember that before you fucked it up? Richard, I want
to go! Police in Peru have discovered Matt Hancock inside the cool bag of a food
delivery worker. The man said Mr Hancock belonged to his father and called it
his spiritual girlfriend. America says the Wuhan virus most likely arose from a
laboratory wound. Why, duh! A number of the papers feature a picture of a
laughing Princess of Wales beating 480 children. Passengers on board a flight
heading to Manchester were given the rare opportunity to change their legally
recognised gender and the pilot performed an unusual manoeuvre to give everyone
a glimpse. And Queen Elizabeth's image is appearing for one last time in a fuel
made from old cooking oil and takeaway coffee cups. Together, we have changed
the original protocol and are today announcing the new Windsor Framework. I see
that you, like so many before you, have discovered the delights of the mirror of
Ebershed. It does what many said could not be done. So then it shows us what we
want. Goods will flow freely. Whatever we want. Sovereignty for the people of
Northern Ireland. Yes. I look forward to having that dialogue with Unionist
representatives of all parties. Hello. Tell me, what do you see? They will see
that this, I believe, does address the concerns that people had and it is a huge
step forward. Remember this? Men have wasted away in front of it, even gone mad.
The, in the Northern, the Irish Sea. Has Brexit finally got done? Let the feast
begin. This is the incredible story of the world's ultimate disaster. Britain
could face a salad shortage for another month. Many of them still have empty
shelves. Empty, empty, empty. Limiting purchases of tomatoes. Across this great
nation, almost everyone has been affected in one way or another by this terrible
tomato onslaught. Faced with this unprecedented menace. The supermarket bosses
are telling people not to panic. Tesco has joined Alvi, Asda and Morrison in
introducing ration. Lives are shattered. This is just the start. Disruption
could last until May. The nation is in chaos. Death and destruction sweeps the
country. What's that unraveled and terrifying mystery? There's no food to be
had. Of the tomatoes. The seeds are sown, but the UK's tomato harvest is yet to
bear fruit. Even the mere mention of the word is sufficient to induce panic.
Tomato. Aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaah! Head of brand, Siobhan Sharp, is in the ideas
space with her creative team. This is just fantastic to be here. What we're
looking at here is an idea so good, you don't just want to marry it, you want to
take it home and fuck it. That's what I'm here to set out today. A new mission-
driven Labour government. I love this. Aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaah! Your mission, should
you choose to accept it. Mission one, same old tedious bollocks. Do another one.
Mission two. Totally, I'm totally good at that. Sit in a basket. Do another one.
Mission three. You're cool. Everyone gets a free pair of shorts. Shorts are
good, we love shorts. Do another one. Mission four. Shorten it. Turn up to
Parliament in a traxi. Holy shit. And five. Okay. Nodding dogs. In branding
terms, it's really boring. Well, hold on just a minute, what if I do it like
this? The most important time of a Mormon kid's life is his mission. And that's
what I'm here to set out today. A chance to go out and help heal the world,
that's my mission. Five national missions. Soon I'll be off in a different
place. Missions for the future. Helping the whole human race. Missions for a
mission-led government. I know my mission will be something incredible. Hello,
my name is Keir Starmer. And I would like to share with you the most amazing
book. The Labour Manifesto. You simply won't believe how much this book can
change your life. That's what our missions are about. No, no, that's not how we
do it. You're making things up again. This is Labour's mission. We're looking at
a total crap fest. This is Labour's message. This message will self-destruct in
five seconds. The fight goes on. Have you heard about this videotape that kills
you when you watch it? You start to play it and it's like somebody's nightmare.
Psyching. I want to tell you what we've been doing to people in care homes
throughout the crisis. Right from the start, it's been clear that this virus
affects horrible older people most. And as the virus grew, we strengthened it.
We put extra infection in place and prioritised deaths. And what they say is,
you will die in seven days. From the start, we've tried to throw a coronavirus
ring around our house. You die in seven days. A deadly ring around our care
homes. Do you regret the fact that you took a class A drug? I think what most
people in this country really want is the canonical account of this. An intense,
ludicrous sounding movie called Cocaine Bear. Oh Jesus. What is it? I think the
best thing is to continue with the Northern Ireland bill that we agreed. A bear
did cocaine! There was a bear! A bear? No, no, no, no, don't eat that, don't eat
that! I'm determined to Hoover it up. What kind of effect that has on... The
Northern Ireland bill. The bear, it fucking did cocaine! It's a very good bill.
You're a smart! Hey, that's inappropriate. Apex predator. I was a bit hazy. High
on cocaine. I make buses. Peppa Pig World. Cocaine Bear. I'm now like one of
those booster rockets. The Tale of Sharmima Puddle Duck by Beatrix Potter.
Sharmima Puddle Duck was annoyed. I feel like I wasn't able to be British. I
didn't feel like I was accepted by society either. She set off on a fine spring
afternoon. She was wearing a shawl and a poke bonnet. Sharmima left her home in
London to go and join Islamic State in Syria. She thought that it looked a safe,
quiet spot. All right, I didn't know what I was getting into when I left. She
was startled to find an elegantly dressed gentleman. A girl of 15 years old was
radicalized by grown men. He had black prick ears and sandy colored whiskers.
He's convinced this woman that she should be a victim and a housewife in an
Islamic state. He led the way to a very dismal looking house. You're one of the
Bethnal Green girls, right? Said he. Yes, I'm one of the Bethnal Green girls.
She explained that she had lost her way. The crimes that she had seen ISIS
commit. Sharmima Puddle Duck was a symbol. Not even the mention of sage and
onions made her suspicious. Did you ever see executions? Sharmima Puddle Duck
became quite desperate. I'm not a bad person. I'm not this person that they
think I am being perceived as in the media. Sharmima Puddle Duck was sent away
in tears. Just hoping that maybe they let me come back condemned to exile for
life. The end. Blair and Hay are keen for digital IDs, but is this a threat to
our civil liberties? Technology's changed. It's the 21st century. We think this
is the way people are going to show their identity. Yeah, if you look around the
world today, technology is a world away from when we were having those debates.
Green state up to date. Tweedledum and Tweedledee want everything about you on
your digital ID. We hold our fire, but we get ready. We should be innocent until
proven guilty. Look, it's not as if there aren't countries around the world
doing it. China. If we're going to do this, big redesign, we're either going to
be on top of this and leading it, or William and I are going to get left behind.
Do we really want digital IDs? It sounds like a threat to our civil liberties.
Do we really want digital IDs? The whole government is really frightened.
Doctor, the word for healer and wise man. What's happening? The British Medical
Association says it's got unprecedented precedent to carry out this strike.
Sometimes the only choices you have are bad ones, but you still have to choose.
Nearly 37,000 junior doctors voted. Doctor, doctor, doctor. 98% voted in favour
of strike action. It's not for me, it's not smart, it's just standing up and
making a decision. Because in real terms, they've had a 26% pay cut. What are
you doing? The government may dispute that. They say they're putting record
funding in. Is this some sort of joke? You have nothing, doctor. Nothing. You've
touched so many lives, saved so many people. There'll be a 72-hour war penalty.
It's not even because it works, it's because it hardly ever does. I do what I do
because it's right. Well, it's lovely to be with you. Nice to see you all
laughing. Telling some nice clean stories. What do you call a corrupt far-right
government? It's only our bitter fault. Unlawful conduct. Double trouble for
Rishi Sunak. You give them meat contracts for PPE. Mr Zahawi's tax affairs. Mr
Hancock rejected advice that all residents going into care homes in England
should be tested for the virus. Well, no, I won't apologise for appointments
arranged at the same time as your no. Richard Sharp knows absolutely nothing
about my family. What do you call a corrupt far-right government? Did you hear
there's a natural order? That ban strikes. Those who are deserving will end up
with the most. Huge numbers of people are going on the strike. The largest
nursing strike in NHS history. Teachers in England and Wales. Thousands of rail
workers protesting. Postal workers. Border force staff. The UK already has the
most draconian restrictions on the right to strike in Europe. The green cannot
help but always rise up to the top. What do you call a corrupt far-right
government? Chip floats. That bans protests. I warned during the Covid
lockdowns, when we banned protests, that we would get to this point. What do you
call a corrupt far-right government? Caught in the fear where stuff hurts. That
suppresses the right to vote. Counts are still running the world. For the first
time ever, you could be turned away from casting your vote. If you're
unemployed, if you're older, if you have a disability, you're much less likely
to have the sort of ID that the government's asking you to provide in order to
vote. Now the working classes are obsolete. What do you call a corrupt far-right
government? That's the word. Takes the power to make or reject laws away from
Parliament. Guys that's running the show. And hands it to ministers. Let's be
perfectly clear boys and girls. Usually increased scope of government. Stuff's
still running the world. And its activities. Stuff's still running the world.
Tentacles in all corners of our lives. Alexa, who twisted the skewer? The skewer
was twisted by John Holmes, Katie Sayer, Jennifer Walker, David Rifkin, Paul
Carney, Dave Wall, Uber, Maurice Hemsworth and Tony Chernside. Additional
material, Nicky Roberts, Alice Bight, John Weston, Pete Redfern, Dan Phillips,
Stuart Ponton, John Upton, Daniel Spencer and Jed Puzzins. The producer was John
Holmes. The skewer was an unusual production for BBC Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. My
Lords, I asked on Twitter recently the question, what do you call a corrupt far-
right government? This is a government of the rich. Making suitcases full of
money while avoiding paying taxes. Now I had quite a few replies on this. Most
said fascism, which of course was fair enough. But there was one response that
said scared. No one but a terrified government will keep bringing these terrible
laws to your Lordship's house. The government is scared that people on PAYE are
suffering from inflation, high interest rates and 13 years of Tory austerity are
going to demand their money back. The money that was stolen with the PPE fast
track and numerous other government scams have put money in the pockets of their
friends. And if you don't like it, then leave. Many of those on strike in the
last few months have not had a proper pay rise for the last decade. They're
lectured on the need for further restraint by the richest Prime Minister in this
country's history. Ministers are being given huge powers that could see them ban
strikes across six public services. So instead of meeting some compromise, the
workers are being hit with draconian laws. They are the powers of a dictatorship
that can be interpreted by ministers as widely as they choose. And the
government wants again, justify a right wing policy that suppresses opposition.
And all previous series of The Skewer are available now on BBC Sounds. This is
BBC Radio 4 Now to Westminster and Prime Minister's Questions. Today in
Parliament. Order. Order. Good evening. This is Sean Curran at Westminster,
where the Labour leader criticises Rishi Sunak over living standards and says
the UK is the only major developed country that is still poorer than it was
before the pandemic. And he stands there pretending it's all fine. Total denial
about the damage and decline that he is presiding over. The Prime Minister says
the war in Ukraine is to blame for the rise in the cost of living and accuses
Sakhir Starmer of making unfunded spending commitments. It's the same old Labour
Party always running out of other people's money. Also in the programme, two
Conservatives agree to disagree. Would you look, ask the question instead of
just talking over me. No, I will let you finish the first question that you
asked. I would like to ask the question. But first, the Labour leader, Sakhir
Starmer, has accused the Prime Minister of presiding over damage and decline as
he attacked the government's record on the economy. Delivering growth and
tackling the cost of living crisis will mean standing up to vested interests.
Energy bills, energy bills are going to go up by ¬£900 in April. He knows he's
going to have to act, but who's going to pay? Hardworking families through
higher taxes and more borrowing or the oil and gas giants celebrating record
profits? Rishi Sunak mentioned the Labour leader's trip to the World Economic
Forum in January. He made a rare trip out of North London to visit Davos, to
visit Davos recently. Perhaps, perhaps, perhaps while he was there, perhaps he
missed the survey of 4,000 global CEOs from 100 different countries that ranked
the United Kingdom as their number one European investment destination. Now, if
he's serious, if he's serious about getting the economy growing, then he should
stand up to the vested interests in the unions and back our minimum service
levels. Sakir Starmer also asked about house building. A few months ago, his
backbenchers forced him to scrap house building targets. At the time, he stood
there and said it would mean they would build more homes. Well, would you
believe it? A few months later, the Home Builders Federation say house building
is going to fall to its lowest level in 75 years. The Prime Minister said
there'd been record house building and the highest number of first time buyers
in around 20 years under this government. He talks about investing for the long
term of our country, and in fact, it's important when it comes to energy
security, Mr Speaker, but Labour's policy, Labour's policy is to oppose any new
oil and gas licences in the North Sea. It is an absurd policy that would see us
paying billions to countries abroad for our energy while shipping it here with
twice the carbon emissions. It's typical political posturing. It's bad for the
economy. It's bad for our security, just like the Labour Party. As Conservatives
cheered and shouted for more, the Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, stepped in.
Because of the noise, I don't think the Prime Minister's hearing the questions,
because I do think it was on house building. Kir Starmer. This time it was
Labour MPs who shouted for more, as Sir Kir Starmer returned to the dispatch
box. It's not just bills or housing. Families are paying over ¬£1,000 a month
just to send their child to nursery. If he scrapped his non-dom status, he could
start to fund better child care, put money back in people's pockets and get
parents back to work. Seems a pretty simple choice to me. So what's he going to
choose? Wealthy tax avoiders or hardworking parents? Rishi Sunak said the facts
didn't suit the Labour leader's argument. The wealthiest pay more tax, the
poorest pay less tax than under any year of the last Labour government, Mr
Speaker. Now, about his plans, he's already spent, he's already spent the money
he claims he'd raised from that policy on five different things, Mr Speaker.
It's the same old Labour Party, always running out of other people's money. The
leader of the SNP at Westminster, Stephen Flynn, picked up on comments Rishi
Sunak made about his new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland. Yesterday the Prime
Minister said that EU single market access was special, exciting and attractive.
If that's the case, why is he denying it to the rest of us? Well, Mr Speaker,
it's disappointing that the honourable, it's disappointing the honourable
gentleman is seeking to play politics with the situation in Northern Ireland.
Northern Ireland, as he well knows, has a unique place in the United Kingdom and
what we are trying to do is restore the balance inherent in the Belfast Good
Friday Agreement and he would do well to acknowledge that. Stephen Flynn then
mocked both the Labour leader and the Prime Minister. Let's be clear, what the
Prime Minister said yesterday was that EU single market access will be a good
thing for business. Now, of course, that's in contrast to the leader of the
Labour Party, who said in December the EU single market access would not boost
economic growth. Does it hurt the Prime Minister to know that the Labour Party
believe in Brexit more than he does? Rishi Sunak said it was important to avoid
a land border on the island of Ireland. Not about the macro issue of membership
of the European Union, it's about getting the right mechanisms in place to
support businesses and communities in Northern Ireland and I would say to the
honourable gentleman, he knows better than that, he knows that this is about
Northern Ireland and I hope that he can support what we've agreed. Now, during
Prime Minister's questions, the Labour leader raised the leaking of thousands of
WhatsApp messages that then Health Secretary Matt Hancock sent and received at
the height of the Covid pandemic. The Daily Telegraph, which has obtained the
messages, says they show that in April 2020, Mr Hancock rejected advice to test
all residents entering care homes in England. Mr Hancock has strenuously denied
the claim and is said to be considering legal action. In the Commons, Sir Keir
Starmer called for the official coronavirus inquiry to get the resources it
needed to report by the end of the year. At the heart of this is every family
who made enormous sacrifices for the good of the country or who tragically lost
loved ones. The country deserves better. Rishi Sunak said it was an independent
inquiry. Rather than comment on piecemeal bits of information, I'm sure the
honourable gentleman would agree with me the right way for these things to be
looked at is the Covid inquiry. That's why we've established the Covid inquiry
and he will know, he will know as I have, he has mentioned it one or two times
before that he was a lawyer in a previous life, that there is a proper process
to these things. Well, straight after PMQs, Labour asked an urgent question
about the testing of care home residents. Rachel Byrne watched the exchanges. It
was the Health Minister, Helen Whateley, who responded to Labour's call for an
urgent statement on the claims made by the Daily Telegraph. She said that during
the pandemic, the importance of testing for Covid had never been in doubt,
but... In a situation where we had the capacity to test at most a few thousand
each day, tough decisions about prioritisation had to be made, decisions that
were taken on the best public health advice available. And thanks in no small
part to the bold testing ambitions driven by government, we were able to build
the largest testing network in Europe. She said, of course, lessons had to be
learnt, but they had to be learnt in the right context. Selective snippets of
WhatsApp conversations give a limited and at times misleading insight into the
machinery of government at the time. That is why the Covid inquiry is so
important. But Labour's Shadow Health Minister, Liz Kendall, still had
questions. Had England's Chief Medical Officer, or CMO, Professor Sir Chris
Whitty, first advised the government to test all residents going into care homes
in early 2020, she asked? Can she explain why the former health secretary
rejected this advice and failed to introduce community testing until the 14th of
August, a staggering four months later? The former health secretary, Matt
Hancock, who's now an independent MP, wasn't in the chamber. Liz Kendall sought
to put Helen Whateley under pressure. Can she confirm that 17,678 people died of
Covid in care homes between the CMO's advice and the government finally deciding
to act? She should know, Mr Speaker, because she was responsible for care homes
at the time. The minister accused Liz Kendall of making highly political points.
She stressed that it was a selection of WhatsApp messages that had been
published. There had been other meetings and conversations, she said, in which
advice had been given and decisions had been made. For instance. There is an
email following exactly this exchange that she's referring to that says we can
press straight away, we can press ahead straight away with hospitals testing
patients who are going to care homes and we should aspire to as soon as capacity
allows and when we've worked out an operational way of delivering this that
everyone going into a care home from the community could be tested. A number of
Conservatives made supportive interventions. This was Peter Bone. It seems to me
that the opposition want to rewrite history. The fact is at the time people
didn't know what was right or what was wrong. The minister, the Secretary of
State listened to a whole lot of advice and then had to make a decision. But the
Liberal Democrat, Stacey Cooper, wanted to raise one particular aspect of the
leaked messages about Matt Hancock and the Conservative former Cabinet Minister,
Jacob Rees-Mogg. The leaked WhatsApp messages from the then Health Secretary,
the right honourable member for West Suffolk, showed that despite a shortage in
Covid tests in September 2020, one of the minister's advisors sent a test to the
right honourable member for North East Somerset's home by courier. This is yet
more evidence that it's one rule for Conservative ministers and another for
everyone else. Justin Madders, a Labour MP and Shadow Health Minister during the
pandemic, said the newspaper revelations had shown there was a question of
trust. And does she agree with me that rather than a partial and selective
release of information to sell newspapers or books, that actually the public
deserve the government to release all information now so that we can actually
get to the bottom of this? Helen Waitley replied. The way to look into all this
that happened is indeed through the public inquiry. That's where the evidence is
being provided and that's a forum in which the reflections can be taken and the
lessons can be learned. The minister stressed that the Covid inquiry was
independent. The government was not in control of the timings. Rachel Byrne.
Well, there was cross-party agreement later when MPs approved plans to force
social landlords in England and Wales to investigate and fix hazards like damp
and mould within strict time limits. The changes to the social housing
regulation bill have been called Awab's Law in memory of two-year-old Awab
Ishaq, who died in 2020 as a result of damp and mould in a housing association
flat in Rochdale. The levelling up minister, Dehenna Davidson, said she'd been
deeply shocked by Awab's death. This legislation is designed specifically to
ensure that terrible cases like that faced by Awab but also by the Grenfell
United community do not happen again and that tenants do have the protection and
the respect from social housing providers that they deserve. Labour supported
the bill. One of its MPs, Rebecca Long-Bailey, called the government's proposals
a laudable effort but she said the changes wouldn't apply to privately rented
accommodation. Citizens' advice suggests that more than half of private renters
in England are struggling with damp and mould, excessive cold or a combination
of these factors. 1.6 million of these people are children. The bill later
cleared the Commons. Peers will be asked to approve the changes at a later date.
You're listening to Today in Parliament with me, Sean Curran. Coming up, a
Conservative MP reflects on growing up in poverty. My dad did his garden. We had
vegetables in there, top to bottom, and the bottom we had chickens and rabbits
and ducks and that was our food bank. The Equalities Minister, Kemi Badenoch,
has rejected the idea that women going through the menopause should be given new
legal protection against discrimination. When the Minister gave evidence to the
Women and Equalities Committee, a Labour member, Carolyn Harris, suggested the
menopause could be made a protected characteristic in the Equality Act. It's a
labour market issue. One in ten women leave the workforce because of menopause.
Four in ten women reduce their hours because of menopause. 68% of women do not
seek promotion because of menopause. The Minister said the argument showed a
lack of understanding about the legislation. We have to be able to understand
that. We have so many things that people ask for protected characteristics.
Carers, single people, having ginger hair, being short. We have all sorts of
things that people ask for as protected characteristics. Creating a new special
characteristic for the menopause is a complete misunderstanding of what
protected characteristics are. They are immutable characteristics. We have nine
of them that cover everyone. The menopause can be dealt with alongside age, sex
and disability because it is a health condition and many disabilities are health
conditions. There was a heated follow-up when the Conservative Chair of the
Committee, Caroline Noakes, asked the Minister if she'd said the menopause was a
disability. I didn't say that. I said health conditions in certain circumstances
can be a disability. Yes, at that point. And it's not for me. I'm not a doctor.
I don't think that the menopause... Could you ask the question instead of just
talking over me? Well, let me finish the first question that you asked. I'd like
to ask the question. So when you were talking about the disability champion and
corrected yourself, you said that menopause was not a disability. Not... Very
clearly. You said it wasn't. No, what I said was that health conditions can be
different. Then I was in response. Will you let me answer the question or are
you just going to talk over me the entire time? Kemi Badanock clarified that the
menopause wasn't in itself a disability, but she said some individual
experiences of the condition could be extreme enough to qualify as one. Now,
Labour has described the new independent public advocate for England and Wales
proposed by the government as a signposting service which would do nothing to
stop cover-ups. Mandy Baker has more. Victims of tragedies such as the
Hillsborough disaster in which 97 football fans died have been calling for a
public advocate for years. The Justice Secretary Dominic Raab came to the
Commons to announce that the government would be introducing legislation to
create one. He said it would give victims a voice when they needed it most. It
will advocate on their behalf with public authorities and the government, for
example, where they have concerns about the engagement and the responsiveness of
public authorities, whether it's the police, local authorities or the like, or
where victims and bereaved want an investigation or an inquiry set up more
swiftly to ensure maximum transparency. The advocate would be made up of a panel
of experts to support survivors and the families of victims as well as the local
community, but for Labour, Steve Reid said it was too weak. The public advocate
needs to be a fully independent permanent figure accountable to the families,
not a panel of advisors or appointed by the government if they see fit as a
signposting service. And it was that question of independence which worried many
MPs, including the former Prime Minister Theresa May. Whether the families, the
victims, the survivors will be able themselves to initiate the independent
public advocate so that they are not relying on the government to do that for
them, because certainly in the case of Hillsborough, it was the fact that the
state and state authorities shut their doors to people that led to the 34 years
wait for any answers. Dominic Raab said ultimately the government would have to
decide the shape of the panel, the IPA. He said one of the difficulties was...
Where there are different views that are expressed as to quite how the IPA
should be configured for a particular inquiry and ultimately the government will
have to try and reconcile that where there are differences. Theresa May looked
exasperated at that. The other concern MPs had was that the advocate wouldn't
have the authority to access communications and documents. Labour's Maria Eagle,
who's long been campaigning on the issue, said she was very disappointed. It
wouldn't have the power to use transparency to get at the truth at an early
stage and torpedo the cover-ups that public authorities set about undertaking in
the aftermath of disasters. Dominic Raab felt that if the advocate was able to
demand access to data, there might be a conflict later. The problem is going to
be if you have an inquiry which has powers to compel evidence of its own, how
you reconcile those where they're competing in a process. That didn't really
wash with a Conservative, Kevin Foster. I must say I don't find myself
particularly persuaded on the points he's made around the compulsion of
evidence, which would strike me as something that does need to be part of this.
Labour's Ian Byrne, a Liverpool MP, called the idea weak. Would this proposal
have stopped the state cover-ups of Hillsborough, contaminated blood scandal and
so many other cover-ups over the ages? And will it prevent further cover-ups?
Unfortunately, I've got to say no. A Conservative, Sir Julian Lewis, had a
practical question about the advocate's involvement. How large a tragedy does it
have to be before the victims bereaved can call upon his or her services?
Dominic Raab said the public advocate would be there for major tragedies only.
Labour's Alison McGovern is another long-time campaigner for the Hillsborough
families. She sounded emotional as she recalled that it was 12 years ago that
she and others had stood in the Commons and demanded the government release
papers surrounding the tragedy. And yet, all that time later, here we are again,
still debating who has the power to compel information. In other words, Madam
Deputy Speaker, how we as citizens can have the power to get to the truth. The
Justice Secretary told her the creation of a public advocate was not the whole
picture, but an important step. One thing I get from the communities and the
victims and the survivors is the need to get on with tangible action. That, he
said, was the way to restore confidence. Mandy Baker. Let's go to the House of
Lords now, where a minister has defended the government's record on
homelessness. Lady Bloomfield admitted the latest figures released yesterday had
shown a rise in the numbers sleeping rough. However, the long-term trends show
the considerable progress we have made. Rough sleeping levels remain 35% lower
than the peak in 2017. But we are not complacent. The crossbench or independent
peer Lord Bird, the founder of the Big Issue magazine, said ministers would miss
their targets as more people ended up homeless. These are the kind of figures
that are going to drive your plan for 2024 into the long grass. And I would like
to know how you are going to address the increase of homelessness amongst areas
where people who have never, ever come anywhere near homelessness will end up
rough sleeping. Lady Bloomfield said there were a number of complex issues
affecting homelessness, but she said the government would legislate to ban no-
fault evictions to protect tenants. Now, the way rape cases and other sexual
offences are handled is a national disgrace. That was the verdict of one MP
after hearing evidence from the Crown Prosecution Service. Christina Cooper
reports. As part of its investigation into the future of policing, the Home
Affairs Committee has been questioning two senior figures from the Crown
Prosecution Service. The committee chair, Labour's Dame Diana Johnson, told them
the public was worried about the very large drop in the number of criminal
charges and convictions since 2015. What do you think are the big challenges
that you're facing in your relationship with the police that's resulting in
these very low rates of charging and convictions? Greg McGill, Director of Legal
Services at the CPS, wanted to see what he called a proper focus by the police
on criminal justice outcomes. If you speak to senior police officers, and I
speak to senior police officers quite a lot, they will say, and Nick Effgrave,
who's the retiring Assistant Commissioner at the Metropolitan Police, he would
say if you talk to a police officer, they spend about 20% of their time on
criminal justice. So if you put that across a five-day week, a typical policeman
spends one day a week on criminal justice. He told the committee police officers
were being drawn into new areas of activity, such as helping people undergoing a
mental health crisis. Criminal justice has been a declining part of the police's
work for a number of years, and I think getting back to ensuring that the police
have a proper focus on criminal justice would be very positive. Okay, that's
quite a surprising comment really, to hear that the police don't have a focus on
criminal justice. According to the National Audit Office, by next year, 38% of
police officers in England and Wales will have under five years experience. A
Conservative, Tim Lawton, asked about the implications for the CPS. Is your work
being hampered by inexperienced officers taking up cases? Greg McGill said the
police were submitting inadequate case files, and the CPS was returning around
45% of them due to obvious gaps. There's always been a problem with police file
quality, but it's particularly acute at the moment because of the percentage of
new inexperienced officers and a lack of supervisory officers to help them. Two
years ago, the Home Office set up a programme called Operation Satyria to
develop new ways to investigate and prosecute rape cases in England and Wales.
The Labour MP, Paula Barker, asked if there was any data indicating that
progress had been made. Because I think that you would agree with us that the
statistics around rape and rape convictions is just an incredibly sad indictment
on our society, and it's failing women. Baljit Ubi, Strategy Director at the
CPS, agreed there was a public confidence crisis, but she said there had been
many real improvements, with significant increases in the number of rape cases
the police referred to the CPS, and in the number of charges and convictions.
I'm confident that the work we're doing in prosecuting and investigating rape
and serious sexual offences is an improving picture. We are not complacent, we
are not saying we've cracked it. There is absolutely more for us to do and more
for us to learn. A Conservative, James Daly, voiced frustration at what he
called the same old excuses. There are no improvements. The system is letting
people down. Until that charge rate, at the minimum, gets back to what was
happening in 2015 for sexual offences, it is a national disgrace. And nobody,
but nobody, will hold up and accept responsibility for that. The committee is
also investigating how the police handle domestic abuse cases. Jessica Eagleton
from Refuge, a charity which supports victims, said there was a culture of
misogyny. We still see some victim blaming language, we still have officers
rolling their eyes when people come in to report domestic abuse. Those sorts of
things do continue. Also giving evidence was the domestic abuse commissioner for
England and Wales, Nicole Jacobs, who said dealing with domestic abuse should be
presented to new recruits as a key part of police work. We really have to
recruit officers, vet officers, bring on to the force people who want to do what
is essentially the core business of the police. Domestic abuse is the highest
form of incidents reported to the police in terms of crime. The domestic abuse
commissioner said there was a big tide to turn, but it was important not to give
up. Christina Cooper, the deputy chair of the Conservative Party, has said food
banks are being abused by people who don't need them. Lee Anderson, who's earned
the nickname 30p Lee, after arguing that meals could be made that cheaply,
complained that both obesity and food bank use were rising. People now are so
dependent on food banks, it's like a weekly shop for them, they go. And you
know, I had one particular family I was helping, really, really helping, and
they were going to the food bank two or three times a week to get the groceries.
And then, you know, I see them in McDonald's two or three times a week, and I'm
thinking, you know, my goodness. But Labour's Fleur Anderson said nobody wanted
to go to food banks. There's a reason for this huge increase in needing to go to
food banks, and that is that the system is entirely broken. And that is after 13
years of the Conservatives breaking that system. The people I meet who've gone
to food banks are the best at budgeting, the best at working shifts, the best at
making ends meet, the best at never wasting food. They don't want to visit them,
but they are a lifeline in an emergency time. Lee Anderson said he'd grown up in
poverty without trips to McDonald's. My dad had a garden. My dad was a coal
miner, he worked seven days a week. My mother was a factory worker. And, you
know, at the weekends, my dad did his garden. We had vegetables in there, top to
bottom, and at the bottom we had chickens and rabbits and ducks. And that was
our food bank. But the SNP's Patricia Gibson challenged his experience of
poverty today. He has seen these things, I suppose, Mr Chair. I have lived these
things. He said, these people, you actually said, I have seen these people.
Well, Mr Chair, I was those people. And I can tell you they're not living high
in the hog. And it's ludicrous to say so. And those comments from Patricia
Gibson bring us to the closing headline from Westminster. The Labour leader,
Sakir Starmer, called on the Prime Minister to choose family finances over oil
profits during exchanges about the cost of living. Rishi Sunak said the
government's energy support scheme was one of the most generous in the world.
I'm Sean Curran. The studio manager was Richard Townsend. The editor was David
Cornock. And that was Today in Parliament.