TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-17H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Oh, it's all around me. The Gold. Watch on BBC iPlayer. BBC News at four
o'clock. Lancashire's Police and Crime Commissioner has announced an independent
review of the investigation into the disappearance of Nicola Bulley. Andrew
Snowden has commissioned the College of Policing to look into the case,
including the release by officers of personal information about Miss Bulley. The
45 year old's body was pulled from the River Wyre on Sunday. Mr Snowden said the
case was completely unprecedented, considering the amount of online and media
interest. This review is being held because there are questions quite rightly
that members of the public and across different political spectrums want to have
answered around the search, around the investigation and around the release of
the information. Lancashire Police said it welcomed the review. Tesco and Aldi
have become the latest supermarkets to introduce limits on the sale of certain
fruit and vegetables because of shortages. Asda and Morrisons have already
imposed restrictions after extreme weather affected harvests abroad. Ambulance
and other health staff are to stage a fresh strike over pay. Unison said its
members would walk out across England on March 8th and accused the government of
failing to hold proper talks with health unions. The health secretary is having
pay talks with the Royal College of Nursing. Shamima Begum has lost her legal
challenge to the decision to revoke her British citizenship. The court dismissed
her appeal but said there was a credible case that she was a victim of human
trafficking. Miss Begum was 15 years old when she travelled to Syria to join the
Islamic State group. The ruling means the 23 year old remains barred from
returning to the UK. At least two people have been killed and more than 50 are
trapped. 50 are trapped underground after a coal mine collapsed in northern
China. President Xi Jinping has ordered a search and rescue mission to the mine
in Inner Mongolia. And a large mystery metal sphere has washed up on a shore in
Japan. The authorities don't know what it is but police have investigated and
they don't think it's explosive. The hollow object has been called the Godzilla
egg by curious and confused locals. BBC News. Now on BBC Radio 4, Matthew Saeed
steps into the concert hall to explore the passion and the pain of music.
Corrine Morris is on stage. She's playing to a concert hall in Bordeaux. Tonight
it's Tchaikovsky's Variations on a Rococo theme and she's the solo cellist, the
star. About three quarters of the way through the concert I just became aware
that I was not going to have the stamina to finish. Corrine isn't just tired
from a busy performance schedule. Her right shoulder, the arm she uses to bow
her cello, is failing her. She pushes on through the notoriously difficult final
variation. Dread, just utter panic. I can't even remember how I got to the end
of the concert but I did. The crowd suspects nothing. Applause fills the air.
And then I staggered off stage and that was the moment that I knew I can't lie
to myself anymore. There really is something wrong and I have to go and face it,
whatever it is. I'm Matthew Saeed and this is Tchaikovsky's Variations on a
Rococo theme. I'm Matthew Saeed and this is Sideways, my show about the ideas
that shape our lives with stories of seeing the world differently. Today I want
to explore the powerful connection that forms between our bodies and the
instruments of our professions and passions and how losing that connection may
feel like we've lost a part of ourselves. I started playing piano because my
mother hated my singing. I was walking around the house singing, clearly not
gifted at singing, and so she put me in piano lessons and it really stuck. This
is Artina McCain. I'm glad that I'm a terrible singer so I ended up playing
piano. From her teenage years, Artina knew she was onto something with the
piano. She was selected for the Juilliard Experience where she spent time with
professors at the prestigious New York Performing Arts School. She was entering
competitions and she developed a taste for the thrill of adoring crowds. People
are telling you you're really talented at this or that and you're like, yeah, I
feel really great on this stage. I want to stay here. I want the attention. I
think you have to have maybe a tiny bit of an ego to go on stage and be
crucified for every concert. So I had that energy of just wanting to be on
stage, wanting to be in front of people. In her early 20s, Artina is studying at
a conservatory. Everything is falling into place. The dream she holds of being a
concert pianist is looking really promising. I always felt like I was completely
on target to be a concert pianist, which is crazy because being a concert
pianist is a dream. I was always on target to be a concert pianist. I was always
on target to be a concert pianist. Which is crazy because being a concert
pianist is what people tell you not to do. They tell you to take a safe path.
Clarity of mind about the direction she wanted her musical career to take was a
feature of Corrine Morris' teenage years too. One of my first defining moments
was a concert that I went to when I was around eight at the Royal Albert Hall.
And I just remember those deep sounds coming from the cello section just caught
my imagination. And I suddenly said to my parents, I must learn the cello.
That's just the instrument I've got to do. So believe it or not, by the age of
11, I knew that that was the instrument that I wanted to play professionally.
Corrine's abilities are clear from a young age. By just 16, she has a diploma
with honours from the Royal College of Music in London. She's requested
personally by one of the world's greatest cellists, Mstislav Rostropovich, to
take part in his festival in Evian in France. And over the years, a deep bond
has formed between Corrine and her instrument. I actually don't feel like I'm
holding my cello. But rather embracing it. We are connected, the cello and I, as
one, as a unit. I feel how the cello is on any particular day, as you might with
a friend. Having a good day, having a bad day. I can feel that with my cello.
Could be the weather that's influencing the wood and therefore the response of
the instrument under my hands. And of course, it can be down to things such as
strings. And it's also my own mood and feelings of that day. I viscerally relate
to the idea that certain objects, can be taken into our own emotional and
physical world. As a professional sportsman, I had the same table tennis bat for
almost 20 years. And frankly, it wasn't a bat. It was part of me. Mine was
called a Gruber Pro FL. And I can still feel its ghost in my palm. Once a tiny
piece chipped off at the top, and I could feel it in my hand. Once a tiny piece
chipped off at the top, and I took it to a carpenter to add some resin to the
gap. I almost couldn't bear to watch. I flinched when he started to sand it
down. It was like watching an operation without anaesthetic. Thankfully, when I
got it back, it was the same trusty, subtle, wonderful, pliable piece of wood.
And it fitted my hand as it always did, like a second skin. When we take a tool,
something unhuman, inanimate, and connect with it on a deep, almost spiritual
level, it can allow us to perform to our highest potential. To play involuntary
music, you need to have an embodied interaction with music. And that means that
actually your body can play its natural role when you interact with music. This
is Professor Luc Ness. He's a music education specialist and a philosopher at
the University of Luxembourg. To explain this idea of involuntary music, Luc
calls on the ghost of that legendary cellist, Mstislav Rostropovich. Dmitri
Shostakovich composed the fiendishly difficult Cello Concerto No. 1,
specifically for Rostropovich to perform in 1959. He says at some point, I play
music involuntarily. The cello is my tool no more. And that is exactly what
expresses this idea of becoming merged with the instrument. You don't have to
deal with the instrument, you play music. That's actually at the point where
your instrument becomes like a natural extension. Just as you don't have to
think about what to do with your arm to take a glass and drink. But Luc's also
been considering this relationship philosophically, to understand how musicians
might reach that natural extension of themselves, where the instrument
disappears and they just play. It can be achieved by finding a very important
mental state one that will be familiar to any sports people listening. It's
called flow. In sports, it's often called being in the zone. You're really into
it. You feel challenged on the one hand, but on the other hand, you also feel up
to the challenge. You just can do it. We feel in control and vitally, we feel
emotionally invested. If you don't feel like playing the clarinet, if the
clarinet doesn't mean anything to you, at that level, it will also interfere. So
when all these levels are OK, you will be able to immerse deeply in what you are
doing and you will be able to experience flow. Flow sounds quite hard to
achieve. A lot of practice and repetition to lose yourself in the performance,
to merge with the activity, whether it's playing an instrument or table tennis.
But in the end, flow is worth it. When one achieves a state of flow, it becomes
a part of who we are. But when the flow stops, it's brutal. I was playing the
Tchaikovsky Rococo Variations, which is a fairly difficult piece. I realised
that I was losing control of my right arm and it was becoming increasingly
heavy. And from then on, I tried to conserve energy, tried to get myself cued
mentally. I'm going to do this, I'm going to go through this, and true grit,
it's just inconceivable to stop in the middle of a performance and say, I'm
sorry, I can't. I had masked that pain through the grit, I will make it. But
then, as soon as I was out of the performance, that's when the pain really
kicked in massively. Corrine has a debilitating shoulder injury. It had come on
slowly, but with a gruelling practice and performance schedule, the tendon in
her right shoulder was hugely inflamed. This performance was the breaking point.
A doctor suggested that she should have surgery. He's basically telling me, if I
go back to the chair, in three, four years' time, I'll wind up in the same
place. Corrine refuses the surgery. I think I went straight into quite a deep
depression as I refused the hope of something, even if it wasn't 100%
guaranteed. And yet I didn't have another strategy to replace it. I was just
trying to give myself time to find the right way forward. I cancelled all my
work. I basically closed in on myself. I think if one can imagine trying to hold
a cup or a mug or something small, and that seems like such an easy task, but
even those types of tasks, when you have that type of stiffness in your hands,
can be quite monumental. Pianist Artina McCain was in her 20s. She'd been
studying and playing hard at a conservatory for her Masters of Music. She was on
track for the concert pianist career she'd always dreamed of. But she'd started
experiencing pain and loss of mobility in her hands. That's something that's
really probably scary for anyone, but particularly when you use your hands as
your career and your life goals and focus, it's particularly devastating. Each
time she experienced another bout, she'd rest a day or two, hoping to recover
quickly. She felt she just had to keep on playing. Everybody wants to compete
and be the best, and you could definitely experience this no pain, no gain, or I
believe those things, but I also realized that when a person is in a spiral of
pain, it's actually not possible to progress. Artina realizes she has to take a
break from her performing career right when it's taking off. Her only source of
income is teaching. And she couldn't talk about what she was going through. It's
very hush-hush. You know, you don't want to tell people you're injured, one,
because they might not call you for engagements because they figure, oh, she
won't be able to do them. They think, for lack of a better word, that maybe I'll
catch it. What is wrong with the way you think about posture or your technique?
Artina takes time trying different methods she thinks might help. She decides to
pursue a doctorate, but again, she faces major pain trying to complete the
performance side of her PhD. She rests some more, and she starts to feel like
she can play in a more low-stakes setting, her church. After playing for one
week, I had actually lost the complete ability to open my hand, my right hand. I
could no longer reach an octave. I couldn't drive. I was in excruciating pain at
this point all of the time. There was never a break. And I really thought, oh,
wow, this is the end. It's difficult to describe when your vocation, the thing
from which you derive meaning, is suddenly ripped away. It isn't just about
losing the thing that brought you joy, but like losing a part of yourself. I've
met injured sports people who say that while they're out with injury, they
didn't know who they were. It's a profound loss when your goals are cut short,
when a career no longer serves you, when the thing you love so much is damaging
your health. Luc Ness was a talented clarinetist. I think it was 2002. I think
my first son was just born. And I had a very severe accident with my car. And at
that moment, I could no longer play the clarinet. Everything stops, playing in
the orchestra, playing chamber music, just that it stops because you can't play
anymore. What am I going to do? MUSIC Luc decided to take another path into
philosophy and it was his accident that sparked his interest in the relationship
between musician and instrument. When you have such an accident, you're
confronted in such a big way with your body and your instrument. And your body
is actually saying, no, you can't play any longer. MUSIC Now Luc's research aims
to bring more freedom to the instrument. It aims to bring more freedom into
music teaching. To celebrate and encourage the role of movement is a way of
finding greater expression. And 20 years since his accident, Luc isn't a
classical concert player, but he is a teacher and he is able to play his
clarinet again. And when he does, he's free. And so I play with six friends. I
play in this Balkan klezmer ensemble. And I move around, I go among the public,
I dance with them while I'm playing. It feels great. MUSIC It is possible to
redefine yourself and maybe discover a new kind of relationship with your former
passion. Luc found his alternative path and eventually it brought him back to
music in a fresh way. But that isn't the choice everyone would want to make.
It's the summer before Artina is due back in school for the second year of her
doctorate programme. She can't play, she doesn't have an alternative income and
she's in a state of constant pain. She's back in the same church where just a
couple of months earlier, she'd lost all hand movement. She thought her career
was over. I think I was just sitting there looking depressed. You know, somebody
noticed my down demeanour and said, hey, you want to talk about it? No, I don't
want to talk about it. And one of my friends said, no, you know, Artina, you
should just tell them what's going on. And so I told this woman who happened to
be an amateur pianist and kind of secretly thinking, what can an amateur pianist
tell me? But it's interesting that works in funny ways. And she told me about a
new modality that was in Austin, Texas, and it's actually one of the best
practices in the world called the continuum method. And it uses a hand technique
to turn on your nerve endings at your muscles. Sounded crazy to me, but at this
point, I'm like, hey, I don't have any other hope. I'm going to give this a try.
After two sessions of this muscle activation technique, Artina has the full
range of motion in her hand again, which she says is mind boggling, given where
she'd been. I had lost other mobility in my body. I had suffered from two car
accidents. I wasn't able to turn my head to the left. I was like an old lady at
27. And so he was able to reactivate the nerve endings in my feet. After her
injury, cello player Corrine Morris was also searching for a way to move past
her pain without surgery. She spent nine months working with a specialist in
what's called active release techniques to break down scar tissue in her
shoulder and heal the area. Corrine could finally begin to practice again. And I
remember that first day when I took a bow and drew the bow across the string. I
basically did one minute and that was me done for the day because it was so
tired. It was not hurting, but so tired. But slowly, slowly, minute by minute,
Corrine begins to come back to playing. I needed again to build very slowly into
this and also mentally to trust in myself and trust in my right shoulder that it
was sufficiently healed for me to be able to do this. It was hard for me to even
believe my dream can come back. Six months into my treatment, I gave my first
doctoral recital and you can't believe what that felt like. It was so
incredible. I actually performed a work by Margaret Bonds called Troubled Water.
It felt like a rebirth. It felt like I had been born again. I had been given a
new life, a new opportunity to start over. The piece's meaning really is
symbolic of my story. Troubled Water is actually a Negro spiritual that's based
on the biblical story of God troubling the water for healing. The expression
that I was able to get after being healed, you can only imagine the joy that one
has that exudes not only from just the performance aspect, but from your soul.
Artina McCain is a celebrated concert pianist and is now a scholar showcasing
the work of underrepresented composers and associate professor of piano at
Memphis University. She runs the Musicians Wellness Forum to help her fellow
players find information and create openness. Today, Artina doesn't have the
same relationship with the piano that she did in her twenties, but that's more
than okay. Most of my experiences of practicing over that period of time from
being a teenager to an early 20-something was negative and painful. And yet I
still want this relationship with the piano. And it's like they took away the
fear I had of the piano and restored it with something that's pure love. It
doesn't feel like a vocation or just this is my career, but it actually feels
like an opportunity to connect with humanity and the human soul. The reality of
what it means to have to rebuild after a break is not simple. Corrine Morris
came back after five years away. She recorded a new album, Macedonia, and
sessions recorded with the Macedonian Radio Orchestra. Her second, Chrysalis,
was recorded with the Scottish Chamber Orchestra. Corrine was back. She was
giving promotional interviews, getting great reviews, and she was on stage to
delight audiences. I suddenly started to have fairly severe lower back spasms
and that was like my body saying to me, you're going to have to stop because
there's no way you can play when you have a locked lower back. You can hardly
walk. It turned out as a full-blown burnout, of which I recovered after a few
months. With a second setback, Corrine took a new approach to her care. She
started to look at the art of playing and the underlying causes of her shoulder
issues. It was obviously due to muscle imbalances and lack of recovery time and
strength training and many other aspects of life. From then on, I started to
approach my life in a far more holistic manner for myself. And this has now
become also the object of my next project, which is to build a course for the
next generations so they find out about the realities of managing one's energy,
one's time, building in proper recovery time before it is an injury and doing
preventative measures. And through this holistic approach to her recovery,
Corrine is now able to embrace her cello in a new way, one that allows her to
connect more deeply. The memory of physically playing on the instrument is fully
there. And yet when you do it in real time after a period away, it feels like
that's not exactly how I remembered it. You've moved on as a person and
physically, mentally, spiritually, and you reconnect with this instrument that
you know so well, and yet it feels foreign at the same time until you find your
new way. You settle into your new relationship. You are one with the instrument
again. Why are we creating those notes? And how do we connect with the
composer's emotions and his thoughts that he's poured into the music? And that
flow state just allows you to fly off with that. Flow is one of the most
evocative of experiences, a sense of oneness with your skill, your surroundings,
and the tools of your trade. To lose access to this experience through injury or
anything else is traumatic. It's understandable that so many people in this
position seek a pathway back, but this isn't typically the instant return to
form that makes for a neat and satisfying storyline. More often, it's a jagged
path full of compromises, but this too can lead to its own kind of reinvention.
I think there's a lot to celebrate here about passion, about purpose, about the
strangely intimate relationships we can forge with inanimate objects, and also,
of course, about the nature of reinvention. Obstacles don't need to be the end.
They can denote new beginnings. And true flow may be found when our passions
serve our physical and emotional needs. The storyteller and satirist David
Sedaris returns to Radio 4. The author shares his incisive humor and social
critiques of modern life and himself. A new series of Meet David Sedaris starts
tomorrow evening at 6.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Now on BBC Radio 4, here's
Katie Razzell with The Media Show. Today, what does the tragic story of Nicola
Bully tell us about the media? Yesterday, the broadcast regulator Ofcom wrote to
ITV and Sky News after the Bully family issued damning criticism of them. This
afternoon, the Police and Crime Commissioner for Lancashire launched an
independent review that will look at the police's investigation as well as their
interaction with the media. I'll be talking to a journalist who's been covering
the case and getting the perspective of a former police chief constable. We're
also taking a look at the conflict in Ukraine one year on and asking how it's
changed journalism. I'm joined by journalists in the studio and also in Ukraine.
Amongst them, the BBC's Orla Gerin. Hello Orla, where are you? Tell us where you
are right now. Hi Katie, we're in the east in a small town called Drushkivka and
that's about half an hour from the city of Bakhmut, which people will have been
hearing about in the headlines in recent weeks and months. It's the centre of a
fierce battle now between the Ukrainians and the Russians. Well, very much
welcome. Thank you so much for sparing us the time on The Media Show. And also
with me is Rohit Kachru from ITV News, John Sweeney and Katerina Melofeeva. And
more from you all in a moment, because I want to take a look first at the
reporting around Nikola Buly's disappearance. Let me just play you a clip of
Andrew Snowden, Police and Crime Commissioner for Lancashire, who was speaking
this afternoon. It has got very personal, it's got very vitriol and it has felt
that sometimes that certain elements of the media have been determined to expose
whatever information they can and undermine the police investigation. I think
Ofcom need to look at that and there will be reflections for policing around how
they have handled elements of the investigation. But I think there should be
some reflection from the media around, has their focus always been in all
elements of the media on finding Nikola or creating stories that will simply
create that click through to their websites? Well, that was Andrew Snowden,
Lancashire's Police and Crime Commissioner. And I want to bring in The
Guardian's North of England correspondent, Josh Halliday and Andy Trotter, a
former police chief constable, to make a community statement.