TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-00H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 in Ongiigin. It was abridged and produced by Mary Ward Lowry. BBC News at 11
o'clock. An off-duty police officer has been shot in the town of Omer in
Northern Ireland. Reports say he was shot multiple times in front of young
people during a Gaelic football coaching session at a sports complex. He was
taken to hospital but his condition is not known. The government will publish
plans tomorrow for a radical shake-up of the way English football is governed.
The proposals include the creation of an independent regulator with the power to
licence and sanction clubs, oversee the financial stability of the game and
prevent unscrupulous owners buying clubs. Lawyers for Shamima Begum have
insisted that her legal battle to reinstate her British citizenship is nowhere
near over. The 23-year-old left London when she was 15 to join the Islamic State
group. An immigration appeals court found there was evidence she was trafficked
to Syria but decided that did not overrule national security concerns. A former
head of national counter-terrorism, Chris Phillips, says today's ruling means
Shamima Begum's story will act as a deterrent. Mainly because of her impact, the
impact that she's had and will have in the future on those people that are still
looking towards joining ISIS. You know, we talk about ISIS in a past sense to
some extent. You know, this is still a major issue for the world and there are
many people in the UK and across the world that still believe in ISIS and would
love to see it make a comeback. The Home Office has announced that 12,000 asylum
seekers will be considered for refugee status without face-to-face interviews. A
10-page questionnaire will decide the cases of people from Afghanistan, Eritrea,
Libya, Syria and Yemen who applied before last July. The UN General Assembly is
meeting in New York to discuss the war in Ukraine. A motion has been tabled
calling on Russia to withdraw from all Ukrainian territory. The vote has no
legal effect. And rugby's Six Nations match between Wales and England will now
go ahead on Saturday after the Welsh players dropped plans to go on strike in a
dispute over new contracts. They struck a compromise deal with the Welsh Rugby
Union during talks this afternoon. BBC News. And BBC Eye player. Six robbers
have carried out an armed raid, stealing almost three tonnes of gold. Inspired
by Britain's biggest gold heist. How do you shift three tonnes of gold? Slowly.
Â£26 million worth of pure gold in the possession of people who didn't expect to
have it. If you could handle a job like this, then I'd have heard of you. You
only hear about the people who get caught. Stealing it was just the start. We're
looking for six robbers and three tonnes of gold. Every ring, every watch. If
you're looking for the gold, it's all around you. The Gold. Watch on BBC Eye
player. Well now the last of three modern day ghost stories. The Haunting.
Written by and starring Tom Neenan. This week, viral. Thank you. Yeah, thank you
very much. What a privilege it is to be here. So many innovators, so many social
media pioneers. If a bomb went off in this room today, well the bombing would
probably have been organised on one of your platforms. Most of you will know me,
and for those who don't, I'm Camilla Chambers. No doubt my book, Social Media
Safety, Protecting Yourself and Others, sits on many of your Kindles. I bet one
or two of you have even read it. I stand before you today at short notice, I
grant you, to deliver a brief session on a subject which means a lot to me. I've
called this talk, quite dramatically, Knowing the Online Nightmare. I hope you
will remember this, and that just as WWJD is a Christian saying, so too I hope,
Know the Online Nightmare. KTON will become yours. Say it with me. KTON. KTON.
KTON. One more time. KTON. Because while the platforms you create have enormous
benefits, for some, they can be a nightmare. And only by knowing that can you
hope to improve the spaces you create. Tonight, I hope to show you the need for
improvement first hand. The story which frames my talk was a nightmare. Just two
details have been changed, but the rest is 100% accurate. 18 months ago, I went
to meet Tom, a tech blogger, who was going to interview me about social
networking ethics. When he suggested the venue be a grotty cafe on an A-road
just outside Reading, I was hesitant. But he sounded so desperate, I agreed. I
arrived and he seemed a little distracted. What a venue. All the bacon I can eat
for an ATP. Hello, yes, Camilla, isn't it? That's right. And, I'm sorry, why did
we arrange to meet again? For the interview. Okay, sure. What do you want to
know? Shoot, I'm an open book. You were going to be interviewing me. Right, yes,
of course I was. I remember that. Well, I'd probably say my first question would
be, what's the interview about? It's about to be over. Sorry, sorry, of course.
I remember. Right, I had a glance at the kitchen and they've got a door with one
of those panic bars in case we need to get out via the back. And you've brought
your friend along. Hi, I'm Heidi. And do you talk about doors with panic bars a
lot? What? Look, would anyone mind telling me what the hell is going on? A week
ago, you contacted me about an interview. Then you changed the venue and time.
Now, you don't know what we're speaking about. Sorry, it's been a weird few
hours. Well, for me, it's been a weird 30 seconds and that's quite enough. Fine,
fine. It started yesterday morning. I bought some old video games off Gumtree
and this guy, Dale, said he'd pop round to bring them over. There was a load of
them. Goldeneye, Doom, the original Resident Evil. The graphics aren't up to
scratch but you can't fault them for playability. Just stick to relevant
information maybe, Tom, yeah? Right, OK. Anyway, when he arrived, he seemed
quite distracted. Oh, I love these old games. You see, the graphics aren't up
too much but you can't fault them for playability. No, yeah, of course. You OK?
Yeah, yeah, no, I'm fine. Just haven't slept in a while. Oh, I was like that
first time I played Doom. Couple night being chased by shadowy creatures. Yeah,
yeah, something like that. Yeah, sorry, where shall I put them? Um, pop the
games there by the gaming chair. Live alone, do you? Yeah, the gaming chair's a
bit of a giveaway, isn't it? No, no, I mean, there's nobody else in the flat.
No, no, if you want to stay and have a game, you're more than welcome. I have
Tekken. No thanks, not interested really. Worried I'll beat you. Other way
round, actually. Oh, you know that's an expression, right? Sorry, one more time.
Oh God, how terrible. I know, right? He just knocked me out cold. No, I mean,
your living situation. You're in your thirties and you own a gaming chair. I'm
sort of missing the main thrust of the narrative. I once saw one of those with a
commode built in. I mean, what is wrong with people? Oh, he would if he could,
believe me. Heidi! Not now. Can I just get on with the story? So when I came
round, my hands were tied behind me and I couldn't feel my legs because my hands
were tied behind me. That was a joke. I couldn't resist. Heidi, not now. Can I
just get on with the story? Yeah, fair point. So Dale was standing over me
holding a piece of card. Oh, dear God, I've met some socially awkward gamers in
my time, but this immediately puts you in the top three. Well, top five. Shut
up. Right. See this card? Read it out loud. Okay, I'll just read it neutral. You
let me know if you want a more playful delivery. Just read it. Emily Dreever,
Emily Dreever, Emily Dreever. Not bad. Bit repetitive. The ending needs work.
I'm so sorry, but I didn't have any choice. I haven't slept in five days.
Creating that literary masterpiece. I'm not surprised. She's coming for you now.
Good luck. And then he untied me and left. What did he mean? She's coming for
you. That's what I asked. We had no idea, but we thought we could search engine
the name. Just say Google. No, that's how they win. We SE'd the name and it
turns out Emily Dreever was a minor Instagram celebrity. Couple of hundred
thousand followers. The way she got so popular was through a thing called
extreme glamming. I regret asking, but what is that? Oh, it's huge. It's
basically beauty blogging in extreme conditions. So contouring in a canyon,
doing smokey eye in a sandstorm. It's stupid, but people love it. People? Me. I
love it. But Emily was out there. The more extreme the video, the more viewers
she got until one day she was recording a guide to statement lipsticks on the
very top of Kyoto's tallest skyscraper when she slept. And what? Smudged her
cheek with some cheeky pink? Smudged some bystanders with explosive red. Well,
that's delightful. And why did this Dale character want you to say her name? Was
it some kind of guerrilla marketing? Because hats off to her. It's a bold
gambit. We didn't know, but her Instagram bio mentioned a boyfriend. Felix with
three X's. So we organized to meet him at his house. He's ridiculously huge
house. Let it go, Tom. He's eight years younger than me. Anyway, we met up with
him later that day in his mansion. Yes, fine. In his mansion. Oh, mate, it all
happened about 18 months ago, I think. I mean, time is just insane. Is it? What
happened exactly? When I got the news about Emily, I was in shock. My face was
total cry emoji. You mean you were crying? Sure. I mean, I suppose you could
call it that. Must have been awful. No. Yeah, I was so shocked. And then if I
can be honest here, I was as shocked again when she turned up at my place after
her funeral. I can imagine. Sorry. What? She turned up at your house after her
own funeral. I know. Random, right? I mean, Emily used the phrase I'm dead a
lot, usually about videos of cats playing different instruments. But this time
she was actually dead. There's this one where this kitten is inside a bassoon.
I'm having trouble following this. Well, the cat is sort of crawling around in
the bassoon. Not that bit. The other bit. Well, that bit too. OK, look, here's
the thing. You know, ghosts have all like unfinished business and shit. As
Dickens once wrote. Well, M wants to be famous. Proper mega famous. She always
said you're only dead when nobody's talking about you anymore. And I reckon
that's why she is wandering around. And now she's wandering after Tom. Yeah,
why? So it goes like you say her name and then she starts coming after you.
Shocked cat ghost excise. Are you emoji in your own sentences? Get someone else
to say her name three times. She comes for them. It's her way of keeping people
talking about her. Keep the brand current. So this is all about her getting more
famous and it's working. You're the fifth person who's come asking about her
this month. Last guy was this sweaty bloke called Dale and I don't reckon he was
even a fan of hers, but he knew her name. See branding genius. And what happens
if I don't get someone to say her name? Oh, mate, no. Do get someone to say her
name, because otherwise, if you don't and she catches you IRL, let's just say
she'll give you an extreme makeover of your own. Edvard Munch scream emoji. Like
what? She'll pluck your eye. Brows? Right. Just say her name. Pass it on. Spread
the brand. It's simpler that way. We should be going. Yes, we should. Felix.
It's Felix sex sex. Felix sex sex. Felix sex sex. Oh, em gee. There she is at
the window. Give her a wave and get the hell out of here. Yeah, yeah, we should
be going. I'll show you a back way so it won't get messy. Yes, please follow me.
We'll go through the garage. So many cars. Don't scratch that Batmobile. It's an
original. How rich are you? I haven't really checked today. Today? Oh, babe,
have you smashed my window again? Say I believe you. If all you need is to get
someone else to say her name, get a stranger to say it. You have to know the
person who's saying it. Until we know what to do with it, it wouldn't be right
to pass it on to a friend. Plus, despite years of blogging, this is the first
time Tom's had a committed female following. Not a helpful comment to make,
really. Yeah, sorry, I couldn't resist. And then you emailed me about the
interview and I thought maybe you might be able to change the rules. Get the
higher ups to shut down her account. You know, use your influence. I can't stand
in front of every platform developer and just get them all to change their
rules. And I'm not tarnishing my reputation off the back of a very dubious story
from two weird strangers. Well, if you won't do that, would you say her name
three times? No. Yeah, that's a long shot. So goodbye then. You will let me know
when the interview is on your website, won't you? The interview? Well, no, it...
Oh, you're being sarcastic. Well observed. Do let me know how this all turns out
for you. You have my number? She seemed nice. What am I going to do, Heidi?
Well, there's only one thing we can do. What's that? Get the bill. Sure. Oh,
maybe she changed her mind. Camilla? Tom? Camilla? That's not Camilla. Oh. Oh.
Hello, Emily. I've heard so much about you. Yeah, big fan of the video on Mount
Rushmore where you review 14 different shades of blusher. Mount Blushmore, yeah,
that is a great one. And that whole eyebrow sculpting tutorial by the wind farm.
Huge fan. No, pun intended. Let's head to the back door, shall we? Good idea.
And the Burj Khalifa bronzer challenge. Breathtaking. Open the door. I can't.
They must have changed it at the back. Whose smart idea was that? I am starting
to realise why they call it a panic door. Emily, maybe we can come to some kind
of arrangement. I don't know what exactly. Oh, God, oh, God, oh, God, oh, God. I
can't watch and that is the first time I have ever said that about a makeup
tutorial. Oh, God, she's going to really bring out my eyes. Literally. She's
leaving. Why is she leaving? How did we do that? Did I do something clever
without realising? That doesn't sound like something you would do. Oh, God.
Hello? You're welcome. What? I did it. You got her account shut down? No, I said
her name three times. You said her name? Why? I was pulling onto the motorway
and I thought, I don't know what I thought. Call it a hunch. Call it stupidity.
Just please never call me again, OK? OK. Bye. Who was that? Camilla. She said
Emily's name three times. Emily's her responsibility now. That was nice of her.
It was. We should track her down. Make sure she's OK. Yes, because if you ask
me, Camilla is clearly a beautiful and inspirational genius. So that's the story
as I experienced it. Obviously, I've had to make some assumptions about what was
said after I left. But that broadly is what happened. It's the story of a young
woman who died chasing followers on platforms like yours. Maybe it's time you
took some responsibility for some of these problems. Maybe it's time you know
the online nightmare. K-T-O-N. Now, before I leave you and draw this
presentation to a close, I would like to make some clarifications. I said I
would change two details of this story and I did. But here's the truth. The
meeting in the cafe didn't happen 18 months ago. It happened yesterday. And the
girl's name, it wasn't Emily Dreever. It was K-T-O-N. A name, thanks to my
little mnemonic, you have all now said three times. I don't know which one of
you said it first or last, if she'll come after all or just one of you. But
she's coming. You've created this monster. Now it's your turn to deal with it.
Good luck. Camilla, that was amazing. So smart. They are all terrifying. That'll
give them something to think about. Finally, my message might actually sink in.
K-T-O-N, of course. I repeated it during the soundcheck. So smart. Wait, how
many times did you repeat it during the soundcheck? Two? Three? Two? I can't
remember. Unbelievable. I'll start the car. The Haunting was written by and
starred Tom Neenan. It also starred Jenny Bede as Heidi, Nicola Walker as
Camilla, Ewan Bailey as Dale and Yvonne Gonzalez as Felix. The producer was
David Tyler and it was a positive production for the BBC. This is BBC Radio 4.
And now the news remixed as a current affairs comedy concept album with some
very strong language. It's John Holmes's The Skewer. Tim. Rishi Sunak has been
told the threat of Oompa Loompas is real. Prince Andrew is offering sauna
sessions in an old horse box. Two of the UK's biggest supermarket chains are
introducing limits on human trafficking. Morrison's is restricting people to two
each. And King Charles will commission 12 new pieces of music to be performed at
his coronation in May. Among them will be an anthem composed by Katie Price's
disabled son, Harvey. When we stand up for the sovereignty of nations, when we
stand up, we stand up for democracy. So that brings us to the end of our
program. Now let's have a look at the cop sucker that pops up this weekend.
President Biden made an unannounced visit to Ukraine's capital. Literally I
think it's a war crime. Fight for freedom wherever there's trouble. How can I be
of help? Comment from the Kremlin. God knows what he's thinking. I don't think
he's thinking that. Knowing is half the battle. G.I. Joe. Roald Dahl's iconic
books have received a woke makeover. His publisher has made hundreds of changes
to the original text. Charlie and the Chocolate Factory. Charlie and the Fair
Trade Avocado Factory. Read by James Boland. And the big friendly giant in the
BFG. The BFG. TQIA+. Read by Olivia Colman. The BFG TQIA+. was a gender fluid
dream. Did anyone check with Roald Dahl when they did these rewrites? The
Unpleasant Magical Women. Read by Patrick Stewart. It's important to remember
that witches aren't real, so they couldn't possibly be offended, even if they
are bald and ugly. What was glorious about Roald Dahl's books is that they were
violent. They were dark, rude and offensive. Matilda. Read by Miriam Margulies.
Matilda loved reading books. One day she was reading in her room when her father
came in. What's this rubbish? He asked. It's a book by Roald Dahl. They've
changed it though. They've taken out the offensive language, Matilda said. What
a bunch of woke twats, her father fumed. You can't just change it. You can't
just put words in people's mouths. I prefer it actually, Matilda said calmly.
Shut up you stupid little cunt. The Prime Minister is in Belfast with a deal
with the EU on the Northern Ireland Protocol thought to be close to completion.
Welcome to Deal or No Deal. Well today I had positive conversations with
political parties in Northern Ireland. Hello. He did not see that coming at all.
There's work to do. We have not got a deal yet. Great times in the dream
factory. See you tomorrow. It was one of the most daring heists in British
criminal history. It's been announced that MPs are going to get a pay rise. This
is April this year. By April the gang were ready. They've taken something that
doesn't belong to them. MPs should turn this money down. No, I think they should
take it. This part of London is the very heartland of one of Britain's most
notorious crime organisations. They're running the country. One of the
ringleaders put it like this. In some ways I feel that Christmas has come early.
They're public servants. A gang of aging criminals. The perfect crime. They
don't just sit there and bark. Old school villains. Look, some MPs, some would
argue maybe on the take a little bit. I'm told by underworld sources that it's
two, three, four times that amount. I don't think we'll ever know. Should MPs
get a pay rise of 2.9%? It harks back to a kind of golden age of robbery. Former
kickboxer and online misogynist Andrew Tate. Andrew Tate. The British American
influencer Andrew Tate. He's someone who's built a social media empire by
encouraging men to embark on these sort of self-improvement programmes. Andrew
Tate's misogynistic tirades have been viewed billions of times online. Much of
his content is also a sort of caricature. There's a whole bunch of men in the
world who understands my value. Of what an alpha male might look like. Pictures
of him next to supercars, smoking enormous cigars, next to guns with fancy hat
women. So Andrew Tate has this thing called the Hustlers Academy, where he says
he's going to teach how to sort of live this lifestyle like he does. And he
charges about $50 a month. Topics like women are the property of men, women who
are raped, so probably they're contributing to that by being out on their own.
I've been seeing what my son's watching on YouTube. Construct a female to
provide sustenance. He does seem to speak to young men. I think my sister is her
husband's property. My son seems to put Andrew Tate on a bit of a pedestal. If I
meet a girl who's 33 and single, I know the amount of dick that's been through
her before me is just simply unattractive. Women, let's cut to the chase here,
women should clean up. If you're sitting there going, that's sexist, well it's
sexist for me to fucking pay for everything, isn't it? You fucking bimbo. If men
grow up to be like me, you're going to have a whole bunch of people with no
criminal record. Andrew Tate was arrested in the Boop arrest. Who protect and
provide for the people close to him. On suspicion of human trafficking. Are
fantastic for the economy. Rape and are forming an organized crime group. The
lawyer for Tate has said that his client rejects all the allegations. Vice News
obtained WhatsApp messages and voice notes sent by Andrew Tate to a woman who
accused him of rape. The more you didn't like it, the more I enjoyed it. I
fucking loved how much you hated it. Shh, turn me on. Sometimes you forget
exactly how lucky you were to get fucked by me. Are you seriously so offended I
strangled you a little bit? You didn't fucking pass out. Chill the fuck out.
Jesus Christ, I thought you were cool. What's wrong with you? The fact that
masses of men are parading through the streets in defense of him, after all of
that stuff came out, is deeply distressing. I didn't put a magic spell on
everybody. I managed to accumulate a large amount of affinity with the male
populace across the Western world because I'm simply saying things that many men
believe, think, and feel. So many adults have literally no idea what is being
said to the kids. I am one of the most dangerous men on this planet. Don't
forget to smash that like button. It's a nice day for a white BAFTA. Welcome to
the 76th BAFTA Film Awards. I'm white actor Richard E. Grant and I can ride a
horse. What was it like on the red carpet? Give me a feel, Martin. Give you a
feel? Yeah, give me a feel, Christ. That's not that kind of show. I'm not being
funny. Where is the diversity of the BAFTA? Fundamentally, there aren't enough
people of color in our industry. It's a nice day for a white BAFTA. You bet. It
happens every time. I'm not a queer white. Please welcome the legendary white
actor Sir Patrick Stewart. From where I was sitting, I can see your belly. It's
a nice day for a white BAFTA. It's a nice day for a white BAFTA. It's a nice day
for a white BAFTA. And I judge every trade on its merits. The Scotland Hour, The
Search is on for their next first minister after Nicola Sturgeon's surprise
resignation. This is Naked Attraction. Tonight, could Kate Forbes be the one to
step up as FM? Troublesome. I like trouble, though. Funza Yousaf's name is also
being floated. Please, please, please don't be a bloody dickhead. He's currently
the health secretary. What a dream job. Now, the third person in the race is Ash
Regan, not as well known. It's total cringe. Wow. Dionne and John are from the
party's youth wing. Who do you want? I mean, I think for me, it's more about the
qualities I'm looking for in somebody. A nice bum as well. Bit of a peachy.
Leadership hopefuls will need the backing of 100 members. Nice bit of girth on
that penis. You're going to have to make a decision. I'm looking for someone
that will just really represent the Scottish people and focus on independence
for Scotland. Wow. One person who it won't be the MP Ian Blackford. He's got a
great bum. Oh, and he is twerking that bum. The former Westminster leader of the
SNP has ruled himself out. Naughty. And they were cleared of the MP. I'm not
going to be a member of the SNP. There are clear dividing lines between the
candidates. That is one hell of a hairy crack. He's got a nice set of balls as
well. A lion-hearted litigator becomes a fractured fiend. The Labour Party is
unrecognisable from 2019. The notorious gangster known as Two-Face. I am working
with Jeremy Corbyn to try to win the next general election. He's experiencing a
violent breakdown. Jeremy Corbyn will not stand for Labour at the next general
election. Have I read all of Batman's case files about Two-Face? Well look, I
don't think that the role of politicians is to go on to picket lines. Two-Face.
And it's really important you get politicians to come out and support you and
stand with you. Two-Face is a maniac, but he knows it. I'm not going to resile
from my belief in the NHS. Two-Face is losing his grip. I'm proposing there's a
partnership model with private business. His obsession with his own duality is
beyond his control right now. I've changed my mind on loads of things. And just
like that, his mind broke clean in two. And it will never go back. I've seen
much of the world. It is brutal and cruel and dark. Lancashire police have
confirmed they've recovered a body from the River Wye, just a mile away from
where Nicola Bully disappeared. The investigation was attracting amateur
sleuths. TikTokers have been playing their own private detective. Some of them
live-streamed their own theories on social media. Hundreds of people. I am
filming. I'm just getting some little clips for TikTok. You should see the
Coliseum, Spanien. 50,000 Romans watching. The creation of what some critics
have called true crime brain. You view everything as a true crime story. Social
media and true crime content creation has become democratized. Win the crowd.
Conjure magic for them and they'll be distracted. We feel a sense of like
ownership over the person that is not actually due. The whole world and its
wifers weighing in on this. I don't often see you enjoying the pleasures of the
vulgar crowd. The audience is titillated. He knows too well how to manipulate
the mob. That is somebody's mum, somebody's partner, somebody's daughter. The
crowd wants battle, so the emperor gives them battle. Do you think the police
were right to reveal, you know, deeply personal information? All the people were
seeking to make that information public. I will win the crowd. I will give them
something they've never seen before. Their hunger is forced. I'll feed you to
the lions. A beating heart and bone is not the marble of the senate, it's the
sand of the Coliseum. Alexa, who twisted the skewer? The skewer was twisted by
John Holmes, Katie Sayer, Paul Carney, Dave Wall, Henrik Persson, Cooper, Maur
Hemsworth, David Rifkin and Tony Chernside. Additional material, Nikki Roberts,
Liz Ryan, Amy Harrison, Selena Igni, Pete Redfern, Nick Harper, Jack Stewart and
a few man's field. The producer was John Holmes. The skewer was an unusual
production for BBC Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Yesterday we recovered Nicola Bully
from the River Wyre. Our girls will get the support they need from the people
who love them the most and it saddens us to think that one day we will have to
explain to them that the press and members of the public accused their dad of
wrongdoing, misquoted and vilified friends and family. We tried to take in what
we have been told only to have Sky News, special programme live for you today
from St Michael's on wire in Lancashire and ITV, news at 10 St Michael's on
wire, making contact with us directly when we expressly asked for privacy. It is
shameful they have acted in this way. Are you not entertained? Are you not
entertained? Is this not why you are here? And all previous series of the skewer
are available on BBC Sounds. You can literally go anywhere at the snap of your
fingers. For 100 years the BBC has been making groundbreaking radio drama. Of
course a tired woman, but you have to ask yourself what I'm tired of. The radio
plays our voices in the dark. Join me, Michael Simmons-Roberts, as I explore
this great dramatic form. It's just a sheer amount of possibilities. Continuing
our celebration of the centenary of BBC radio drama. There is scope for so much
more to happen on radio. Dramatic Beats on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds on Saturday
night at 8. Now Prime Minister's question time and will there be a new Brexit
deal for Northern Ireland today in Parliament? Hello, this is Susan Hume at
Westminster where Labour says the Prime Minister's own MPs are getting in the
way of a new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland. The country has to wait while he
plucks up the courage to take on the malcontents, the reckless, the wreckers on
his own benches. Rishi Sunak says Parliament will be able to express its view on
his deal, but Labour's strategy would be surrender. It's give the EU a blank
check and agree to anything they offer. Also tonight a committee proffers a
bible to ensure honest answers from royal mail bosses. The evidence I shall give
before this committee shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the
truth. And a Scottish Government minister comes to Westminster with a message on
drugs policy. We really need all the tools in our box to tackle this public
health emergency. But first, the Prime Minister has said Parliament will be able
to express its view on any new deal he strikes with the EU over Northern Ireland
trade rules. It's thought that the Government is on the brink of agreeing new
rules with Brussels, but it's been suggested it's not there yet because some
elements of Rishi Sunak's own party and the DUP are not yet on board. Under
Boris Johnson's Brexit deal, the protocol left Northern Ireland following many
EU rules to prevent checks on the sensitive border with the Republic. But it has
instead led to some checks on goods travelling between Northern Ireland and the
rest of the UK, which has angered unionists. At Prime Minister's questions, the
Labour leader argued that people needed to be realistic about what was possible.
We all agree that the protocol can be improved, but there are trade-offs and we
need to face up to them. His predecessor told businesses that there would be no
forms, no checks, no barriers of any kind. That was absolute nonsense and it
destroyed trust. So would the Prime Minister concede that any deal would have to
see Northern Ireland follow some EU rules to avoid border checks with the
Republic? The Prime Minister felt he was jumping ahead a bit because... We are
still in intensive, intensive discussions with the European Union to ensure that
we can find agreement that meets the test that I set, and that is sovereignty
for Northern Ireland. It's Northern Ireland's place in our precious union and it
is to find practical solutions. Sir Keir Starmer noted the Prime Minister had
said nothing specific about what a deal might look like, for example, on
contentious issues like whether the European Court of Justice would still get a
role in settling trade disputes. The Prime Minister is biting his tongue, but at
some point the irreconcilables on his benches are going to twig and they're
going to come after him. Rishi Sunak repeated that nothing was decided yet and
said Keir Starmer was taking his usual position on the EU. It's give the EU a
blank check and agree to anything they offer. It's not a strategy, Mr Speaker,
that's surrender. Conservatives were keen to demonstrate unity and yelled more,
but Keir Starmer pressed on. Mr Speaker, the sound you hear is them cheering the
Prime Minister, pulling the wool over their eyes. He said politics in Northern
Ireland needed to be built on trust, not on telling people what they wanted to
hear. So can the Prime Minister confirm that whatever deal he brings back, this
House will get a vote on it? Prime Minister. Mr Speaker, of course, of course
Parliament will express its view, but what is crucial, but what is crucial here,
but what is crucial here is that this is not, this is not about his desire to
play political games in this House with this situation. This is about what is
best for the people and communities of Northern Ireland. Keir Starmer reckoned
the deal was actually ready and waiting. It's the same old story. The country
has to wait while he plucks up the courage to take on the malcontents, the
reckless, the wreckers on his own benches. But I'm here to tell him he doesn't
need to worry about that because we will put country before party and ensure
that Labour votes to get it through. Absolutely. He should accept our offer,
ignore the howls of indignation from those on his side who will never take yes
for an answer. Why doesn't he just get on with it? That was his last question,
so Keir Starmer could have no comeback when the Prime Minister went on the
attack in his final answer. The Honourable Gentleman talks about his plans. We
have heard that tomorrow he's going to announce five missions. But we already
know what they are. It's uncontrolled immigration, it's reckless spending, it's
higher debt and it's softer sentences. And for the fifth pledge, the fifth
pledge, Mr Speaker, we all know it's that he reserves the right to change his
mind on the other four. But the difficult questions about his negotiations were
not quite over. The DUP leader, Sir Geoffrey Donaldson, got to his feet to
underline that the protocol Boris Johnson had agreed to was unacceptable and he
wanted fundamental changes. It is unacceptable that EU laws are imposed on
Northern Ireland with no democratic scrutiny or consent. And will he assure me
that he will address these fundamental constitutional issues and do so not just
by tweaking the protocol, but by rewriting the legally binding treaty text? The
Prime Minister didn't make any promises, but said he heard him loud and clear.
Sir Geoffrey and his party have refused to take part in power sharing with Sinn
Fein in the devolved Northern Ireland Assembly until the EU trade issues sorted
out. Under the rules, the Westminster government has to call new assembly
elections if power sharing still isn't back up and running. But in the hopes
that a new EU deal will persuade the DUP to get back to work at Stormont, the
government's putting off the elections till next year. Alicia McCarthy reports.
It's a little over a year since Paul Gibbon announced his resignation as First
Minister of Northern Ireland as part of the DUP's protest against the post-
Brexit trading arrangements. His decision effectively meant Stormont couldn't
function properly. And despite an election being held last year, it's still not
back up and running. The deadlock meant another election was due this April. But
in the Commons, the Northern Ireland Secretary, Chris Heaton-Harris, brought in
a bill to stop that happening, saying at the moment another vote would be
unwelcome. At this critical juncture, the best approach to facilitating the
return of those institutions is one built on flexibility. Flexibility to allow
the time and space for the negotiations on the Northern Ireland Protocol between
the UK and the EU to continue. And flexibility to promote the parties in
Northern Ireland collaborating to form a government and not competing in an
unwelcome election. So he was extending the deadline for an executive to be
formed until January next year. But he stressed the current arrangements with
civil servants taking some decisions wasn't sustainable. This logistical bit of
legislation had a last-minute change made to it to help a six-year-old boy and
others like him in need of organ transplants. Dahey's law will mean people in
Northern Ireland automatically become potential donors unless they opt out. The
bill had passed through the Northern Ireland Assembly, but got held up by the
Stormont stalemate. With Dahey and his father looking down from the public
gallery, Chris Heaton-Harris said he'd been moved by the family's story and
dedication to making the change. And I'm sure honourable members would wish to
join me in welcoming him here and commending the whole family for their valiant
efforts. They should not need to be here today to see this change being put in
place. The Assembly could and should have convened to take this across the
finish line. The Shadow Secretary of State Peter Kyle said his party wouldn't
oppose the bill as it wasn't clear what an election now would achieve. The
vacuum caused by the absence of Stormont is having a profound effect on Northern
Ireland and I don't think we would accept that in any other part of our country.
Public sector workers are striking, but there are no ministers to negotiate
with. Civil servants are being asked to make impossible decisions about
education cuts behind closed doors. And the health service has the worst waiting
lists in the UK, with no clear plan to improve them. The DUP leader Sir Geoffrey
Donaldson defended his decision to pull out of the Northern Ireland Executive
last year in protest at the protocol. It was what I felt a measured response to
the inactivity, up to that point the failure of the EU to engage with the
government in a meaningful way to bring forward proposals that would address the
concerns of unionists. And he hoped between now and January there'd be
fundamental change to the protocol to, as he put it, restore Northern Ireland's
place in the UK. The Alliance MP Stephen Farrie agreed it was right to postpone
the elections, but he argued that if the Assembly wasn't restored soon, it would
be time to look at wider reform, in particular the ability of individual parties
to veto power sharing. This is not about exclusion of any party. This is about a
situation where if a party is determined to exclude themselves, that that
doesn't bring the whole show down and prevent other parties who are willing to
govern to proceed. But my preference is that all parties that have a mandate
will work together in Northern Ireland for the collective good of our society.
The SDLP's Clare Hanna wanted the parties back at Stormont as soon as possible
to get on with tackling issues like housing, climate, jobs and most urgently
health. She said the stalemate was eroding public services and belief in
politics. And it is giving comfort to some of the anti-democratic forces that
are still skulking in the background, that haven't really come to terms with the
agreement and with the will of most people in our society to move forward and to
get on with solving our problems and creating our shared future. As to the
legislation before MPs... This bill is like a few that we've been through
recently, a bit of a sticking plaster on failure, but there is some real good
coming out of today, thank goodness, in the progress of Dahi's law. Clare Hanna
said Dahi and his family should be proud of all they'd achieved. The bill later
cleared all its common stages and will now go off to the House of Lords. Alicia
McCarthy. Back at Prime Minister's questions, the SNP's Westminster leader,
Stephen Flynn, was dismayed that energy bills are likely to rise from April.
Because of the way the government's energy support works, people will be paying
more despite falling wholesale prices. Wholesale gas prices have fallen by 75%
since their peak, yet in just a matter of weeks, the British Government, the
Westminster Government, intend to increase energy bills by a further Â£500. What
would motivate a Prime Minister to do such a thing? Mr Speaker, what we are
doing is providing tens of billions of pounds of support for people with their
energy bills, particularly the most vulnerable. What we're also doing, opposed
by the SNP, is to invest in producing more homegrown gas here in the UK and the
North Sea. The Lib Dem leader, Sir Ed Davey, referred to the Conservatives'
promise at the last election to build 40 more hospitals in England. He said that
after three years, most didn't even have planning permission and communities
felt betrayed. St Helier Hospital in South London is literally crumbling, but
there's still no plan to save it. Hinchingbrook Hospital in Cambridgeshire has
sewage leaking into its wards and a roof that could collapse at any moment. Does
the Prime Minister agree that these are conditions no patients, doctors or
nurses should have to put up with? Rishi Sunak said he was investing record sums
in the NHS. Not just going on upgrading almost 100 hospitals, developing 40
large-scale developments, as the Honourable Gentleman knows, but also investing
in more scanners, more ambulances across the board, so we can deliver vital care
to people. And he said emergency care was showing a clear improvement. You're
listening to Today in Parliament with me, Susan Hume. Coming up, with sewage
spilling into English waterways, calls to stop the polluter getting paid. Why
aren't the government looking at stopping water company bosses being able to
give bonuses until they clean up their act? But first, after the head of Royal
Mail appeared before a committee of MPs last month, thousands of postal workers
got in touch, disputing what he'd said. So Simon Thomson was recalled to explain
himself. And the second session proved to be even more stormy than the first.
Mandy Baker was watching. Witnesses who appear before Commons committees are
expected to tell the truth, so there's no need for them to swear an oath. But
when an official approaches them with a Bible, it's clear the session is going
to be different. Given the circumstances in which this is a recall hearing with
allegations of misleading Parliament, we have decided on balance that we will
ask the witnesses to take the oath today. The chair of the business committee,
Labour's Darren Jones, said that the answers he got during the original session
didn't align, as he put it, with the 1,500 pieces of correspondence he'd been
sent afterwards by unhappy postal workers. So it wasn't just the oath-taking
that made this feel like a court hearing. There were exhibits too. If I could
ask the clerk to display image one on the screen, please. This was a route map
tracking staff as they did their rounds, and yet the Royal Mail boss, Simon
Thompson, had told the committee before that his workers weren't tracked. He
explained... It's not information that's available in real time. As I said last
time, we don't track the postal workers in real time, nor do we nudge them in
terms of making sure they go at the right pace. Another exhibit was a bar chart
showing the time in minutes that each individual spent not moving during their
round. Simon Thompson admitted that particular example was a breach of the
rules. He insisted the tracking devices were only used to balance workloads. But
what did that mean? Darren Jones asked the Royal Mail's Operations Development
Director, Ricky McCauley. What's the consequences for those people who are
slower than the average when you're trying to balance this? It's not a case that
they're slower than the average. It may well be they're not completing the route
to time. If you're not completing the route on time, you're being slow, aren't
you, by its very nature? Well, absolutely, I don't accept that. At all. Well,
I'm sorry, if you can't complete your route on time, there is a time target to
complete the route. If you don't do it on time, you are by your very nature
being too slow, aren't you? That's not the accusation we would make of a postal
worker. We would sit down with them and we would try and establish if they had a
problem in the route, whether a road was closed or is there any particular
reason. The framing of how we behave in Royal Mail is not representative of what
I see. Sounds very unusual to me, Mr McCauley, just on the basis of the English
language. Several of the MPs on the committee, including Labour's Ian Lavery,
were struck by a yellow dot on the tracking data, which showed when a postal
worker was standing still. If the dot gets bigger, then there's an alarm after
one minute. Right, Ricky. So, to the best of my knowledge, that's not the case.
Given we're under oath, I would like to take the opportunity to... Check.
Absolutely. If we check. Check. I don't believe so either. And the reason I say
it's not in real time and the managers don't actually get to see the data to the
next day, so we certainly don't haul people into delivery offices when they come
back out of delivery. They don't have the data to the next day and we don't do
any hauling, full stop. But, Ricky, I think we are under oath today and I think
we'll double check. The committee chair, Darren Jones, made the point that they
should do that, whether they were under oath or not. At the original hearing,
Royal Mail denied that it was prioritising the delivery of parcels over letters.
But Darren Jones said he'd been sent recordings of staff being briefed that they
should concentrate on parcels. He accused Simon Thompson of breaching the
company's universal service obligation, USO, to deliver letters six days a week.
Do you recognise the system-wide failure that is currently taking place at Royal
Mail? I totally understand, based on the US... Not understand. Do you agree with
me, yes or no? Our USO performance has definitely not been good enough. Do you
agree with me that it is a system-wide failure, yes or no? It's hard for... I'm
sorry, Chair, and I can see that you're getting frustrated with it. I do not...
I'd like you to answer the question. I can see you're getting frustrated with
it. I do not recognise those briefings. I understand... You disagree there's a
system-wide failure. You disagree with that. No, we are definitely not achieving
USO. And as I've said in correspondence... It doesn't achieve......and said
around this committee many times, that it is my commitment to make sure we're
doing better. And I would like to say that what I've seen recently is we are
definitely doing better. Darren Jones summed up the afternoon. There's a theme
to your answers today, gentlemen. There's a theme, which is we have rogue
posters, we have rogue managers, we have isolated incidences, we've got a global
pandemic, we've got industrial action. It's everyone else's fault. Everyone
else's fault that there are all of these problems. Nothing to do with me, Gov.
And he seemed dismayed that the Royal Mail chief hadn't said sorry for any
misunderstanding. Simon Thompson did then apologise if he hadn't been clear, as
he put it. He said he was facing a difficult task. We are making changes that
have been overdue for some time. There are some very difficult changes that we
need to make. But what I'm focused on and what I'm interested in is growing the
business so that the great team that we have can actually have the long-term job
security that it is that they deserve. And he suggested that meant he wasn't
always going to be popular. One thing he and the committee would probably agree
on. Mandy Baker. An environment minister has denied the government's
backtracking on plans to allow the Environment Agency to fine water companies
that pollute English waterways up to a quarter of a billion pounds. A
Conservative, Lady Altman, was concerned after the chair of the Environment
Agency, Alan Lovell, criticised the proposed fines as crazy and excessive. Does
my noble friend the minister think it appropriate for the chair of the
Environment Agency to publicly state that a proposed Â£250 million fine is crazy?
And does he share my concern that the chair of our main regulator should express
such lack of confidence or belief in the regulatory regime he oversees? The
minister, Lord Bennion, said there was a distinction between the capped fines
the Environment Agency could levy by itself and the unlimited fines it could
pursue through the courts. And he denied the government was preparing to drop
its plans. Absolutely not. We are not resiling on anything that has been
announced. We believe it is right to look, for example, at the variable monetary
penalties that are currently capped at Â£250,000, which we don't believe is a
significant enough deterrent. He said all options remained on the table. A Lib
Dem, Lady Parmenter, had a suggestion. 22 water company bosses received over Â£14
million in bonuses, despite sewage spilling out on our rivers and into our
beaches, killing wildlife and harming students. Disgraceful. Why aren't the
government looking at stopping water company bosses being able to give bonuses
until they clean up their act? Fear. The minister told her the watchdog could
hold the water companies to account when they paid bosses in a way that wasn't
warranted by the service provided. Now, a Home Office minister has ruled out
reforms to UK-wide drugs laws dating back to 1971 and rejected plans for a safe
drug consumption facility in Glasgow. Both proposals are being championed by the
Scottish government as it tries to tackle what it says is a public health
emergency. Christina Cooper reports. The Home Affairs Committee is investigating
whether drugs laws need updating. And which strategies for getting people off
drugs actually work. In what was the last session of this inquiry, MPs heard
from Scotland's Minister for Drugs Policy, Angela Constance, who said Scotland
faced a serious and significant public health challenge. The scale of the
challenge in Scotland is far greater than anywhere else on these aisles. There
are many underpinning factors for that. The scale of the challenge that we face
to save and improve lives is greater in Scotland than anywhere else in Europe.
And we really need all the tools in our box to tackle this public health
emergency. The drugs death rate is roughly five times higher in Scotland than in
the rest of the UK. Angela Constance said there were some encouraging signs of
improvement because last year, for the first time in seven years, the number of
drug deaths hadn't increased. Scotland has adopted what's called a public health
approach, which means treating drug taking mainly as a health issue instead of
one for the criminal justice system. The committee chair, Labour's Dame Diana
Johnson, asked about the differences between England and Scotland. Are you
disappointed you've not been able to persuade the UK government to follow
through on your view that it should be a public health approach? I am deeply
disappointed in that, convener, of course. But my philosophy in life is that you
must seek to engage more with those that you disagree with. She hoped to see
movement within the UK government, especially on reviewing the 1971 Misuse of
Drugs Act, which she called not fit for purpose. We're obviously always open to
challenge and accountability about what we are doing with our current powers and
resources. But there is a level of accountability and responsibility through
every tier of government. And the scale of the challenge in Scotland, I must
reiterate, is so great that we need every tool in the box. For example, Scotland
is keen to trial drug consumption facilities, which aim to provide a safe
environment for users. A Conservative, Tim Lawton, wanted to explore the reasons
behind Scotland's drug problems. I'm quite interested in your take on why there
is such a differential between serious substance misuse in Scotland compared to
England, for example. So it is complex, deep-seated, and it has been many years,
decades in the making. She cited deprivation, poverty, inequality, mental health
issues and adverse childhood experiences as factors. She said that in Scotland
there was a greater availability of lethal substance combinations and the method
of drug taking was high risk. Answers that didn't satisfy Tim Lawton. Why is it
so bad? At all. So because we've got double the prevalence. That's the reason.
We have an increased implication in deaths of benzodiazepines and a greater
opioid problem. Why? We know that deprivation is a factor. The exchanges
continued in this vein until Tim Lawton concluded that the health approach in
Scotland had not been effective. Angela Constance replied that when it came to
saving lives, no solution should be off the table. Her hopes that the 1971
Misuse of Drugs Act will be reviewed were dashed when the committee heard from
the Home Office Minister, Chris Philp. The view the government has is that the
1971 Misuse of Drugs Act provides a framework that is sufficiently flexible that
we don't need to revisit it, at least just at the moment. The SNP committee
member, Stuart MacDonald, asked whether the UK government would be prepared to
trial drug consumption rooms. We met the Health and Social Care Partnership in
Glasgow. I think they are pretty much ready to go. Again, is that something that
the Home Office will be open to considering? Yeah, I mean, facilitating drug
consumption outside of a treatment programme is not something we think the law
currently allows. Diana Johnson pointed out that a Commons committee had
recommended safe consumption facilities four years ago. This has been kicking
around for quite a while. Yes, it has. And as I say, it's not a new thing that
the Minister is suddenly coming up with. No, but I think currently the matter is
with the Procurator Fiscal or the Lord Advocate to consider from a legal point
of view. The Minister said the Home Office thought the focus should be on
treatment, but he added that he was always happy to engage in constructive
dialogue with ministers in devolved administrations. Christina Cooper. The
Scottish Secretary, Alistair Jackett, said there's a real opportunity for
whoever becomes the new First Minister of Scotland to reset the relationship
with the UK government. Last week, in a surprise announcement, Nicola Sturgeon
said she was resigning as SNP leader and First Minister. In the Commons,
Alistair Jack reckoned the SNP members were somewhat preoccupied by the contest.
This is a real opportunity for a new First Minister to reset the relationship
with the United Kingdom government, to work constructively with us and to make
life better for the people of Scotland. However, SNP MPs concentrated their
questions on the Westminster government's plans to scrap EU-era laws copied over
to UK law after Brexit. The government's retained EU law bill will see thousands
of laws expire automatically after December unless they're specifically kept or
replaced. The SNP's Martin Docherty-Hughes worried about what that might mean.
Economics for the Environment report has calculated that lower standards in just
the areas of chemical regulation, water pollution, air quality and protection of
habitats will cost the British government Â£83 billion over the next three
decades. Does the Secretary of State believe it's right for Scotland to face yet
another billion pound price tag for a Brexit it didn't vote for? Alistair Jack
dismissed that, saying the government was respecting and increasing standards.
But the SNP's Gavin Newland said the Royal Society for the Prevention of
Accidents had warned that ditching EU-era laws could weaken protections for
workers, for example on construction sites, risking life and limb. So how many
Scottish workers' lives does the Secretary of State believe are a worthwhile
price to pay for a Brexit race to the bottom? Well, when it comes to utter
drivel, Mr Speaker, it shouldn't be a competition. But the honourable member
takes it to a new height. I mean, what utter drivel that is. Workers' rights are
entirely protected. In fact, they're being enhanced by this government, and they
are not dependent on EU membership. Alistair Jack. And before we go, the main
news from Westminster again. The Prime Minister has said Parliament will be able
to express its view on any new Brexit trade deal for Northern Ireland. But Sir
Keir Starmer has said the mull contents and records in the Conservative Party
are holding things up. I'm Susan Hume. The editor was Rachel Byrne. The studio
manager was Richard Townsend. And that was Today in Parliament.