TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-18H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This is BBC Radio 4. It's five o'clock. Time for PM with Evan Davis. Hello
there. The UN General Assembly in New York debating Ukraine right now. A motion
for Russia to get out. Let's dip in live to the proceedings....sitating safe and
unfettered access to humanitarian aid for those in need. Well that is Iran's
speaker taking the stage in that debate. Here's a taste of some of the
contributions that we've recorded. This invasion was unprovoked. If Ukraine
stops fighting, there will be no more Ukraine. We are witnessing a flagrant
violation of international law. Well on PM we'll hear how different countries
see the war. Countries that are not always aligned to the Western view of it.
Also on the programme, the shooting of a senior police officer in Omar last
night in front of his son and more than a dozen other children, the head teacher
of Omar High School tells us of the shock they've experienced. Some of them are
in such a shock that they cannot express themselves in the moment. I had kids
today crying. They didn't want to do anything other than just stay in the next
to my room and cry there. The Labour Party has set out five national missions.
Not much detail on how to deliver them as yet. We'll interrogate the Shadow
Health Secretary. We're streaking. Gary Lineker joins us as we remember
commentator John Mottson who's died at the age of 77. And... Ever feel too shy
to speak to strangers at parties? Well the broadcaster Adrian Childs is the
same. We get some tips for him from an expert on the art of conversation. But
we'll start with the BBC News, read today by Tina Ritchie. Police in Northern
Ireland have arrested three people on suspicion of attempted murder after an
off-duty officer was shot in County Tyrone. Detective Chief Inspector John
Caldwell was attacked outside a sports complex in Omar. He is in a critical
condition in hospital. In a joint statement, all five main parties at Stormont
said they were outraged and sickened by the shooting. Our Island correspondent
Chris Page reports from the scene. The United Nations General Assembly is
holding an emergency session in New York ahead of a vote on a special resolution
that calls for Russia to withdraw all its forces from Ukrainian territory and
end hostilities. The ballot has no legal standing but is considered an important
measure of international opinion. Our UN correspondent Neda Tawfiq reports. The
session has been dominated so far by speeches from Ukraine's supporters, urging
members to reaffirm their commitment to the founding principles of the UN by
supporting the resolution. The first speaker of the day representing the Nordic
countries was Denmark's Foreign Minister Lars Lokey Rasmussen. He brandished the
UN Charter, telling members that it clearly prohibited aggression and wars of
conquest. Later this afternoon, China, Russia's most powerful ally, will address
the assembly. Beijing in the past has abstained on similar votes and says it
will soon release a policy paper, setting out its position on how to settle the
conflict through political means. The Labour leader, Sakhir Stama, has promised
an end to what he called sticking plaster policies if his party wins the next
election. During a speech in Manchester, Sakhir set out his five missions for
government, which include making Britain a clean energy superpower, fixing the
NHS and securing the highest sustained economic growth in the G7 group of
developed nations. Official figures show that one in four ambulance patients in
England waited at least 30 minutes to be transferred to A&E last week. That's
the longest waiting time since early January. NHS England says there are 5,000
more patients in hospital than this time last year, due to arise in COVID cases.
Labour says the asylum system has been broken by the government, after official
figures showed a record 166,000 asylum seekers were still awaiting an initial
decision on their case. The home office says it's recruited hundreds of workers
to help reduce the backlog. Our home editor Mark Easton has more details. Rishi
Sunak has vowed to stop the migrant boats crossing the channel by swiftly
returning asylum seekers arriving by irregular routes, but his hopes of speeding
up the asylum system by eradicating the backlog of cases have been dealt a blow
by new figures, showing the numbers awaiting even an initial decision from the
home office has risen by 60% in a year, topping 160,000 for the first time.
Ideas to clear the backlog include granting asylum to migrants from five
countries with high acceptance rates without the need to attend a face-to-face
interview. Instead, they must complete a 10-page form in English. The former BBC
football commentator John Matson has died at the age of 77. During his 50-year
career, he covered more than 2,000 matches, including 10 World Cups and 29 FA
Cup Finals. The Prince of Wales, who's the president of the FA, said Matson was
the voice of football. Thank you very much, Tina. Now, they're going to vote
later in the UN General Assembly. It's a long motion they're debating. Paragraph
5 demands that Russia immediately, completely and unconditionally withdraw all
of its military forces from the territory of Ukraine within its internationally
recognised borders and calls also for cessation of hostilities. Well, it's a
clear enough position one year on to this war, but how many countries will
support it? It is one country, one vote. The Germans said this morning it's
important to get 100 votes in favour of that motion. That's a bit over half the
UN members. The debate picked up this afternoon. It has some way to go. They
might even, in fact, be voting on it tomorrow. But let's just listen to a couple
of a couple of contributions. Denmark's Foreign Minister Lars Rasmussen spoke on
behalf of all the Nordic countries on the importance of supporting Ukraine. As
the late Archbishop Desmond Tutu said, if you are neutral in situations of
injustice, you have chosen the side of the oppressor. The fact remains today as
simple as one year ago. If Russia stops fighting, there will be no more war. If
Ukraine stops fighting, there will be no more Ukraine. Well, for us, as Foreign
Minister Catherine Colonna denounced Russia's aggression and its tactics.
Conversely, Russia shows no desire for peace and respects no boundaries. The
only dialogue it will accept is that which subjugates the other side, in Ukraine
as elsewhere. The only peace it accepts is the silence of the dead and of ruins.
And then let's just hear a little bit of Japan's Foreign Minister Hayashi
Yoshimasa, who insisted any peace process must abide by the UN Charter. What if
a permanent member of the Security Council roached an aggression against your
homeland, gloved your territory and then seized hostilities calling for peace? I
would call it an unjust peace. So those are some of the contributions in common
there, condemnation really of what Russia has done. But while most of the
developed Western nations consider the Russian operation an invasion bombing of
infrastructure and the committing of war crimes to be obviously something to
condemn, it's not nearly as clear cut in much of the rest of the world. So we
thought we might spend a little time hearing how this war a year on is viewed in
some other parts of the world. And we're going to start in India with Anjali
Istwal, who's senior editor at India Today. There is no one side that India has
taken. India has made it amply clear that it's not choosing a side. India is
very clearly saying that we want you to talk. As Prime Minister Modi had said,
this is not an error for war. And that, in fact, has become a defining statement
coming from any world leader. And in fact, if you would see everybody, every
other nation and world leaders have mentioned and referred to that statement. So
India is very clear about the fact that we are not choosing a side in this war.
They are aware of the humanitarian crisis and they are consistently emphasizing
on the fact that we need to stop the war and is urging from its side, both the
sides to come on a negotiating table. I guess I'm puzzled because with issues
around Pakistan on the border and China too sometimes, surely India would say
territorial integrity is all. You can't have one country walking into another
one. Absolutely. And that is something India has stated again and again when
India has opened dialogue channels with Ukraine and Russia. And when Prime
Minister Modi said that this is not an error of war, you know, it is sort of
pointing towards the fact that UN Charter is supreme. But we have to understand
that it's a very ambiguous situation. It's not like everybody is black or white.
And India right now is very clear about it that we are not going to walk on the
toad line of the Western countries. So, you know, here we are trying to make our
own narrative, our own story. And very clearly, no, we are not going to say the
same thing that the West is saying or what the NATO wants us to say. Or for that
matter, US wants us to say, even though India likes US as a partner. But
territorial integrity is something that we understand. But India has clearly
stated that this is something territorial integrity also. This entire issue can
be sorted out once you come down to a negotiation, diplomacy, dialogue. These
are the most important fundamentals for peace negotiation. The view from India,
Anjali Istwal there from India today, making the point India doesn't want to
follow instructions of the West. Let's go to Israel. We can hear from Tovah
Lazarov, who's deputy editor of the Jerusalem Post. Well, Israel is part of the
Western group of allies that is against Russia, and it sees itself that way.
Overall, it is not hesitated to condemn the war, to condemn Russia. It is voted
with Ukraine every time at the United Nations. It's been very clear on a policy
level. It's also been very good at humanitarian assistance. But it runs into
trouble as the bar moves up. Right? I hear this but coming. Yeah, I had to set
it up. What was good, maybe in the beginning, right, when everyone's going, oh
my God, this is terrible, and how do we help Ukraine? Now you've got offensive
weapons rolling into Ukraine. Israel isn't on the list, even though it has a
mark of a tank that could be good. And it hasn't even given it defensive
weapons. But the issue here is that, first of all, Israel has always had a good
relationship with Russia. And that's been a useful thing for Israel,
particularly because the Russian military is active in Syria, and Syria borders
Israel. So we have Russia literally on our border, in some ways not so different
from Poland, except that Poland is a NATO country and Israel is not. So the idea
that the Russian military is already there on our border, you know, that's the
first thing that gives one pause. And Russia has been very clear with Israel
that defensive weapons would be a red line. Tova, latter off on Israel's
thinking about the war. And finally, let's go to South Africa. We heard a
reference to Desmond Tutu, a quote from Desmond Tutu earlier. I spoke to Crystal
Orderson, a journalist based in Cape Town. In South Africa, these mixed reviews,
if you talk to politicians, those that are in the opposition benches, they will
tell you that South Africa's foreign policy is being dictated by the African
National Congress, which is, of course, in government. If you speak to ANC
members or officials, they will tell you that they don't want to be dragged into
a war that's far away geographically. They find that the West often sends out
contradictory messages around who they support and who they're not supporting.
And that South Africa is an independent country and they won't be bullied by
others who want them to take a particular view. If you, for instance, speak to
EFF supporters, which is your kind of young black, either unemployed or young
radical people, either at university, they will say, you know, in fact, perhaps
South Africa should strengthen the economic alliance with Russia, because again,
they feel that South Africa should not be strong armed by the West, that one to
dictate how a country gives an opinion, a particular opinion around what's
happening. But if you, of course, speak to middle class South Africans and of
course, in East South Africa, so race will always come into the play. White
South Africans, you know, they will, they either an opinion and a sense that the
ANC is using its historical ties. And yeah, I mean, during exile, the African
National Congress, they were supported financially, politically by Russia. A lot
of ANC members that's currently in government actually either studied in Russia,
they can speak Russia, they spent the exile years in Russia. And they often
think that that historical relation often dictates what's happening now and how
South Africa has officially it's taken a neutral stance. But for some within the
middle class, it's this historical relation that's blurring the lines. Crystal
Orderson there for the perspective from South Africa, you see a pattern in all
of those countries wanting to make up their own mind on it, not wanting to be
dragooned into lining up with the West. Might be one of those moments where the
West discovers it's not as popular as it might have hoped. Let's just talk
briefly to Bronwyn Maddox, chief executive of the Foreign Affairs think tank at
Chatham House, amongst other things, has been foreign editor of the Times. And
Bronwyn, I don't know, in some ways, it feels as though a lot of the ambivalence
about what is going on in Ukraine is more a reaction against the West than it is
support for Russia. It's a sort of desire not to be seen, to be pushed around by
a West that is often regarded as hypocritical in those parts. It's a really
interesting point. I don't think it's support for Russia in most cases, other
than the countries that really have had ties and trading ties with Russia. And
there are some, as we've just heard, but I think some of it is don't push us
around. Some of it is, this is nothing to do with us. This is your war. Don't
ask us to take sides which might compromise our own interests. And what I heard
very loudly at the Munich Security Conference, which was dominated by Ukraine
last weekend, was countries, many of them, poorer countries, saying, look, why
don't you care about our conflict? You don't care anything like as much as this
when war erupts in our countries and you don't care about our refugees as much.
Why don't you do something about that? And there was a really a real passion
behind that as well. I wonder if it matters whether the whole world isn't on the
same side on this. Does it have a material effect on the outcome of the war, the
support for Ukraine that's coming from the West? Does it make much difference?
It's a good question. I think it actually does make some difference to the
outcome of the war in terms of which countries are providing support. The war
affects more countries than are perhaps acknowledging it at the moment through
inflation. You see that in a lot of the Middle East, food and energy price
inflation. But I think it matters for the West in whether the West can win this
argument, and it's an argument of words, not of munitions, about these being
global values, observing the rule of law. That there is such a thing as
international law that the countries will be held to, that offenses like
marching into another country and killing thousands of civilians, that these
things are ones that the world should care about. And I think the West has been
really disconcerted in this, in realising that it's going to have to make an
argument that it thought was self-evident. It's interesting, isn't it? Because
when this war is over, the West must look at itself and say, we've got a bit of
a job to do here to rebuild relations with a lot of the world who obviously
don't think like we do and don't like the way we react to, that we in the West
react to things that they think it is hypocritical, it is inconsistent. I think
that it has to confront that question of double standards, though many of the
countries making that charge of double standards are themselves guilty of it in
other ways. It's an argument that has many, many signs. But I think the point,
in a sense, which this is a bit of a turning point, is it seems to me the US,
the UK, much of Europe thought it was that the world would be obviously
absolutely horrified and repelled and automatically share their view on it. And
they need to come out of this and realise that that is an argument that they can
make to the world. One that they have a lot of force in making, I think a lot of
justification in making, but they're actually going to have to win that one, and
you, something that I think they thought was one for eternity, if you like.
Bronwyn Maddox, Chief Executive of the Chatham House Foreign Affairs think tank.
Interestingly, we heard just a snippet, a tiny snippet of Iran speaking at the
UN General Assembly. In fact, Iran has said they will be abstaining on the
resolution. They don't agree with the wording as it doesn't reflect both sides.
So Iran taking that neutral position. Now, 19 minutes past five. Let's have a
look at some other headlines. Here's Tina. A group of transgender people has
been given permission to appeal a judgment that ruled NHS waiting times for
trans health care were unlawful. They argue NHS England is breaking the law by
not providing treatment within 18 weeks. Prosecutors in New York have charged
Sam Bankman-Fried, who ran the cryptocurrency exchange FTX, with four new
offences, including fraud. He's denied eight other charges. And four people have
been arrested after protesters painted the road outside the Russian embassy in
London the colours of the Ukrainian flag. They said they wanted to remind Moscow
of Kyiv's right to self-determination. Thank you, Tina. Now, it seemed like
something from a different age in Northern Ireland last night. An off-duty
policeman in Omar shot by two gunmen while he was leading a football coaching
session for his son and other children. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell
is currently in a critical but stable condition in hospital and three men have
been arrested in connection with the attack. Many of the children at the scene
were from Omar High School. They were aged between 11 and 14 and the principal
of the school is Costas Gaetatsis. Now in the last hour, he told me how the
children have been reacting to what happened. Evan, it was shocking. The
children that I've spoken this morning have expressed the shock, some of them
their fear. There is a number of kids that are numb and silent. Some of them are
really worried about their football coach, obviously, that they don't know if
he's going to make it through. Clearly, the community is in shock, considering
that actually the person that was shot is a past pupil of ours as well. At the
scene, it seems that the children basically screamed and ran, really, as this
was all breaking. Yeah, you see, some of the kids, they were saying that they
failed, that it was actually fireworks or firecrackers for some reason. Some
kids directly saw the two men in Balaklavas with the guns shooting. They saw the
smoke and the fire from the gun and they heard the sounds and they ran away in
fear that they're also shooting at them. Some of the kids ran so fast, they
jumped over hedges to try and avoid it. You see, at that moment, the actual
session had finished and they were all walking towards the car park outside the
sports complex. And this is when it actually happened. So you do imagine it was
a big group of kids, not just from all schools in the town, that were walking
outside the sports complex. And clearly, the fear that someone is shooting at
them led them into a panic, which then unfolded into the tragic shooting,
obviously, of John Caldwell. Obviously, these children have thankfully been much
less exposed to troubles and violence in Northern Ireland than earlier cohorts.
That's correct. You see, the generation of 20 or 30 years ago, which has
possibly dealt with this in a completely different manner, they might have seen
it as a fact of life in Northern Ireland. Something that the children nowadays,
it's not something that they experience, it's not a normal, it's not a
normality. They would consider it a space like the sports complex, they're an
enormous safe haven, like our schools, they're safe places for them. And
clearly, coming across a shocking event, a heinous attack of that nature, they
never, I think, some of them, as they were saying to me today, imagined that
this will ever happen to them. Some of them are actually worried, is it going to
happen again? Is that how we're supposed to be from now on, scared? And this is
where we are today. You've got a difficult task now as the principal of Omar
High School of dealing with the aftermath of this and with those children who
will have been badly, badly scarred by this. Are you planning to offer support?
What is the way you deal with this? The first step ever this morning was we had
an assembly, we just had to give factual account of what happened the previous
night. We had to explain that they are in a safe space here in school. And once
we reassured the whole community, we had to give them also the opportunity to
come and talk to us, especially the kids that were directly involved there last
night. We also ran to a home to the kids that did not come to school. We
reassured them that we have opened these channels of communication. They can
approach any of the senior members of staff, the counseling service that is
available. The shock will manifest itself in different times, in a different way
as we're going through the days. Some of them are in such a shock that they
cannot express themselves in the moment. I had kids today crying. They didn't
want to do anything other than just stay in the next to my room and cry there.
Some of them were going over and over again what happened to them. So we will
need to each individual to be treated differently in terms of how they manifest
that shock that they experienced last night. That was Costas Guy-Tatzis, who's
the principal of Omar High School. Now, an island in North Wales has been
officially recognized for having one of the best night skies in the world. Inis
Enchli, also known as Bardsley Island, has become the first site in Europe to be
awarded International Dark Sky Sanctuary certification. There are other Dark Sky
certifications, but this is the International Dark Sky Sanctuary, the first site
in Europe to be awarded it. Its location means it's one of the most remote and
dark places on Earth. Here is an idea of what that darkness sounded like on the
island last night. I marry and I live and work as a warden here on Inis Enchli.
Enchli is an island that lies two miles off the tip of Hien in North Wales. As
I'm recording this, it's half past eight in the evening and it's been three
hours since the sunset. I'm outside, I've switched my head torch off and the
only artificial light I can see is the occasional red flash of the lighthouse
and that's a mile south from where I am. To the west is beautiful. I can see a
slither of a new moon, Geweener Lyad as we'd say in Welsh and Jupiter and Venus
are shining on its right. The three of them will soon set on the west coast and
I'll be surrounded by darkness. But not a pitch black kind of darkness because
above me is shining with stars. It's early spring now and life is slowly
returning to the island. Everything is waking up and the night is about to come
alive again. Tonight I can hear the distant cries of the odd oyster catcher but
in less than a month's time a colony of over 20,000 pairs of mang shearwater
will return to the island, an octurnal sea bird that's completely dependent on a
dark sky as they only venture back to their burrows in the depths of the darkest
nights. A truly dark sky has become something rare in the western world. Over
99% of people resident in Europe live in the light polluted skies and this
inevitably has devastating effects on the natural world as well as as humans.
It's crazy to think how much has changed in the last 100 years. What I'm
experiencing right now, this pure form of darkness would have been the most
normal thing in the world but unfortunately that just isn't the case anymore. So
it's a privilege to live here but more so to be working towards protecting
something truly important for nature but also for future generations. Mary
Hughes there, the Warden of the island of Innis Enchilid also known as Bardsie
which has International Dark Sky Sanctuary certification. Now it's 27 minutes
past 5, a voice so familiar. They were appealing for offside, the Germans in
their own trouble, Algontal couldn't do it, Liddiker probably could, and he had
the bequest, it's Gary Liddiker. The Ace Marksman keeps England in the World
Cup. Just 10 minutes to go. It's his 35th goal for England and who's to say it's
not his most important? Particular rhythm, that excited tone, Pacey informed
John Mottson, a voice so associated with television football has died. He was
77. You heard him there, commentating in his particular style. I was going to
say inimitable style but in fact it was imitated. He was describing then England
international footballer Gary Liddiker's goal against West Germany in the 1990
World Cup semi final. And Gary Liddiker joins us now and Gary obviously a
subject of John Mottson's commentary, also a colleague at the BBC of him. Yes
indeed, very sad day for all of us involved, not just at BBC Sport but in
football in general. He was the voice of our sport for pretty much 50 years
wasn't he? And remarkable character, remarkable commentator and he always seemed
to get the mood right and get the occasion and just lived and breathed football
did John. Yeah, he did make it look very easy and I know a lot of people think
it must be very easy for the fans thinking they could do it but actually it's
not easy at all is it? Commentating, I think it's an incredible skill and it's,
you know, I've been involved in television for a long time but we would never
want to take that microphone and do an actual commentary on a game but I think
the one thing you'd always say about John Mottson was that he was incredibly
well prepared and, you know, he did it masses of homework before games I've
spent a lot of time. I spent a lot of time with him over the years, watching him
do his preparation, you know, particular style of his, his little cardboard
sheets that he put all the information on every player. And he'd think about
things he said and, and he just always pitched it right I felt he got the big
goals right. He was an almost an anorak if you like but he was, and I think
you've got to be that a little bit to be a commentator, certainly of his ilk.
Yeah, so it really is a full time job because you can't just rock up and
commentate on it. I mean, I think a lot of people would have a go if you're
doing to well known Premier League side, because you know most of the plans but
you can probably get found out when you end up some World Cup group stage game
somewhere or some obscure game. And then you have to, but no you've got to do
your homework, I think more than anything with football commentary you've got to
find a way of recognizing players from a glimpse that perhaps you haven't seen
play very often. You know, whether it be the number on their shirts, their
hairstyle, I mean, Motti was famous in the game when he ended up I think it was
I think it was Romania that all came out didn't they all dyed their hair blonded
cut short. It was almost impossible to tell one footballer from another, but
somehow he managed, which summed him up in many ways. Well, he did it for a very
long time. I mean, his career in sport was extremely long time is five decades.
I mean, and obviously he commentated on a lot of your own goals. I mean, do you
have a favorite one, a favorite moment of being commentated on by Jon Watson? I
think the one you just highlighted funny enough, because, you know, you don't
get too many goals bigger than scoring a World Cup semi final 10 minutes to go
against Germany when you won down. So, yeah, and, and the, and again, I mean,
obviously it's not something I heard at the time. I know he's got quite a loud
voice, but I couldn't have heard it from the back of his hand. But, but
obviously it was I've seen it hundreds and hundreds of times and heard it
hundreds and hundreds of times subsequently. And he absolutely nails it. Yeah,
he does. Gary, thanks so much for that Gary Lineker there remembering Jon
Watson, who has died age 77. Nevermind all quiet on the Western Front. If you
want to see what mass death on the battlefield looks like, you only have to
follow the war in Eastern Ukraine. There, Russian soldiers are dying in their
droves as they try to break through Ukrainian lines. Uniquely, many of them are
recruited and employed by a private army, the Wagner Group. So what is the
Wagner Group? Who is the man who leads it? And might Wagner be more of a danger
than an asset for Vladimir Putin? To find out, join me, David Oronovic, in the
briefing room at 8 o'clock tonight on Radio 4. Now, later in this programme, by
the way, we're going to be looking at a question relating to important social
skills. It's arisen out of a column in The Guardian that asked how you should
best go about initiating a conversation with someone you don't know. You know
the situation, we've all been there. You find yourself at a party surrounded by
strangers. How should you go about saying hello to someone? We're going to be
talking about it at the end of the programme. But if you have a tried and tested
piece of advice, do let us know and we'll come back to it. PM at bbc.co.uk or do
tweet to our account at bbcpm. Now it's 27 minutes to 6. You are listening to PM
and we'll have a summary of the news from Tina Ritchie. Three men have been
arrested by detectives in Northern Ireland investigating the shooting of an off-
duty police officer in County Tyrone last night. Detective Chief Inspector John
Caldwell was attacked while with his young son at a sports centre in Omer. Two
gunmen opened fire and continued to shoot at him as he lay on the ground. Mr
Caldwell is in a critical but stable condition in hospital. Police say the
dissident Republican group, the new IRA, is the primary focus of the inquiry.
The United Nations General Assembly is now considering a resolution calling for
Russia to withdraw from all Ukrainian territory and for hostilities to end.
Major powers like India and South Africa have abstained on similar votes
previously while Moscow's allies oppose it. The vote has no legal standing but
is considered to be an important measure of international opinion. The number of
asylum seekers waiting for a decision on their case in the UK has risen to
record levels, with around 166,000 people in the backlog. Almost 110,000 of them
have been waiting for longer than six months. Ritchie Sunak has pledged to
eradicate much of the backlog by the end of the year and the Home Office has
said it will allow 12,000 people to undergo a speedier claims process which
wouldn't include an interview. The Labour leader, Sakeer Stama, says the UK is
being held back by short-term obsessions and has set out five missions if his
party wins the next general election. They include fixing problems in the NHS,
making Britain a clean energy superpower and securing the highest sustained
growth in the G7 group of countries. The European Commission has told its staff
to remove the Chinese-owned app TikTok from their official phones and other
devices because of security concerns. There are increasing fears among Western
governments that Beijing could use popular Chinese software and hardware as
tools for spying. TikTok said the move was misguided. And the football
commentator John Mottson, hugely popular with generations of fans during a
50-year career with the BBC, has died at the age of 77. Mottson, known as
Mottie, retired in 2018 after covering ten World Cups, ten European
Championships, 29 FA Cup Finals and more than 200 England matches. Thank you,
Tina. Now Labour are 28 points ahead of the Conservatives in the latest YouGov
poll. I think you could call that a comfortable lead. With an election in, say,
18 months, it is surely Labour's to lose at this point. So maybe the right thing
for Labour to do is to say as little as possible in order not to scare off
voters while sounding like they're saying a lot. Now, there's been a bit of that
accusation thrown at the party today as it set out five missions, five broad
goals, largely uncontroversial. And at this point rather vague. Can we blame
politicians for being bland if they fear they'll be introduced by being
interesting? Well, let us talk it all through with the Shadow Health Secretary,
Wes Streating. And welcome back to PM. Wes, thanks for joining us. No problem.
I'll try not to be bland. No, no, well, you're never bland. Let's just ask, are
you expecting to win the next general election now? I've been a Labour Party
member for over 20 years. I never expect the Labour Party to win the next
general election. We know how hard it is. There's no room for complacency. And
we're very sincere in saying that. I think one of the reasons we've set out
these missions today is to both give people a clear sense of the priorities of a
Labour government and also to reassure those voters. I think particularly those
who are really cynical about politics and politicians, that we're not pretending
there's a Labour magic wand where we can fix all of the problems of the country
overnight. But with a serious focus, with a right set of priorities and a degree
of honesty about the long term nature of these challenges, the need to move away
from sticking plastered politics and to fix the fundamentals, hopefully, as well
as building support for a Labour government, we can also rebuild some trust in
politics itself. Because I think the biggest opponent of Labour at the next
election isn't actually the Conservative Party. It's cynicism and a degree of
hopelessness that politics can't fix anything anymore. And I think we've got to
give Britain not just its future back, but its hope back and a belief that
politics can be part of the solution, not simply driving the problems. Well, I
think many would say when you have bland goals like we'll make Britain a growth,
you know, improve growth and we'll reduce health inequalities and you don't put
any detail or any flashy policies to grab the public's imagination on those,
that you're not really kind of beating apathy and disenchantment with politics.
You're kind of accentuating it. No one can really relate to these objectives if
you don't have policies to deliver them. Right. Well, hang on a second, Evans,
because firstly, the ambition of securing the highest sustained growth in the G7
is a big ambition. Well, it's an ambition, but there's no policy to deliver it.
When Keir and Rachel outlined it at the Shadow Cabinet, I was one of those
people who did a kind of like, gosh, that's ambitious. But it's the right
ambition, similarly making Britain a clean energy superpower, zero carbon
electricity by 2030. That is that is really difficult to achieve the right thing
to do, possible to do, but it requires you to pull together the different levers
of government, particularly around planning, around skills and working in
partnership with business to leverage in the expertise and the investment and
the focus to deliver that goal. The policies will in terms of the specific
pledges, not a selloff, that will follow. I promise that will follow. OK, so we
will hear how you make Britain over the high sustained growth in the G7 is
bloody ambitious, actually, and we need it's the right ambition to have. And you
are going to tell us how you will deliver that because obviously everybody would
love that. I could say I'm going to deliver 10 percent growth sustained. And if
I don't tell you how I'm going to do it, there's no there's no argument. How do
you even counter that? I mean, it's highly unlikely, by the way, that we can
beat American growth because their population grows much faster than ours and
they their economy tends to grow faster as the population grows. And these are
the forces of cynicism we are going to have to defeat in the next election,
Evan. But let me give you an example from my own from my own patch in terms of
the NHS, give you an example of what we mean. So we could do what the
conservatives do, which is come out with a few little sticking plaster things to
pretend that we've got an answer for the immediate winter crisis. And that will
solve all of the problems. And then we'll be back in the next winter crisis. And
then the one after that and the one after that, we've had this pretty much for a
decade now. Instead, what Labour's done is outlined a plan to live the biggest
expansion of the NHS workforce in history, doubling the number of medical school
places, increasing nursing and midwifery clinical training places by 10,000 a
year, as well as roles like district nursing and health visiting to do more in
the community. We've shown how we'd pay for it, what it would do. One of the
criticism of have had actually is, yes, but it takes years to train these
people. Well, exactly. So we need to start now. Jeremy Hunt should do it in the
budget. He should nick our plan. We know he supports it. He said he supports it.
And, you know, that's the sort of approach we need from government if we're
serious about not stumbling from one crisis to another. And, you know, the
conservatives stumble from stumble from one prime minister to another, one
chancellor to another. And look what it's done for business confidence, for
inward investment to consumer confidence and even more devastatingly, look at
what it's done to the pockets of families who are struggling right across the
country. So that's why we're taking a serious long term mission driven approach.
Of course, they'll be the retail policies, the manifesto policies and the
yardstick that people can judge a first term Labour government against so they
can decide whether to give us a second term. But I think we're right to take
this serious long term approach. And I hope that gives me some confidence. No
one will say don't take a long term approach. I'm quite sure. Now, I'm really
interested in the kind of the money issue that we've had another report today,
actually, from the Institute for Government on the tracking the state of public
services. And it's not just the schools, NHS, the ones that you mentioned in
your five missions. I mean, they talk about prisons insufficient capacity at the
moment to offer pre pandemic standards of rehabilitation. Very high backlogs in
courts, for example, in the Crown Court, 63,000 backlog in September, that's
higher than any point since 2000. I just I don't know how you're going to
deliver anything like the vision you have without essentially transferring quite
large amounts, maybe 123% of national income into public services. Investment
matters, but so does reform, Evan. And even if the economy and the public
finances weren't in the state that the Conservatives have left them in, we would
need to reform our public services. But it is because our public finances are in
such a mess that reform has to do even more of the heavy lifting. And that's why
I've been very upfront with health and social care leaders about the fact we are
going to have to look at how we deal with the fundamental challenges facing the
NHS to reform the way that it works and to reform where the money currently
goes. Because I genuinely think I really genuinely think even if Rachel Reeves
threw her fiscal rules in the bin and said, go crazy on the NHS, where's poor
loads of money in hospitals? Well, she wouldn't, by the way, she probably
spitting her coffee out as she listens to this. Even if I poured loads more
money into hospitals, I wouldn't deliver the kind of results that patients need
because we've got to reform primary care and to fix the front door to the NHS.
We've got to deal with the late discharges through reform in social care, too.
Investment matters and we will have fully costed, fully funded pledges in our
manifesto, as well as trying to leverage in more inward investment from the
private sector, too, across the economy. But we've got to do the reform as well.
And that was the lesson of the last Labour government, investment and reform
delivers results. And by goodness, you're right to outline the scale of the
challenge, Evan, because with respect to the new Labour generation and the 1997
team, what the next Labour government will inherit if we win the next general
election will be even worse. It's even harder. And that's why Keir Starmer's
right to be clear about what the missions, the focus, the long term answers are
to the fundamental problems that the Conservatives have created for this
country. Clearly a lot of stress in public services. I just wanted to ask you
one last question if I could, Wes. You're a gay Christian and I imagine you've
been watching the SNP's leadership election, Kate Forbes, someone of deep faith
who said she would never have supported gay marriage and has perhaps done some
damage to her leadership campaign for that. And others saying, well, that means
you can't be a Christian. We're driving Christians out of public life. I just
wondered what your thoughts were on that whole debate. I feel really sad, if I'm
honest. I felt really sad watching the whole thing play out. It's not that
people with sincerely held traditional, orthodox religious views can't play a
role in public life or political leadership. It's that if we take a view that
politicians shouldn't legislate for religious belief and to interfere in the
practice of churches or mosques or synagogues and so on, people with sincerely
held orthodox religious beliefs shouldn't impose their beliefs on others through
legislation and public policy. That's the distinction. I'm not interested in
applying tests of faith on politicians who hold religious views. I'm very happy
to discuss my own religious beliefs and my own theology. I'm prepared to do God
in the way that Alistair Campbell famously advised Tony Blair not to. But I take
a liberal secular view in terms of how I cast my vote as a legislator. And I do
think it is perfectly reasonable, if uncomfortable, to challenge people like
Kate Forbes on whether or not she would impose her religious views on others. In
the same way, I think it is perfectly reasonable to ask Humza Yousif, if he
supports equal marriage, as he says he does, why did he abstain in the vote when
everyone knows he was in the Scottish parliament that day? It's all very well
being courageous about equality after the battle's been fought and won, but
where were you Humza when the battle was ongoing? But anyway, we love converts
and we love to the cause, so it's great to see him on the side now, I suppose.
Where's the Streeting Shadow Health Secretary? Thanks so much for joining us.
Now, it's quarter to six. Let's have a last look at some other headlines. Here's
Tina. The Scottish Finance Secretary Kate Forbes says she's greatly burdened
that some of her comments during the SNP leadership contest have caused hurt. Ms
Forbes said she would have voted against gay marriage had she been an MSP in
2014. Experts are examining concerns that high street nasal decongestants could
have rare but serious side effects. One has been found to cause the brain to
spasm, which could lead to a stroke. And a presenter on one of France's top
television news channels has been sacked after he was accused of running reports
commissioned by outside interests. Rashid Mbaki denied taking money for them but
admits by passing editorial controls. Thank you. Now, yesterday we heard James
Sutcliffe on this programme promoting a plan to build a causeway across the
wash, the estuary between Lincolnshire and Norfolk. In one project he was aiming
to build a roadway, a flood protection scheme, a tidal power station and a
container port. Many listeners emailed to voice their objection to the idea. We
voiced some of those up. Dear PM, Given that the wash is a marine area of such
environmental significance, will you also be featuring an item on the
environmental consequences of such a scheme? How disappointing was your item
about a causeway across the wash? There was no questioning about the
environmental implications or why we should need another container terminal. I
was upset, concerned and so disappointed to hear the one-sided broadcast about
the proposed wash barrier on this evening's PM programme from Skegness. It was
factually incorrect and failed to even mention the complete ecological collapse
that would occur if this barrier were placed across this internationally
critical and nature-rich space. Well, let us give a right of reply to the birds
of the wash because we're going to talk Steve Rowland, the RSPB's area manager
for that area. And Steve, I think you didn't really agree with James Sutcliffe
that this is a good idea. Absolutely not, Evan. It was really shocking to hear
some of the claims he would make because as your listeners wrote in, the wash is
our most important estuary for wild birds. It's of global significance for these
long-distance migrants. They depend on the ebb and flow of the tide and the free
flow of water from the four rivers that drain about 15% of England's lamb mash
through the wash. Because that creates a wonderful food-rich environment and
that food isn't just about the birds, Evan. It's also about people and their
livelihoods, so the fishing industry that depends on the ebb and flow of the
tide. The ports in Kingsland and Boston depend on the channels being kept open
by that flow of water. The people who depend on the salt marshes and the
mudflats acting as sea defenses and also as massive carbon sinks. And if we
can't protect a wetland of that level of importance with every protective
designation that we've come up with as a nation because we're proud of such
places, then we're not going to savor the climate and the nature crisis by
pouring concrete over it over some of our most precious and beautiful
landscapes. I just leave aside all of the comments about whether or not you need
a port and all the rest of it. It would be and we know it's environmentally
destructive. We've got evidence from elsewhere in the world. Steve, we're going
to leave it there. You've made your point and you've made lots of other people
wrote in to make that point. We've started an interesting debate on that. Steve
Rowland from the RSPB. Thank you very much. Now the tomato crisis, the shortage
of shortages of them in British shops, along with other salads and veg items,
whenever we talk about this, we are assailed by tweets from those on the anti
Brexit side of the argument suggesting the problem is not affecting other
countries. So it must be down to Brexit. The official line from retailers here
is that supply chains have been hit by bad weather in Spain and North Africa.
But can we say Brexit has made it worse? We thought a quick fact check might be
useful here. Theo Leggett is the BBC's international business correspondent.
Come on Theo, tell us what to think. OK, well, there's no doubt that the weather
has had a huge impact here and not just over the past few weeks, over months
there have been extreme weather events that have affected crops, not just in the
UK, but across Europe. It's all come to a head over the past few weeks because
there's been simultaneous bad weather in Spain. That was cold weather flooding
in Morocco. Normally we would have some domestic production at the moment in
greenhouses, but high energy costs have meant that farmers are reluctant to
grow. They've deferred planting their crops in order to save money. It's been
the same thing in the Netherlands. So there's less stuff coming onto the market.
And that is pretty certain. What is also certain is that the shortages that
we've seen in the UK are not being replicated across Europe. And that's why
we've had this chorus of people saying that it's all about Brexit. The question
is, is it? In terms of goods coming into the UK, there aren't really many
restrictions at the moment. Fresh produce is subject to... This is crucial
because I can't think why you wouldn't be getting stuff in because of Brexit.
Getting stuff out into the EU might be difficult, but getting stuff in shouldn't
be difficult. Getting stuff in is not a problem if you pay enough. That's what
importers are saying at the moment. And that price is an important thing. There
are no border checks on fresh produce at the moment. You have to have customs
declarations. So there's a bit of bureaucracy, but not a massive amount. But you
have to remember in this country, supply chains are longer. There's a seaboarder
to negotiate. There is a little bit of bureaucracy as well. And I've been
talking to people in Brussels and I've been talking to the Copacosia care, which
is the grouping of European farmers unions. And they say, well, there aren't
huge obstacles to trading with the UK, but it is simpler to do business in the
single market. Supply chains are shorter. They're more coordinated. It's
basically easier. So if you have a limit on supply, then it's easier to do
business in Europe. And of course, many of these countries have domestic
production. Spain will feed its own market before the export market. So all of
these things come together. And also the UK market is very price sensitive. As
Therese Coffey pointed out in the House of Commons today, a lot of supermarkets
operate on fixed price contracts with very low prices. European retailers tend
to allow more variation. So all of these things come together, which means that
there is maybe some. But Europe-wise shortage, but shortages in the shops.
That's here. Thank you so much, Theo. I just want to play a quick clip. You
mentioned Therese Coffey. She's gotten a bit of a bind. She's been accused of
telling us to eat turdles. I just thought you might want to hear the clip
because she says we should be eating more seasonally. It's important to make
sure that we cherish the specialisms that we have in this country. A lot of
people would be eating turnips right now rather than thinking necessarily about
aspects of lettuce and tomatoes and similar. But I'm conscious that consumers
want a year round choice. And that is what our supermarkets and food and
growers, food producers and growers around the world try to satisfy. Well,
politicians mentioned turnips at their peril. And she has been mocked today for
mentioning turnips as an alternative to tomatoes. Our colleague at Radio 5 Live,
Adrian Charles, has a weekly column in The Guardian. It tends to steer away from
the heavy stuff in that paper and focus on the everyday and the more personal.
And his latest one provoked a big conversation in the PM office. Adrian
basically argues in it. It's very difficult when you're at a party to start a
conversation with someone you don't know. Really difficult if you don't know
anybody at all. It turns out almost everybody finds the same, at least our
colleagues do. Adrian joins us now and we are going to introduce someone to
guide him in this awkward matter. But first, Adrian, we should say you're
generally quite lucky because people will recognise you from your TV career and
they will walk up to you, presumably. Yes, they come up and say hello. And I
like having conversations. And the conversation itself I'm fine with. You know,
I just like talking to people. If that's me about myself, I like talking about
myself. Who doesn't? But I don't know how to start a conversation anymore. I
always find it difficult. But I don't have to do it, at least when I'm in this
country, because I'm generally quite well known. So people will recognise me
and, you know, then off you go. I really don't know how you do it. No, how you
do it. No. And you said you got caught at a party of the Croatian Davis Cup team
who didn't know you at all. I can speak the language. No, I can speak the
language. But they didn't recognise me and start anything with me. What do you
do? Just go straight up to somebody, shake hands. Hi. Good question. Now, look,
we have someone to help you, Celeste Headley, who is a broadcaster, author of We
Need to Talk, How to Have Conversations That Matter. Celeste, thank you for
joining us on PM. However, we don't want to know how to have conversations that
matter. We want to know how to start conversations that maybe don't even matter.
What is the answer to Adrian's conundrum? OK, so the secret to start in
conversation with anybody at all is take a look at them, notice some things
about them, the type of clothes they're wearing, if they have a tattoo,
jewellery, are they reading a book, are they holding their cell phone? And start
asking them specific questions. I mean, I boil it down to this. Ask them
questions they know the answer to about something they care about. So you could
even start by admitting, you know, if I were at that party, I would say, I feel
awkward. I hate these things. I don't know how to make small talk anymore. Tell
me about something that you care about. So, yeah, if you ask questions, the
burden is off you to hold up your end of the conversation. And as he mentioned,
people like to talk about themselves. So you'll probably be OK. But it's still
starting. I mean, what you've advised, you know, may work, but equally, you
know, if I go up to I can't go bowling up to somebody, say hi, tell me about
something you care about. There's not, you know, it might be an American thing
over here. I think I kind of struggle. It's the opening gambit. So you actually
can. And this works in almost every culture. I'll give you an example. I was at
a TED conference and a Japanese scientist came up to me and asked me this very
question. How do I start conversations? And I said, well, where are you from?
And he said Kyoto. And I said, you know, I've never been there. You know, tell
me what it's like. I've only ever been to Tokyo. And he started describing
Kyoto. And I said, you know, but Tokyo is so cramped. All the apartments are so
small. Is that how Kyoto is like? And he starts explaining. And I was like, do
you have dogs and yards and, you know, what does the street look like? And he
starts explaining. And about five minutes in, I said, that's how you start a
conversation. I can do that. But that is the conversation. I can do all that bit
easily. It's the very first thing. You're embarrassed, Adrian, to sidle up to
people and sort of look like you're kind of trying to get in with them because
they that's the bit. If you're shy, that is the hardest part of it. Well, I
think I think so. Can I just say what? Just one thing that occurred to me since
I wrote the piece is that we've all got kind of a responsibility. It's not about
the person wanting to start the conversation. It's about everyone else being
open to having the conversation started. So when you're in a situation like
that, maybe you're in a conversation, you know, just make the eye of somebody
who's on their own, maybe just a little raise of the eyebrow to indicate you are
welcome to start a company. You know, you come on in. Absolutely. We do ask. We
ask listeners for some ideas. Margaret said raise the topic of dentistry.
Everyone has personal experience in their fields. Jenny suggests. Well, how are
your teeth? I mean, have you got any problems with your teeth? Well, you see, I
think it makes it does show you how difficult this can be. Douglas Turner, who
listens in California, said here in the States, it's very simple. Just ask how
much income they make. Yeah, that is a good one. But that might be seen in three
journeys. What is you? What is your most remembered childhood experience? Again,
I think that's going in a bit deep, isn't it, Celeste? You can't it's got to be
something fairly light and trivial, doesn't it? It really does. I mean, not
everybody is open to and we're talking about Brits and I don't mean to
stereotype you, but most British people I know are not ready to jump into their
memories of childhood. So I would just say that it really doesn't have to be
nuclear science. You know, to speaking of science, research shows us that people
are much more open to conversation than we think. And they enjoy our
conversation and our company way more than we realize. We get so caught up in
believing we're awkward that that awkwardness is not something the other person
perceives. All right. Well, that's a good point on which to finish. Thanks so
much, Celeste Headley and Adrian. Good luck with your your parting. Now, it's a
couple of minutes to six. Let's get some weather. Here's Chris Fox. Well, thanks
a lot, Evan. And we've got some cloud and rain working across northern Scotland
at the moment. And for the far north of Scotland, gusty winds as well, gusts
running into the fifties and miles an hour at the moment. But what's going to
happen as we go on through the course of the next few hours is those strongest
of wind will tend to weaken, but the band of rain will push its way southwards
across Scotland. Now, ahead of that feature for Northern Ireland is going to be
quite cloudy tonight. There could be an odd spit of rain. England and Wales will
have some clear skies for a time and that will allow an early touch of frost to
develop. And indeed, the frost will hang on into southern parts of England where
temperatures get down to about minus three degrees Celsius. But across northern
England, Wales, the north Midlands and parts of East Anglia, it will tend to
turn cloudier overnight and that will tend to lift the temperatures to the frost
lifting away by the time we get to tomorrow morning. Now, tomorrow, I think for
Northern Ireland, for England and Wales, we're looking at a cloudy start to the
day and there will be a few patches of light rain coming and going. For
Scotland, a brighter start with some sunshine, but a few showers across northern
and eastern parts of the country and those brighter conditions will push
southwards through the day. So eventually we'll see some sunny spells get again
across Northern Ireland and across England and Wales. Mind you, there will be a
cold wind with us across northern and eastern areas through the day. Thanks,
Chris. That's PM. Frank McWeeney was the studio director, Scott Adam, editor.
After the news, don't forget to listen to Meet today. Dave Sedaris back on Radio
4.