TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-17H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Every step of the way. Her father, who was found guilty of gross negligence
manslaughter, was sentenced to seven and a half years. The teenager's mother,
Sarah Lloyd-Jones, who admitted the same charge, was jailed for six years. The
judge, Mr Justice Griffiths, said they were both equally to blame. The
conditions in which Kayleigh was left to die were fairly described by the Crown
as unfit for any animal. However, there was no deliberate cruelty, there is no
evidence of dislike or of targeting. It is a case of criminal neglect and gross
negligence. The Prime Minister has urged people not to focus on what he called
piecemeal bits of information after the former Health Secretary Matt Hancock was
accused of ignoring expert advice on testing in care homes during the pandemic.
The Daily Telegraph made the allegation after obtaining thousands of WhatsApp
messages sent to and from the MP, which it says shows he disregarded
recommendations to test everyone going into the facilities. Mr Hancock has
strongly denied the claims. Police searching for a missing baby in East Sussex
say they must consider that the child has come to serious harm. The newborn's
parents were arrested in Brighton on Monday night after disappearing in early
January. The BBC's Transport Minister has resigned after one of the country's
worst ever rail disasters. Costas Karamanlis said he was stepping down as a sign
of respect to those who died when a freight train collided head-on with a
passenger train. At least 36 people have been killed. Los Angeles County has
agreed to pay a settlement of almost Â£24 million to the widow of the basketball
star Kobe Bryant. His after-graphic images of the NBA legend's fatal helicopter
crash were shared by police and fire officials. BBC News This is BBC Radio 4. In
half an hour, the media show will be here. That's at 4.30. Now though, Matthew
Syed hears from a woman disgusted by fruits and vegetables from her earliest
memory until a bag of salad began to change everything. It's January 3rd 2020
and Lydia Harris is on her lunch break. I'm in the supermarket. I buy a mini
quiche and wondering what to have with it, on a whim I buy a bag of rocket.
Lydia returns to the office and warms up her quiche in the microwave. Then she
takes a small bowl from the communal crockery cupboard. I put a very small
handful in a bowl with a bit of olive oil and some salt. But Lydia's colleagues
are looking on in shock. They're trying to be subtle but they can't quite
believe what they're seeing. And that's when it happens. I brace myself, take a
forkful of it and it was done. I had eaten it. Yeah, it's changed things forever
for me. I'm Matthew Syed and this is Sideways, my show about the ideas that
shape our lives with stories of seeing the world differently. In this episode we
hear from a woman on a delicious journey. Taste is a sense that is deeply
personal. In today's episode I'll be thinking about how our individual likes and
dislikes form and how we can find greater joy in what we eat. Eating has never
been simple for Lydia. When I started to move to sort of proper solids, my mum
and dad started to notice that maybe something was not quite right. Something
that had a sort of interesting texture, something that combined a few different
textures I would be very upset about. Now I have to say like all parents I know
that getting children to try new foods can be a struggle. The taste buds are
brand new and it's sometimes easy to forget that each mouthful can be like a
flavour explosion and somewhat overwhelming. But for Lydia the problem went
beyond taste. One of my strongest negative memories of being really little,
really sobbing about trying and failing to eat an apple. Nobody really knew kind
of what was going on and what to do with me. Fruits and vegetables were off the
table. So were things like eggs and baked beans. People began to intervene,
trying to offer Lydia's mum advice. People would say if you don't give her
another option, she'll eat it. And that simply was not true. It wasn't a choice.
It wasn't me putting my foot down. I would rather have starved than eat
something that I was worried about eating. Over time, one word came to define
her diet. Beige. That would be the kind of shorthand for explaining what I could
eat. Bread and potatoes, pasta, but really only in a cheese sauce which is quite
a homogenous texture, it's smooth unless you've made a terrible mistake
somewhere along the way. Lydia wasn't being fussy, that label we often apply to
children's eating habits. She was experiencing something different, a hard-line
aversion. She found it really hard to get people to understand. There was one
particular reality TV show in the noughties that made things worse. Andrew seems
to have it all, but his life is far from normal because for 26 years, the only
thing Andrew Forster has ever eaten is biscuits. There was a programme on when I
was a teenager called Freaky Eaters. It was a kind of freak show. Look at this
person's diet, how are they still alive? Never tried to eat out of us. I'd
rather bring her back up, I'd rather vomit, vent it, come back up somehow. When
they heard about my diet, people would say, oh, like Freaky Eaters. It's like,
oh no, that's how people see me. I'm in that camp with the person who only eats
biscuits. The framing of people's eating habits as freaky can feel a little
pejorative, but the popularity of this BBC3 show and others points at an
uncomfortable truth. We are fascinated by the diets of other people. Think of
the furtive glances that we occasionally give at somebody else's shopping
trolley or lunch box. There's no getting around the fact that you have a body.
You're not a disembodied soul. You are something with a mouth and you need
substance to survive. This is the food writer Ruby Tando. Ruby thinks that much
of our food fascination comes from an angst about what we should be eating and
it goes back a long way. A lot of this anxiety kind of stretches back in this
evolutionary sense. It is beneficial for us to be gravitating towards sweetness,
which is a pretty clear sign of calories, whereas bitterness for the most part
is a sign of toxins. But I think if we look and try to find really clear answers
about the kinds of foods we should be eating, and sometimes we want that, don't
we? We want the security of knowing there's a right or a wrong food. We're being
led astray because I think the thing that is drilled into us through evolution
is not a choice of a specific food, it's the fact of choice itself. As
omnivores, when much of the Earth's buffet is available to us, it's perhaps no
surprise that food choices can sometimes feel overwhelming. Food is a point at
which our body blurs with the world, where the outside comes inside. It's a
philosophical and vulnerable boundary. For our ancestors, who were learning what
was safe to eat through trial and error, it paid to be cautious about food. But
food has been a source of angst at plenty of other times throughout history.
Pope Gregory I, what he said about gluttony wasn't just that it was a sin to eat
more than you want or more than you need. He actually shuts down the possibility
of taking any pleasure in food. So he said that it was a vice to eat to satisfy
the vile sense of taste. This shame, the sense that you are a lusty, physical
beast instead of being an enlightened human, I think that comes through even
now. Gosh, I almost feel sinful anticipating my dinner tonight. But I suppose
working out what to eat is complicated and very personal. Our food choices are
freighted with evolutionary, historical and cultural baggage. They depend on
what's available and desirable where we live, but also the resources we have to
purchase them. And of course, figuring out what we actually enjoy. But for
Lydia, working out what to eat was in a certain sense simple. There were some
foods that made her skin crawl. I did a brownie batch. We had to eat a vegetable
every day. My real absolute nightmare. And one day I ate a single pea, just
swallowed it down with a glass of water. But that was the only successful day.
My mum had to sort of go into brownies the next week and just say, we can't do
this batch. It's not happening. As she got older, Lydia started to feel more and
more embarrassed by her diet. One Christmas, Lydia had to navigate a meal at a
work party in a chic restaurant. She felt like she was on display. We were
served venison and red cabbage. They had been together on one platter. And so I
just simply could not eat it. The amount of interest was really off-putting. I
just felt like I didn't fit in. And actually that could change the way I'm
thought of at work, which is a really scary prospect. Lydia wanted to try new
things. My parents liked to go to a couple of really, really good Chinese
restaurants. The smell was just amazing. This kind of spicy and it's like really
savoury and a bit sweet. But Lydia simply couldn't overcome her aversion. I
could smell it and I could want it, but I could not get over that textural
barrier to be able to experience it for myself. It was a real visceral reaction
I would have to food. I would gag on stuff, just be almost physically unable to
eat things. And yeah, I could only kind of pick around the edges, but I had
enough flavour from those to really feel what it was that I was missing. Most
people, I think, have at least one food that makes their skin crawl. Although I
have to confess, I'm not one of them. I eat almost anything. Speaking of my
wife, though, she cannot stand lamb and she actually struggles if I order it in
the restaurant, which is why I don't have it very much. It's something about the
smell and texture that elicits that visceral reaction. To me, it's delicious. To
her, disgusting. And it turns out that the feeling of disgust may be a critical
aspect of our evolutionary history. The things that prompt our disgust reaction
may have partly evolved in order to protect us from things that will infect or
poison or otherwise remind one of mortality, of death and decay. This is Carolyn
Korsmeier, Professor of Philosophy at the University of Buffalo in New York.
Carolyn has spent a lot of time thinking about disgusting things. Disgust is
thought to be a basic emotion. The expression of disgust is a sort of ugh, with
a downturned mouth and a sort of scrunched up nose and clenched eyes. There's a
huge range of things that elicit disgust. The smell of excretion, the slimy feel
of rotten fruit, the sight of decaying roadkill. We do our best to stay away
from these things. When it comes to food, we often don't hesitate to yuck
someone else's yum. I had a guest at American Thanksgiving from what was at the
time East Germany and we served the traditional pumpkin pie and she was just
appalled. How can you eat a pumpkin? It's pig food. But taste is malleable.
Sometimes we're tentatively willing to try foods that we have previously found
disgusting. Disgusting food prompts our curiosity. What's going on there? How
close can I get to it? How much can I tolerate? Strangely enough, Carolyn points
out that with food, many of the things which initially disgust us are later
cultivated into gourmet delights. For the most part, we're disgusted by rotting,
decaying food, but in some instances, it's a delicacy. To have meat that has
turned slightly strengthens the meat flavour. I have read fascinating examples
of times when people have prescribed that you wait until the pheasant is ready
to drop to the floor. It's been hung by its feet for several days, maybe weeks.
Remove both the feathers and the maggots, then your pheasant is ready to eat.
It's fascinating that at many points in history, these so-called high meats have
become the zenith of culinary fashion. In the 16th century, seeking perhaps to
emphasise their similarity to the cultures of ancient Greece and Rome, French
scholars altered their perceptions of what parts of animals were good to eat, as
well as how they were prepared. The English soon followed suit, cultivating a
taste for these newfangled preparations. And they rose to the status of the
delicious. To enjoy decaying food might sound bizarre, but I'm sure many of us
have trodden this path. Cheese, gorgonzolas, stiltons and so forth. Some are so
stinky you have to keep them away from your other food or it will become very
unpalatable. People need to train themselves to eat something that they are told
is the height of flavour. And with practice, you can learn to like them. It's
almost as if the very process of overcoming initial disgust makes the food more
delicious. These are sometimes called hard-won tastes. And I can see this
journey in my love affair with Roquefort, a sheep's milk blue cheese from
southern France. I remember the first time I saw and smelled it when it was
served at a friend's house. I looked on in a state of disbelief. Is this family
voluntarily eating this stuff? Have I arrived in an alien civilization? Then the
next time I saw it on a cheese board, I had a tiny nibble. And so by a process
of stealth and increment, and via the malleable nature of taste, it became a
firm favourite. There's very little better in life than watching television in
the evening with a decent slice of Roquefort, a few white grapes and some
buttered water biscuits. As the years passed, Lydia tried to move beyond the
disgust that she felt towards certain foods, to come a little closer to the
pleasure that others seem to take in a fruit salad or a vegetable lasagna. I had
moments of really wanting to try stuff, but basically it was just not something
that I could get over. I couldn't rationalise my way out of it. In 2016,
something happened to Lydia that amplified her struggle. I was diagnosed with
non-Hodgkin lymphoma, which is a type of blood cancer. Obviously it's a
devastating diagnosis, everything becomes really uncertain. And I had this real
nagging fear, you know, if I'm going through all of this treatment, if I want to
be healthy again, do I need to be eating fruit and vegetables? Lydia was
comforted when she reached out to her consultant for advice. She just said, I
don't care what you eat as long as you keep eating. That's the main thing, you
have to keep eating. She really lifted a lot of the pressure that I felt during
that time. Lydia started a slow, gruelling course of treatment. The procedures
were brutal. I was really worried about the bone marrow biopsy. It's an
extremely invasive and incredibly painful procedure that they do while you're
awake with a huge needle. I did faint, but actually that was a blessing to be
honest. My body was all of a sudden a real site of horror basically. It suddenly
felt like kind of unknown territory. But finally, thankfully, it was over and
the experience was life-changing. I'd always had this thought if I had a very
serious illness, rather than go through lots of horrible treatment and
procedures, maybe I'd just not do anything about it. But that's how squeamish I
was about things. But when I actually became ill, that wasn't an option.
Anything about that changed my relationship with my body and my health forever.
Before long, Lydia started to notice changes in areas that were off-limits to
her before. Those weird hairs that were growing out of your back, I had them
analysed. They were definitely not human. I'm a big film fan and horror had
always been the genre that I could not really dip my tongue into. In the last
couple of years, I have gone down the rabbit hole of body horror. David
Cronenberg has sort of shot up the ranks for me in terms of my favourite
directors. Don't be afraid. No, be afraid. Be very afraid. Movies like the 1986
film The Fly from Brooks Films and 20th Century Fox Studios were now Saturday
night viewing at Lydia's house. But her tolerance for horror films wasn't the
only thing that had changed. At a Boxing Day buffet, Lydia did something
unthinkable. The Christmas spirit just compelled me. And I had a tiny slice of
this cheese and ham quiche and it was delicious. Lydia had been through
something huge and it was altering her sense of taste. The food she had spent
nearly three decades avoiding with monumental amounts of effort because of its
wobbly texture now appeared tolerable. It turns out that very small changes in
our perception of food can have a huge impact on how much we enjoy it. If you've
got something that's kind of angular, say like a slice of cake, it's better to
have it so that the point is pointing away from the diner. The same cake
pointing towards you and your brain's fear circuits light up for a moment
because it looks like it could be something dangerous. This is Charles Spence, a
brilliant experimental psychologist at Oxford University. His speciality?
Gastrophysics. For too long there's been so much of a focus on the chemical
makeup of food and drinks. There have been hundreds if not thousands of studies
of coffee, roasting process, how does that affect the taste of the coffee. But
no one has ever studied scientifically the coffee cup. So how does that affect
the experience? Experts have steadily revealed that a huge array of sensory
inputs can impact on how much we enjoy the food we eat. We find coffee more
intense when we sip it from a white cup. We prefer the taste of food that is
beautifully plated. Heavier cutlery makes meals taste better and so does eating
with our hands. How can these factors have such a large impact? When we think
about taste, our thoughts turn immediately to the mouth. After all, it's where
we put our food. One of the great tricks our minds play on us is to convince us
all that that drink we taste in our mouth is really coming from our mouth. I can
taste the flavour right there on my tongue and yet all the other senses are also
playing a role in taste perception. In other words, all of our other senses are
working collaboratively to impact our eating experience. Even sound has an
influence on how food tastes. We had 20 hungry undergraduates, each with two
tubes of Pringles. We had a microphone that picked up the sound of their
crunching. Then we could make your crunch louder or quieter. And what we were
able to show is that we can make those potato chips about 15% fresher, more
liked, simply by boosting the sound of the crunch. Charles came up with a
hypothesis to answer the much-pondered question, why do so many people drink
tomato juice when they fly? We thought maybe people are choosing a drink that is
high in umami because that must stand out well to the noise in the aeroplane. In
2015, researchers at Cornell University put this theory to the test. They were
able to show that yes, those loud sounds does indeed suppress people's ability
to taste sweetness in food and to taste salt in food. But at the same time,
umami, that mysterious fifth taste, was actually accentuated. Charles helped a
major airline create a menu paired with sonic seasoning to combat the impact of
engine noise on flavour. When people chose what to eat from the menu, then they
could have matching music designed to bring out the taste of those dishes on the
menu that they might have chosen. The Proclaimers for a bit of a Scottish
salmon. Pavarotti, good for bringing out the bitter notes in the chocolate
dessert. Spencer's found that tinkling music can enhance sweetness. So how about
a lemon drizzle cake with a bit of Mike Oldfield's Tubular Bells playing in the
background? Having said that, gastrophysics isn't just about making airline food
more palatable. Charles has also worked to improve the experience of eating for
older people who might be losing their interest in food. My mother who died of
Alzheimer's in the last year or so in the care home she was in, ice cream was
the only thing we could get her to eat. But I sort of was thinking how could we
make ice cream a functional food, one that delivered nutrients and benefits. And
so together with Chef Joseph Youssef from Kitchen Theory, we made this range of
ice creams. We had a cream of tomato, soup ice cream, prawn cocktail ice cream,
the flavours that we thought would be familiar from their youth. Charles and his
team were concerned about perceptions. Test subjects might see pink ice cream
and expect the taste of raspberry. The tomato flavour might be a bit shocking.
We had tomato soup labels on the screen, we had Vera Lynn singing in the
background, trying to correct the atmosphere to signal the right flavour. I love
Charles' appetite to bring science and experimentation to food, to look beyond
taste as a one-dimensional linear sense and tease out the multifaceted sensorial
nature of our relationship with what we eat. Lydia's success on Boxing Day with
the slice of cheese and ham quiche made her wonder whether she ought to prod at
her perceptions a little more. A week later, Lydia bought a miniature quiche at
the supermarket and on a whim, some rocket leaves to go with it. Even at that
point I thought, I'm not going to eat this. And I surprised myself by making it
all the way through. I didn't love it. I'm not sure that I even really liked it,
but I had eaten it. Lydia had actually eaten a vegetable and it felt like a time
to take more chances, to step even further beyond her comfort zone. Bit by bit,
Lydia began to experiment. Roasted carrots, baby corn, crispy kale. I didn't
want to overthink it and so I made a really concerted effort to try new things
as often as possible. One by one, she was taking on the world of vegetables. It
didn't take long for Lydia to compile a new list of likes. Spinach and feta filo
pie, courgette leek and goat's cheese soup. Lasagna was the kind of big,
exciting moment for me. It was at that point the most delicious thing I had ever
eaten and I did a little dance in my chair at the table. I just could not
believe that I could eat this and that everybody else was just merrily going
about their lives eating lasagna and they must be taking it for granted. The
doors to the world's pantry had finally been thrown wide open and Lydia could
enter. Lydia found inspiration from two particular cookery writers. I don't
believe it's possible to live well without eating well. Nigella was a constant
in my mum's house. She's one of my mum's absolute favourite cooks. Just her
philosophy about food, being about pleasure. Ruby Tando, her book Cook As You
Are, gives you lots of options with the recipes. If you don't have this or you
can't afford that, this is what you can do instead, which I think is such a
generous way to write about food. Ruby also proposes leaving some room for
curiosity when it comes to appetite. We can use our appetite as this wonderful
tool for learning something new, even if we don't end up enjoying the things
that we're trying. If we can just say, do you know what, I'm curious. You might
say, I've not liked parmesan when I've had it shaved in big flat pieces, but I
wonder, would I like it if I had it really finely grated, mixed into this sauce?
It's just about asking a tiny, tiny question today and seeing if that can take
you somewhere new. When it comes to food, as with so much else in life, it pays
to keep an open mind. Trying new things, experimenting from time to time, it
helps us to explore new frontiers. And for Lydia, this gentle, coaxing
encouragement of her appetite has led to a wonderful change in her day-to-day
life. I have access to something that's pleasurable every day. Even if
everything else has gone badly that day, I know I'm going to come home and eat
something delicious. After a few months of radical changes to her diet, Lydia
went home to share a meal with her mum. She had really thought hard about what
we were going to eat together. One of the things was a lamb bake with lots of
vegetables in and tahini and a tomato sauce. It was absolutely delicious. And it
wasn't long until Lydia was able to cook for her mum in return. Mapo tofu, which
is now my ultimate comfort food. She hadn't eaten it before, so it was really
exciting for me to introduce something new to my mum. She loves to eat, and it
had been something that we couldn't share together. We have so much else in
common. Finally, we'd kind of moved that much closer together. It was really
exciting. I'd often felt during this journey that I'd been missing out for a
long time. Coming to it late, it's something that I will never take for granted.
Taste is one of the most wonderful aspects of human experience. And that's why
it's been a joy to hear about Lydia. By overcoming a lifelong aversion, she
entered a kaleidoscopic world full of colour and flavour. She started to
approach mealtimes with curiosity and that spirit of adventure. As creatures of
habit, whose likes and dislikes are often forged early, this is an attitude that
can be easy to lose. We might assume that taste preferences are set in stone
when they are in fact endlessly malleable. I'm definitely not going to take
broccoli for granted ever again. And what's certain is on the way home tonight,
I'm going to stop off at the supermarket, buy some Roquefort, some white grapes
and some water biscuits and eat them. Thanks to the producer of this episode,
Nadia Mehdi. The series editor is Catherine Godfrey. Sideways is produced by
Novel for BBC Radio 4. And Matthew Side will be back at the same time next week
with an exploration of what motivates us to do the right thing. Next this
afternoon, journalistic ethics and today's news. The Media Show in just a
moment. Lem Sisse is a one-off. Are you the poet a woman said to me in the
street? Lem Sisse isn't anyone else. Now I can say, she said, that I finally met
Benjamin Zephaniah. Lem Sisse explores uniqueness. You are a visible original, a
pinnacle of miracle. We're talking about being the one and only non-graduate in
the room. He just said you failed. You are the Lord Mayor of Manchester. Lem
Sisse is the one and only. Are you that poet, Tony Walsh? On Friday mornings at
11.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. And now here's Ross Atkins with The Media Show.
Hello and welcome. Well today we're going back to 2020. First we have what The
Telegraph's calling the lockdown files. These are dozens of WhatsApp messages
that former Health Secretary Matt Hancock sent and received. He gave them to the
journalist Isabel Oakeshott so she could help write his book about the pandemic.
Now they've been given to The Telegraph by Isabel Oakeshott. It's raising
questions about the government's decision-making during the pandemic. And it's
also raising questions about journalistic ethics. Next we have the FBI which
this week said it believes the most likely explanation of how the pandemic
started is a leak in China, an idea that back in 2020 was dismissed by some as a
conspiracy theory. We'll look at how the media handled that idea at the time.
And we're learning a lot about how Fox News handled Donald Trump's false claims
that the 2020 US election was stolen. We'll talk about that too. Let's start
though with The Daily Telegraph's Camilla Tomini speaking on The World at One
earlier about the paper's decision to publish those messages of Matt Hancock's.
When you've been presented with 2.3 million words and you can see the rapidity
and regularity with which messages were pinged on WhatsApp that then informed
major decision-making, then we think there's a legitimate public interest for
the public to know what was said at the time in these messages. With me in the
Media Show studio is Heather Brooke, a British-American journalist, a freedom of
information campaigner and a former professor of journalism at City University.
And Heather, you worked on the MP's expenses story with The Daily Telegraph in
2009. You also worked on the WikiLeaks story that The Guardian published some
years afterwards. In the case of this cache of messages, would you have
published? I would have to see them all, but yes, I think there's such a great
public interest in knowing, having a real-time account of when those decisions
were being made. And they've done it in a seemingly responsible way. They
haven't just dumped it all out on the Internet. They have gone through it. I
mean, my main question is, what did they leave out? And what were the political
motivations for this to even come out in the first place? Because I feel like
there is some underlying story, the story behind the story about how these came
into to be published in the first place. Well, Matt Hancock touches on some of
those issues in a statement. He said these stolen messages have been doctored to
create a false story that Matt rejected clinical advice on care home testing.
This is flat wrong, it says, a statement on behalf of Matt Hancock, which begs
the question, why would you not put all the messages out if you had them rather
than selectively pick them, which leaves you open to this kind of criticism?
Yeah, I mean, it's a common criticism that you get when you do publish is that
you've either manipulated facts or left things out. And if Matt Hancock, being
the original owner of these messages, like he in fact downloaded them all and
gave them to Isabel Oakeshott, so hers are a copy, if he wants to correct the
record, there's nothing to stop him from doing that. He could, you know, he can
just publish the full account of those messages if he wants to. But you don't
have concerns about the fact that he downloaded and gave those messages to
Isabel Oakeshott for the purposes of writing a book, not for the purposes of
putting them in the Daily Telegraph. I would say that's a different
conversation. There's like two ethical issues here. One is the ethics of
publishing them. Do they have a strong public interest? And I think the answer
to that is yes. And then the other thing is the journalist herself, that she has
basically betrayed a source. And that's, you know, that's something that she
needs to think about herself to be like morally square with herself. But then
also there are these I mean, it's a tricky thing because, you know, for
journalists, especially investigative journalists, source protection is such a
an important value. So to if your source gives you something and then you, you
know, you sort of betray that trust, that that is an issue that I would want to,
you know, I think needs more conversation. And it's not the first time that
Isabel Oakeshott has been in this situation before with source protection. Well,
Isabel Oakeshott anticipated some of these questions coming her way because
she's published a long article in the Daily Telegraph along with the story.
Here's just one paragraph from it. She says, already the Covid inquiry is mired
in a secrecy row as lawyers busy themselves redacting civil servants names from
thousands of documents. By the time all those being paid vast sums of taxpayers
money to protect reputations are finished, it's not hard to imagine the whole
thing may become a colossal whitewash. She makes the case for simply getting
this information out there because people deserve to see it. Yeah, it's a good
case to make, and certainly it's true that our public inquiries in Britain take
forever. They are always sort of a way to put something into the long grass and
not, you know, for everybody who who is sort of materially responsible has
already moved on by the time that these inquiries have a concluding result.
Well, Heather, let's bring in Vivian Schiller, executive director of Aspen
Digital, which is part of the Aspen Institute. She's also a former president and
CEO of National Public Radio in the US. She's held senior roles at Twitter, CNN,
New York Times, NBC and others. Vivian, welcome to the media show. I guess let's
start with the same question I asked Heather. Would you have published? Yeah,
well, yes, with some caveats. I have some concerns. Look, it's newsworthy. There
is a separate issue about the ethics of her protecting her source that I think
we can talk about that. But that's a separate topic. Newsworthy. It is
responsibility of news organizations to to publish newsworthy information. It's
certainly newsworthy. But here's my two concerns. First of all, in terms of she
did not release the entire cache of documents. One might say that there is, you
know, confidential information to be protected, you know, that needs to be
protected. And in the hands of a responsible journalist, I would be more
comfortable with publishing as a news organization, publishing select excerpts,
except she clearly has an agenda. And so she is not a so-called neutral
journalist. She even if you read her story about why she did it, she uses
phrases like people being imprisoned in their homes. She's got a point of view.
She's got an agenda. But hold on, don't all journalists and all news
organizations in their own way have one agenda or another? Well, yes, of course,
we're human beings and we all have biases. But she's she but she has explicitly
said that she believes that the lockdown efforts are not casting judgment on
this, but she has specifically said that she's come down with a very strong
point of view on a very controversial issue and then has presented evidence that
supports her point of view, which doesn't give me much trust. Yeah, I would
agree because I've followed her career a little bit. I don't know everything
about it, but she has worked for Michael Ashcroft and she's basically, I feel,
is not a neutral journalist and she has been basically a propagandist in a lot
of ways. Well, I'm sure she would absolutely deny that description. She's
justified her decision. But the other thing I should say is it's not Isabel
Oakeshott who's publishing this. It's The Daily Telegraph. She hasn't put it on
a blog of hers or posted them out as tweets. She's gone through one of the
biggest newspapers in this country who have put it on their front page. And so
it's been through The Daily Telegraph's editorial processes. And as such, we
should be judging The Telegraph as well as the journalists, shouldn't we? Yeah,
I agree. And what? I was going to say that we are also there are politics
underneath the story, and it feels to me, I mean, some stories you can really
sense that there's sort of an empirical bedrock of the story. And then other
ones come out with quite a heavy political spin on them. And this one struck me
as having quite a heavy political spin. I'm glad it's out there. It's certainly
incredibly important to the public, but I would have preferred it to not have
such a such a spin. But when you were working on the WikiLeaks story, which came
out via The Guardian and other media organisations around the world, you and
others involved chose to include some things and chose to not include others.
And there were political ramifications of doing that, too, weren't there? Yeah,
there always is. I mean, if you're making decisions about what to publish and
what not to publish, you have to, yeah, you're deciding those things. But I
guess what I would say is the reasons for those decisions are transparent. You
know, the reason we didn't publish all of the WikiLeaks diplomatic cables, like
as a dump, is because we could say there's actually quite a lot of security
information that shows where, you know, that shows where troops are, that shows
where people that talk to the American government are and they're in hostile
countries, their lives would generally be in danger. So that's why we're keeping
that out. I don't know what the what the criteria were for redactions of these
lockdown files. Well, I suspect it's not the last time we'll hear about them.
And I'm sure through the week and beyond, the Daily Telegraph will be doing more
to explain its thinking. By the way, you can listen back on BBC Sounds to hear
the full interview with Camilla Tomini from the Daily Telegraph, which was on
The World at One. Heather, thank you very much indeed for being with us on the
media show. We appreciate it. That's Heather Brooke. Vivienne Schiller is
staying with us. And we're going to turn to another story now, which also roots
back to 2020. This is a Wall Street Journal exclusive this weekend that the US
Energy Department has concluded that the pandemic most likely arose from a lab
leak in China. Then we've seen in the news today, the FBI's director has said
that the FBI has drawn a similar conclusion. Now, go back to 2020. And that idea
was, in some quarters, referred to as a conspiracy theory. So let's consider how
the media handled this particular idea. First of all, Paul McNukey is here,
senior editor for Global Health Security and Campaigns at The Telegraph. Now,
good to see you, Paul. Thanks for coming in. Thank you. We should be clear, we
invited you before the lockdown files landed, and you're not here to talk about
that. But I just wonder, what's it like being in a newsroom, in a news
organisation, when a story of this scale comes along? Do you know it's coming,
for starters? Well, I didn't know it was coming, but very exciting is the
answer. It's a great scoop, and a great scoop, I think, in the public interest.
But I don't know the detail of how it was put together. Well, as I was saying,
you're not here to talk specifically about Matt Hancock, but you'll remember as
well as I do, that if we go back towards the beginning of the pandemic, there
were sections of the media who were not at all comfortable talking about the lab
leak theory. Some were just saying we shouldn't be touching this. What are your
memories of how that issue was handled at the time? Looking back, I think
actually that narrative isn't quite right. My memory is that the lab leak
hypothesis was pushed out quite early by spooks in the States to the Wall Street
Journal and other American papers. So I think it's been there pretty much since
the beginning, if we really go back. And I think that the US intelligence
agencies, which have been charged with considering where the virus came from,
have actually done quite a good job. You know, there are six or seven of these
agencies. They produced a report under an umbrella title 18 months ago. And this
is an update on that. Do you worry, though, that the nuances of the conclusions
being drawn by these different American bodies is being lost as it turns into
reports in the media? Yes, I do. I think that some of the reporting of it is
pretty poor. So, for example, the energy organization has come to its
conclusion, but it says itself that it does so with low confidence. And that
means in its own words that the data it's relying on is scant, questionable,
fragmented or in a state such that solid analytical conclusions cannot be
inferred from it. And so let's explore this information point where
intelligence, science, and journalism collide. You're going to stay with us, but
let me bring in Tim Caulfield, professor of health, law and science policy at
the University of Alberta in Canada. Professor Caulfield is also an author and a
TV host. And, Professor, you have in some ways straddled the media in the
academic world on this particular issue. I wonder, as you saw journalists and
the media grappling with ideas like the lab leak, what your impressions were?
Yeah, I very much agree with Paul. You know, I think there's been this
fascinating revision of how this debate has played out because there's really a
number of streams going on here. There's the scientific story and how scientists
have grappled with this. And in general, and I want to be careful here, this is
complex, most scientists still lean natural cause, right? They still lean
natural cause. And then you have, you know, these agencies that have come out in
the United States that have grappled with this too. And they're saying, hey,
this is complex. And what is it, two out of five now are leaning lab leak. The
others are still leaning natural or saying there's no consensus, right? And then
you have how the media has been portraying this. And yeah, it has been less than
ideal. Again, I agree with Paul. I found it kind of fascinating how you have
this one report from one agency that is based on sort of low confidence. And
then we come to the fourth category, and those are politicians. And they're
saying, look, we win. Our team wins. You know, there was a lab leak. We should
never have been, it should never have been said that this was a conspiracy
theory. So it is really fascinating to see these four streams and their other
streams. And there are others out there kind of grapple with what is really
complex and important. I think that that should be highlighted too. Science. And
we haven't done a great job. You know, we've just sort of fueled this
polarization. And unfortunately, I don't think it's going to go away. I do want
to add one more element if I could here. I think there has been a conflation
between the bioweapon conspiracy theory and the, which by the way, all the
agencies say it is a conspiracy theory, it wasn't a bioweapon. Really, that has
stayed framed, rightly or not, as being inaccurate and the lab leak theory. But
for sure, early days, we did not handle this well from a science communication
perspective. And as some of the dynamics which you describe played out in 2020
and since, one of the journalistic responses to this has been fact checking,
guiding us through the pandemic with clear fact checking where possible. And
also here in the studio is Pippa Allen-Kinross, news and online editor from Full
Fact. Hi Pippa, thanks for being with us. How did you handle this one back in
2020? This was a very difficult one. I think it was really obvious, really right
from the start of 2020 that we were not going to have evidence to talk about
this. And, you know, we don't pretend to be a team of experts that know
everything about everything. We have to rely on the best evidence that is
available when we fact check something. And I think it's easy to forget now how
much was changing in the early days of the pandemic, how much evidence was
coming out, which would later get replaced by other evidence and other evidence
as we went through. So, you know, we did look at these claims. But sorry, let me
interrupt you because this is the nub of it, isn't it? In that the way that
science handles something, that it collects evidence, it collects more evidence
and its position evolves. While if you're fact checking, that suggests a degree
of certainty that perhaps the science wasn't able to offer. I think one of the
most important things that we do in fact checking, people obviously are keen to
have a this is true or this is false. And that's quite often not something we're
able to give on a variety of topics. But one of the really important things to
do is to express uncertainty where uncertainty exists and to be really clear
about the limits of the evidence we're able to give. So back in sort of March
2020, when we were starting to write about these things, we could say this is
the best evidence we have available at the moment, but this is not certain. And
I think being clear about what is not certain is really important to this
conversation as well. So that's how you were approaching it. But Paul, I wonder
whether one of the other dynamics here was that there was so much poor
information about COVID flying around that scientists, academics, journalists
and others were so keen to jump on information that was wrong and say, no, no,
no, don't believe this. That sometimes information that was worthy of further
attention was being unfairly labelled in that way. I think that's right. I think
Pippa's point about people craving certainty is quite a big problem. And it's a
problem for the media too. Because this question is really about probabilities.
You know, what's more probable? And I think that there's a fantastic story in
it, which is explainable and understandable by readers with all sorts of twists
and levels of evidence. But if people simply want to write this is true or that
is true, we get ourselves into this very difficult position where people start
to lose trust in the media and what is being said. Professor Caulfield, let's
bring you in here. Yeah, I agree with what both my colleagues said. And the data
on this is kind of fascinating, actually, because research has shown that the
public says, I want to know about uncertainty. Be honest with me. Be transparent
with me. But when you do that, you may not get that signal through the noise,
right? So you want to have the splashy headline. You want to have the content
that is shareable on social media that often, unfortunately, skews to the
dogmatic. It skews to the definitive when the reality is it's very, very
uncertain. So yeah, people crave both uncertainty. They crave certainty. But
when you ask them, they say they want you to be honest about the uncertainty.
And I believe we can do both. I agree with Paul. I think we can make compelling
content that is true to the science. Vivian Schiller from the Aspen Institute.
Let's bring you in because you and your colleagues have a huge amount of
information about not just how the media handles disinformation, but how we all
handle it as consumers. Right. Well, I want to just talk about the media
response to this, because everything that everybody said, I agree with, but I'm
looking at the headline of the Wall Street Journal article that broke the news
about the Energy Department. This is before the FBI came in. And the headline
I'm reading it is, Lab Leak Most Likely Origin of COVID-19 Pandemic. Energy
Department Now Says. You have to go scroll down the article to discover that the
disclaimer is they have a low, quote, low level of confidence. Level of
confidence, I found that to be a very irresponsible headline, given low level of
confidence and given the context of people looking to, you know, of our
polarized world, where people are looking to cast blame on the media and sort of
get make sure that their side wins, which nobody wins in this situation. And
just finally, on this subject, Professor Caulfield, what about this idea that
both scientists and journalists are so concerned about giving oxygen to
conspiracy theories that sometimes they unfairly label something as such, when
in fact, it's worthy of further explanation and exploration? Yeah, this this is
a real challenge. You know, we've done a lot of research around the idea of
false balance, which, to be honest with you, throughout the pandemic was a
bigger issue than than by another word. So giving too much oxygen to to to
fringe ideas, then then the other issue of not taking things, things seriously.
You know, the lab leak theory, as Paul noted, you know, it has been covered
pretty consistently for the last two years. Early days, I think early days,
we're talking early 2020. And it was more of this concern. But we were in the
you know, at the beginning of a pandemic. I do think what we can do is use
what's called a weight of evidence approach, where you highlight that there are
these views out there. But right now, right now, the body of evidence tells us
it's another story. And that sounds similar to the approach that Full Fact took
then and is taking now. And Professor Caulfield, we'll leave it there on this.
Thank you very much. Thanks to to Pippa Allen Kinross from Full Fact and Paul
Newkey from The Telegraph. Now, we are reflecting there on that being a story
where media politics, ideology, journalism, all connect. Here's another story
where that has been happening, because in the US, Dominion Voting Systems has
brought a defamation case against Fox News. It relates to how the network
covered Donald Trump's claims about the 2020 election being stolen, which, of
course, is a claim not backed up by available evidence. Eric Wemple, The
Washington Post columnist and media critic, has been covering this story. And
Eric, the reason we invited you on was because this defamation case has revealed
a great deal about the inner workings of Fox News. Just tell us what we've
learned. Eric obviously can't hear us, or if he can, we can't hear him. Vivian,
you've also been following this. And in this, these details, we saw the Fox News
executives were really debating hard how to cover these claims when clearly some
of them had major doubts about those claims. Yeah, I mean, I think that what was
revealed was not surprising, but it was nonetheless shocking to hear so plainly
the executives and the anchors clearly acknowledging that the rigged election
was nonsense, that they didn't believe in it. And very plainly saying, we can't
cover the truth that we know because we will lose audience and we will lose
money was, you know, just really confirmed what many of us have suspected. But
it's just that the level of cynicism and damage that causes is just deeply,
deeply shocking. Well, on the lawsuit, Fox News says Dominion's lawsuit has
always been more about what will generate headlines than what can withstand
legal and factual scrutiny, as illustrated by them now being forced to slash
their fanciful damages demand by more than half a billion dollars after their
own expert debunked its implausible claims. And of course, we'll have to see how
that defamation lawsuit plays out. But nonetheless, it was an insight, wasn't
it? Not just to the dynamic within Fox, but also the fact that Rupert Murdoch,
by his own admission, likes to stay involved in the journalism of the companies
which he owns. Yeah, indeed. And I think Eric has audio now, so he may want to
jump in on that. Eric, are you there? OK. Yes, I'm here. Fantastic. Please tell
us more about what we've learned from these messages about the detailed
discussions within Fox on this issue. Well, the detailed discussions within Fox
about its coverage of the stolen election claims and so on and so forth
basically indicate that Fox is a corrupt news network, something that we've been
able to ascertain just by watching the network over many years. And, you know,
basically, they entertain serious doubts or basically didn't believe a lot of
the programming that they were broadcasting simply because, well, they wanted to
keep their audience. And they knew that their audience would leave them if they
tilted too far toward the truth. And they saw their audience once this issue of
the stolen election claim became a real sort of like top run news issue or the
news issue in the United States, they saw their audience starting to migrate
towards other more even more right wing cable news outlets, and they panicked.
They just freaked out and decided, well, what do we got to do? We need to toe
the line. We need to thread the needle. We need to do some sort of balancing act
to keep their audience at Fox News. And this is understandable behavior for an
outlet that only had its ratings to show for it. Fox News doesn't really ever
break news. Fox News doesn't do a particularly good analysis. They don't have
any huge scoops. All they have ever had is audience. But when you lose your
audience, you lose everything. You don't think, though, that and we've heard
this before from Fox representatives, that there's a distinction between its
opinion programming and its news programming. That's a distinction that
sometimes argued that the news programming plays it straight while the opinion
people are given more leeway to express themselves. I think there is a
distinction between the news program and the opinion programming, but that
doesn't that's not a get out of free get out of jail free card. Look, the
opinion programming is propaganda and falsehoods and stuff that really damages
the country. The news programming is just basically conservatively tilted
discussion and topics and so on and so forth. If Brett Baer, you know, the main
news person at Fox News, if Brett Baer, for example, were all the Fox News
broadcast, our country would be in a much better position. I will say also that,
you know, the fact that they are these so-called opinion commentators weren't
actually expressing their opinion, as we now know, because of the because of the
text messages, they were expressing what they thought they needed to do to keep
their audience, which I am not a defamation lawyer, but the experts are weighing
in that this is about as powerful evidence as has been seen in a very, very high
bar case to win still. Just very quickly, Eric, as we come to the end of the
program, what happens next in the case? How long do we wait until we get to the
end of this story? Well, so they're now going through back and forth a lot of
filings. Both both sides have filed for summary judgment, which which seeks a
judgment from the judge in their favor. They have oral arguments on March 21st.
The trial is set to start on April 17th unless they reach a settlement of some
sort. And, you know, they really haven't had any settlement talks as far as I
can see. So we're looking at basically a five week trial. It would be a real
tedious undertaking, too, because it would be just a lot of people where where
the plaintiffs are trying to establish their state of mind, what they knew, what
they said. So this could be a really interesting and tedious. Eric, thank you
for describing it. Fox has criticized the defamation motion, saying it would
prevent journalists from basic reporting in their efforts to publicly smear Fox
for covering and commenting on allegations by a sitting president should be
recognized for what it is. With that, thanks to Heather, Paul, Tim, Pippa,
Vivian and Eric. The media show is available as ever through BBC Sounds, and
we'll be back with you next week.