TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-23H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 of rain and hill snow for a time. On 92 to 95 FM, on 198 Longwave, on digital
and on BBC Sounds, this is BBC Radio 4. It's ten o'clock. Good evening. Welcome
to The World Tonight with James Kimarasami. The Prime Minister makes the case
for his new bill designed to stop the small boat crossings. People must know
that if they come here illegally, it will result in their detention and swift
removal. Once this happens, and they know it will happen, they will not come and
the boats will stop. That's the theory, but how will it work in practice and is
it compatible with international law? We'll discuss. As the US Congress opens
the door to a ban on TikTok, we get a response from the Chinese-owned social
media firm. It would be hard to deny that we're caught up in those very broad
geopolitics that really have nothing to do with us. I think it's unfortunate if
we become a pawn in a larger geopolitical debate or crisis. And the former New
Order bassist, Peter Hook, on the 40th anniversary of Blue Monday. When we were
doing it, we didn't actually think much of the track. It was meant to be an
encore that the machines could play while we went and got drunk in the dressing
room. We really had no idea that this was going to still be today our biggest
earning song. That's all after the BBC News, read tonight by Tina Ritchie.
Ritchie Soonak says he's confident that the government would win any legal
challenge to its plan to stop migrants crossing the Channel in small boats. The
Prime Minister said he knew there would be a debate about the toughness of the
illegal migration bill, which would allow the government to detain illegal
migrants, remove them from the UK and bar them from returning. But he insisted
the legislation complied with international law. Labour has called the plans
unworkable and a con. Our political correspondent Ian Watson reports.
Introducing new laws to stop small boats was one of the five Prime Ministerial
priorities announced at the start of the year. Asked at a news conference today
if he would have failed if the boats don't stop by the next election, Ritchie
Soonak said that while the new legislation wasn't a silver bullet, he would
deliver what he'd promised. But the outcome may not entirely be in his hands. If
passed, the new law would prevent almost everyone who enters the UK illegally
from claiming asylum here. The Home Secretary, Suella Braverman, described this
as a robust and novel approach. And in a letter to MPs, she conceded there's
more than a 50% chance that it may not be compatible with international law.
This potentially means legal challenges and a rough ride for the bill in the
Lords are more likely. The UN's refugee agency has urged MPs and peers to block
what it called Ritchie Soonak's profoundly concerning plan to tackle small boat
crossings. Our correspondent at the UN in Geneva, Imogen Fowkes, reports. The UN
refugee agency is still studying the UK's new legislation but says it has
profound concerns. At first sight, the proposals look, the agency said, like an
asylum ban, which would violate the UN Convention on Refugees. The convention,
which the UK was a key founder of, says everyone seeking protection has a right
to have their claim for asylum heard, even if they have arrived illegally.
Denying that right would undermine the very purpose of the convention, the
refugee agency said. Instead, it called for global cooperation to find
compassionate solutions for what it said was now a global crisis in which 100
million people are displaced. The RMT union has suspended strike action at
Network Rail after receiving a new pay offer from the company which is
responsible for the rail infrastructure. The union hasn't revealed details of
the deal. Walkouts are still due to take place next Thursday at a number of
other train companies, as our transport correspondent Katie Austin explains from
Waterloo Station in London. Last month, the RMT's National Executive Committee
rejected offers from both Network Rail and the group representing train
companies. Since then, the dispute had appeared deadlocked. But this surprise
announcement means that Network Rail employees will no longer take part in the
strike on the 16th of March, nor a series of overtime bans afterwards. There
will be a vote on whether to accept the offer, something the government and
industry had been calling for. However, as things stand, RMT members working at
train companies will still walk out on the 16th, 18th and 30th of March and on
the 1st of April, meaning there will still be disruption, but it will vary by
operator. A court's been told that a gunman was carrying two firearms when he
killed a nine-year-old girl, Olivia Pratt Corbell, in Liverpool last August.
Thomas Cashman, who's 34 and from Liverpool, was said to be in ruthless pursuit
of his intended victim, a convicted burglar Joseph Nee, when the schoolgirl was
shot in her own home. Our North of England reporter Rowan Bridge has been at
Manchester Crown Court. Opening the case for the prosecution, David McLachlan,
KC, told the jury that Thomas Cashman had fired three shots at Joseph Nee,
hitting him once as he walked near Olivia Pratt Corbell's home. Mr Nee then ran
towards the house after Olivia's mother, Cheryl Corbell, opened her door to see
what was going on. The prosecution say Thomas Cashman chased him, firing several
shots, including one that went through the family's front door, through Cheryl
Corbell's wrist, and hit Olivia. Seconds earlier, the court heard Olivia had
screamed, mum, I'm scared. Thomas Cashman denies murder, attempted murder,
wounding with intent, and two firearms charges. The White House has said it
backs a bill in the US Congress that would give the government new powers to ban
the Chinese app TikTok and other foreign technologies if they pose a national
security threat. The US national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, urged both
Democrats and Republicans to quickly pass the legislation, which was introduced
earlier today. Ukrainian prosecutors have launched a criminal investigation into
what appears to be the shooting of an unarmed prisoner of war by Russian forces.
Graphic footage, which has emerged online, shows a Ukrainian soldier apparently
being shot by his captors. From Kiev, here's our diplomatic correspondent, James
Landale. It is an horrific piece of video. A Ukrainian soldier is shown in some
woodland, standing in a shallow trench. A cigarette hangs from his lips, a hat
pushed back on his head. He looks defiantly at those who are filming him. He
says, Slava Ukraini, glory to Ukraine, and he's brutally cut down by automatic
weapons. A voice in Russian is recorded saying, die, bitch. The footage is
difficult to verify, and the identity of the man is uncertain. Senior Ukrainian
officers named him as a prisoner of war who'd gone missing near the eastern city
of Bakhmut in February. But others identified him as a different soldier, whose
body had already been returned to his family. On television, President Zelensky
vowed that Ukraine would find the murderers. Russia has consistently denied
allegations that its soldiers have committed war crimes in Ukraine. Liverpool
supporters who were caught up in the chaotic scenes at last year's Champions
League final in Paris are to get refunds. The club's fans were initially blamed
for the disorder outside the Stade de France, which saw large crowds locked
behind metal fences and police used tear gas. But an independent report later
found European football's governing body, UEFA, bore primary responsibility. Joe
Blott is the chair of the Spirit of Shankly supporters group. Money certainly
won't heal the hurt of those people who were traumatised or injured or attacked
in Paris last year. But of itself, it's a real victory for fan activism. It's a
first step on the road for UEFA to accept their culpability. The European
Union's drugs regulator has objected to plans to move Amsterdam's Red Light
District to near its headquarters. The European Medicines Agency said proposals
to build what's being called a multi-storey erotic centre would lead to drug
dealing, drunkenness and disorderly behaviour on its doorstep. The agency
relocated to Amsterdam from London after Brexit. Thanks, Tina. You're listening
to The World Tonight with James Kimarasami. In a week with plenty of reminders
of the government's response to the pandemic, there was another one today. A
Prime Minister giving an early evening news conference standing behind a lectern
with a three-word slogan. There are a few differences, though. Rishi Sunak
wasn't flanked by anyone and he was in Dover, not Downing Street, behind a
phrase that spells out one of his people's priorities, stop the boats. He
explained why the government was proposing new legislation that would mean
anyone entering the UK illegally would be detained, removed to what is deemed a
safe country and barred from re-entry. People must know that if they come here
illegally, it will result in their detention and swift removal. Once this
happens, and they know it will happen, they will not come and the boats will
stop. That is why today we are introducing legislation to make clear that if you
come here illegally, you can't claim asylum, you can't benefit from our modern
slavery protections, you can't make spurious human rights claims and you can't
stay. But, it's being asked, can the government follow this legislative path
without breaking international law? In the Commons earlier on, the Home
Secretary, Suella Bravman, had used a different three-word phrase to describe
the government's approach as she acknowledged that its illegal migration bill
did come with certain legal question marks. Our approach is robust and novel,
which is why we can't make a definitive statement of compatibility under section
191b of the Human Rights Act. Of course, the UK will always seek to uphold
international law and I am confident that this bill is compatible with
international obligations. Although in a letter to MPs she sounded less
confident, writing that there was a more than 50% chance that the bill's
provisions were incompatible with international law. Dominic Kashiani is the
BBC's Home Affairs Correspondent. So, there are lots of technical issues and
challenges in there about rights to appeal under standard English law, but the
two big ones are one that the UN Refugee Agency have raised. They are saying
tonight that this really damages, effectively bans, the right to seek asylum in
the UK and that would be in contravention of our international obligations under
the Refugee Convention, but critically also that it would conflict with the
European Convention on Human Rights. And the question tonight among a lot of
critics is, given that the government has admitted this plan is more likely than
not to fall over when it gets to the courts, you've got to ask why MPs and peers
would back it and that's the political battle the Prime Minister Rishi Sunak now
has to actually win that support despite the fact his government's admitted it
may not work. Dominic Kashiani, well joining me now to discuss the practical and
legal implications of the bill are Matt Warman, who's Conservative MP for Boston
and Skegness, Dame Diana Johnson, the Labour Chair of the Home Affairs Select
Committee, and Madeleine Sumption, Director of the Migration Observatory
Research Centre at the University of Oxford. We're going to examine whether this
bill will deliver on the Prime Minister's promise to stop the boats in a moment.
Let's start though with the legal questions. Good evening to all of you first of
all. Good evening. Matt Warman, can I start with you? The Home Secretary clearly
says this is on the limits of international law and I suppose the question is
why put something forward if it might fall at the first hurdle? Well I think
what that tells you is that the Prime Minister and the Home Secretary are
determined to do everything they possibly can and they are determined to see if
what they want to do does stand up in court. You heard the Prime Minister say at
that press conference earlier on today that he is up for that fight and I think
that is testament to his determination but it's also testament to how vital it
is both that we address an issue of such huge political concern to people up and
down the country and that we break that people smuggling model that is putting
so many people at such huge risk. But why does it have to come to a legal fight
if it does come to that? Well I think we've seen over previous attempts whether
that's Rwanda, whether that's the sort of pre-problems prior to that that have
seen government attempts fail in the cause, we've seen that that hasn't worked
and this is as Suella Braverman put it a novel approach and it reflects partly
that we face some novel problems but it also reflects her acknowledgement that
previous attempts haven't worked and I think that honesty is at least a really
good start. It doesn't guarantee success in the courts as you've said but the
Attorney General is confident that it is a fight that is very much worth having.
Previous attempts haven't worked. Diana Johnson I guess you would have to agree
with that. Well what I would say is that the Home Affairs Select Committee has
been clear that when the Home Office bring forward policy it really should be
evidence-based, it should be properly thought through and it should be properly
costed and I think the legislation that's been brought today there are lots of
obviously legal questions about whether we will be fulfilling our international
obligations and our national obligations as well but also there's just some so
many practical questions with this legislation in terms of how are we going to
be able to detain the thousands of people that the Home Office are expecting to
come across on small boats this year when we're really struggling to house
people at the moment, the backlog we've got in our asylum system and then
secondly where are we going to send these people to when the only agreement
we've got with a third country is Rwanda and no flights are going to Rwanda at
the moment because that's mired in the courts so I think there's both legal and
practical problems with this legislation that Parliament is going to have to
deal with. Let me bring you in at this point Madeleine Sumption, let's look at
the evidence then for example on numbers and if this does go into law what sort
of numbers can we expect to be detained? Well a lot of it depends on whether the
deterrent effect that the government hopes the law would have will materialise.
Last year we had just over 45,000 people crossing in small boats which you know
so we're talking about potentially more than double than doubling the number of
people going into detention so an increase of more than twice what we've already
got in terms of people going into detention if the numbers continued. So I think
a lot of it hinges on whether it's a deterrent effect and I think that the
challenge that the government faces here is that actually international
experience and research suggests that you know physically preventing people from
moving to a country to claim asylum can have an impact. In the channel context
that's very difficult because it's quite dangerous once someone's already in the
water and the the so the effectiveness of deterrence policies is not
particularly reassuring from the government's perspective and the key reason for
that is that people who are making decisions about whether to move are not
necessarily listening to parliamentary speeches they're not scrutinising the
details of the legislation. Often the information they have about even basic
things like what the policy actually is are really bad so that's a limit I think
on the government's ability to use to kind of tweak the policies here in order
to shape people's decision making. Matt Warman, question marks over whether
deterrence per se works but also that the question of numbers and where
potentially thousands more people than are being held now would actually be
housed that's going to be a real issue isn't it? Yes you're right I mean these
are the questions that people MPs are asking. Rishi Sunak from the Conservative
side as well and he was very clear that this does have to be about securing the
right kind of accommodation whether it's to end the use of hotels whether it's
for people who are within that 28-day period having just arrived but I do think
at the end of the day the strength of this policy is a message that is simple
enough to be an effective deterrent in a way that previous ones haven't and that
is simply to say if you come in a small boat you will not be able to claim
asylum if you come illegally you won't be able to use those methods that is I
think a simple message that I think can cut through but even so it's a fair
point to say the proof of the pudding will be in the... Yeah but even if that
message is not translated into legislation is that I mean is that partly the
point is it to put this out here out there and hope that the message gets
through? No I think this is a serious attempt to put legislation on the statute
books that's why the Prime Minister has gone over it in such detail I don't
think it's enough to simply say that it might be on the statute books at some
point in the future I think the Prime Minister is very very serious about making
this real but it has to get through the courts I think that poses real questions
on a political level as you sort of said for other parties because the fact is
this is a hugely important issue to all our constituents up and down the country
and I don't think they will thank any party that tries to stand in the way. Well
let's bring you in on that Dame Diana Johnson because it's true isn't it that it
is a top three issue for all voters top two for Conservative votes in 2019
according to the polls it has to be addressed one way or another doesn't it?
Absolutely and that's why the Home Affairs Select Committee in its report on
small boat crossings last year came up with a whole series of recommendations
that the government could implement so we talked about the need to clear the
backlog because that's completely gumming up the system 160,000 people in the
asylum backlog means that people are having to wait far too long to have claims
dealt with. We also said the government need to look at safe and legal routes
they need to perhaps pilot in France the opportunity for people to make an
asylum claim to come to the UK so they don't have to get into these very
dangerous small boats. You need to do a returns policy with the EU that's
something that's not happened yet and of course you need to target the criminal
gangs who are behind the trafficking and the smuggling of people across the
channel so there's lots of things that need to be done and I certainly don't
think that one piece of legislation is going to be the silver bullet that's
going to stop the boats it has to be all these other things as well. And
Madeleine Sumption how important do you think this diplomatic aspect is given
that we've got the Prime Minister meeting President Macron later on this week
how crucial do you think that will be to getting a policy in place that actually
does what it says on the tin? I think without a deal with France of some kind
it's difficult to imagine the policies having a really significant impact on
people's decisions as they decide whether to move across the channel in a small
boat. There are lots of different ways that a deal with France could be done and
you know so for example you'd be talking about returning people to France you
could be talking about having options for people to make an application in
France so that they could have a decision on their claim without having to make
a dangerous crossing over the channel. I think it's very difficult it would be a
bit experimental it's very difficult to predict exactly what the impacts of
those sorts of policies will be and it would depend on how it was done but I
think certainly it's one of the you know maybe slightly more promising options
that are potentially on the table. Now whether France has the appetite for it is
of course a different question entirely. Matt Warman what about the question of
safe and legal routes it's not clear exactly what's in this legislation about
that but that has to be part of the solution as well doesn't it? Yes I think it
does and you heard the Home Secretary talk in the Commons about the success of
the Ukraine route of the Afghanistan route of the Hong Kong route I think she
would not be pointing to those if it wasn't very clear that in due course that
has to be a part of the solution and I agree with Diana Johnson absolutely that
it is not solely about legislation to fix this it is about increasing the
processing rate at the Home Office of applications it is about safe and legal
routes that this is it has to be a sort of full spectrum response to use the
jargon and I think that is what the Prime Minister is absolutely determined to
deliver and as I say some of that is part of this legislative programme but much
of it is not as well. Conservative MP Matt Warman, Labour MP Dame Diana Johnson
and Madeleine Sumption from the Migration Observatory Research Centre thank you
all very much. Now the RMT union has suspended all industrial action at network
rail after receiving a new pay offer members of the union which represents
maintenance workers and signallers were due to walk out on March the 16th
alongside train company workers. Katie Austen's our transport correspondent and
joins us now what more can you tell us Katie? Well this is a significant
development I think because the dispute had seemed pretty deadlocked frankly
since the RMT's committee had rejected what were at the time builders best and
final offers from network rail and then separately from the rail delivery group
which represents the train companies but now we're hearing that there's been a
new pay offer we don't have the details of that yet they haven't been released
and off the back of that the RMT has said that its members who work for network
rail won't take part in that strike next Thursday nor will they take part in
overtime bans which had been scheduled after that. It doesn't mean there won't
be any disruption though as things stand because the strikes by RMT members who
work for the train companies who actually you know run the trains are still due
to go ahead including next Thursday so disruption as I stand here now still lies
ahead. And do we have any sense of how bad it's going to be I mean how much of
the the disruption could be removed by this decision? Well network rail's
involvement in these series of strikes is really significant actually because it
it is really what makes them truly national strikes or has done so far because
you know if you haven't got the signalers working you can't run any trains so on
on strike days when network rail had been involved there's been only a fraction
of normal trains have been able to run across the country. When you have workers
at the train companies on strike that still does mean disruption but it varies
much more by area it basically varies by operator so if things stay as they are
and we still have these strikes on the on these 14 train companies on the 16th
18th and 30th of March and the 1st of April there will still be extensive
disruption but it won't be the same everywhere and some areas things might not
be too bad. And the union will still have to vote on this new pay offer
presumably? Yes now that is that is another really significant thing we've heard
today that that referendum will be of network rail employees we don't know yet
whether the RMT will put forward any recommendation with that and I mentioned
that because there was a previous recommendation sorry a previous referendum
back in December and the union actually recommended its members reject it reject
the offer so we'll wait and see what the detail is of this referendum if the
union gives any recommendation how long that referendum lasts and also it has it
has drawn fresh calls from the other party in this dispute the train company
side of things for their members to also get a vote but as things stand I don't
think there has been any new offer on that side of things. Katie many thanks our
transport correspondent Katie Austin bringing us up to date on that development
from Waterloo station as you might have gathered. Now one of the most mysterious
events linked to the war in Ukraine took place last September not on the
battlefield but deep beneath the sea when explosions ripped through the Nord
Stream gas pipelines linking Russia to the west. Denmark Poland and Sweden say
they believe leaks in two major Russian gas pipelines to Europe are the result
of sabotage seismologists reported underwater blasts before the leaks emerged
and Ukraine has accused Russia of causing the leaks but the question always has
been why would Russia want to sabotage its own pipelines at an estimated cost of
500 million dollars when it had other far simpler ways of controlling the flow
of gas to Europe well tonight US officials have told the New York Times they
have seen evidence suggesting that a pro-Ukrainian group was behind the attack
Ukraine has denied denied any involvement in that sabotage operation well we're
joined now by Julian Barnes who's national security reporter for the New York
Times welcome to the program Julian so what are the officials telling you well
we've had officials tell us that this sabotage act was done by a independent
group not by a government but a group that is aligned with Ukraine a group that
is opposed to Vladimir Putin of Russia right and the information that the
intelligence that the US has right now indicates that the Ukraine government
didn't know about this President Zelensky had no knowledge of this now of course
one could learn something different later on but for now the US does not think
that the Ukrainian government had anything to do it do with it it's a it's an
independent group are they giving you any sense of what kind of intelligence
they're basing this on no the officials wouldn't discuss the nature of the
intelligence who collected it how they got it you know US officials like any
intelligence professional try to keep their sources and methods very close to
the vest we do know that the group of people here likely included Ukrainians it
might have included Russians the exact mix is not clear they also use divers to
according to the intelligence they have now there is a separate report in the
German press saying there was a boat rented by a company in Poland owned by two
Ukrainians talking about a team of six people five men and a woman with fake
passports including two divers as your briefing has also said I mean the
question I suppose people will be asking is why this briefing now what does it
tell you well look I think it's very important to note that we the reporters of
the New York Times and I presume my colleagues in Germany have been working on
this story since September since the pipeline blew up and this is you know a lot
of times we've seen in this war sort of controlled leaks right information that
is declassified and then released to the public a government wanting to have an
effect that's not what's going on here this is investigative reporting that
people are sort of digging out we have not been able to confirm the German
reporting yet but it is very much in alignment with what we were reporting and
so I think that this is you know journalists working hard doing their jobs well
I'm certainly not trying to call into question your work ethic but whenever
intelligence is released to journalists in this way in this sort of unattributed
way as you say especially in the context of this war when information is being
put out quite regularly with a purpose we do have to question that as well don't
we absolutely I mean the your question is is spot on right because governments
have declassified information and released it throughout this war it's a new
tactic that governments are using I was just making a point that that's not
what's happening here no understood so we still have huge questions of course
even even with this partial leak and is anything being said officially I mean we
know Ukrainian Ukrainians of course are denying any direct involvement and as
you say this does not have any any sense that the government there was directly
involved yeah the in America officials have been referring reporters to the
European authorities leading the investigation look my sense is this is not a
point yet where government officials want to talk about this publicly in part as
we noted in our story you know the this is not a formal intelligence conclusion
there's new intelligence it indicates uh it points in this direction but it's
not yet definitive Julian many thanks for sharing that Julian Barnes national
security reporter for the New York Times a quick reminder if you want to listen
back to any of this program or previous ones you can go to BBC sounds where you
can also download the podcast the headlines so far on the world tonight Rishi
Sunak insists that the government's new bill to stop illegal migration to the UK
is lawful the UN's refugee agency says it would undermine Britain's humanitarian
tradition rail strikes planned for next week are set to be less severe after the
RMT union suspended action involving workers at Network Rail and the White House
has supported a bill that would give the US government the power to ban the
Chinese owned app TikTok more on that in a moment now in last night's interview
on the program about the appeal of floppy discs our guests spoke about their use
in works of art well perhaps the best known design that features a floppy disc
is the cover of New Order's single Blue Monday probably the biggest selling
12-inch single of all time definitely released 40 years ago today dance floors
of course still vibrate to the deadpan vocals of Bernard or Barney Sumner over a
track which borrows from the disco of Donna Summer the synth pop of Kraftwerk
even the spaghetti western soundtracks of Ennio Morricone while Peter Hook
played bass on Blue Monday and I asked him and this was unintended I do promise
how does it feel to think the track has turned 40? Oh I get it how does it feel
it feels fantastic I have to say the popularity of Blue Monday and its use in so
many commercials tv series etc it firmly puts people back in that time in that
moment of 1981-82 you know when we were doing it we didn't actually think much
of the track it was meant to be an encore that the machines could play while we
went and got drunk in the dressing room we were using very very old almost
barbaric equipment if you made a mistake in a nine minute song on this one
sequence you had to go right back to the start and start again and it was a nine
minute song there were no radio edits were there? No we stuck to our guns we
stuck to our punk principles and told you lot to get lost. Tell us about the
genesis I mean so many different little tracks that people have identified as
being in there and you melded them together to this great whole I mean your bass
line you've said I think Morricone for a few dollars more soundtrack tell us
about that yeah I mean it was just one of the records that we used to listen to
for inspiration while we were in the studio you know in those days obviously
there was no internet or Netflix so we'd actually play records and get videos
and bring them along and we just entertain ourselves in the off moments on that
thing the backing track was done and recorded but gradually we were just playing
it and we were great length and then we were just sort of spicing it up still
had no intention of putting a vocal on and then when Bernard heard it and with a
bit of pressure shall we say from our manager Rob Gretton he was going put a
vocal on it put a vocal on it it's great you know so we weren't too excited
about it compared to other people when they heard it I suppose if you're going
to say that the marriage of the music and the sleeve made it a real nod towards
the future the future of music that was coming with the use of the sampling
keyboards which is where Peter Saville got the idea for the fact that the memory
was stored on a floppy disk yeah that I mean the sleeve tell us about the sleeve
it is a floppy disk that's a design yes it is Peter Saville was inspired when he
came to our studio to look at our sampling keyboard which was an emulator and he
was absolutely fascinated by the floppy disk itself that stored the information
and then you put it in the slot and the sound would then appear on the keyboard
he thought it was amazing and he said it's just like a little LP sleeve it was
way ahead of his time so that was where the idea came from to emulate the
emulator disk that was intrinsic in making Blue Monday for all the samples the
Smashing Glass and all the things like that the whooshes they were all done on
the emulator keyboard so that was the idea we didn't realize when we were doing
it that the process of emulating the disk with the holes was the expensive bit
and each sleeve had to be stamped I think it was three or four times to get the
holes that cost more than the record earned so we were ending up celebrating the
biggest selling 12 inch 500,000 I think it was and we were actually celebrating
losing 50 grand so but I mean why that track do you think there's quite a lot of
tracks around that time that were similar but why did that one why is that one
endured for 40 years temptation now you see the thing is right the secret of
music that we can never decipher is even we don't know why as a musician you
just can't tell when I go out and when I DJ or wherever I go someone will always
play Blue Monday and to hear the original mix that me and Mike Johnson did in
1981 in Britannia Row sound as good today as it did 40 years ago is an amazing
compliment we really had no idea that this was going to still be today our
biggest earning song Peter Hook bassist on Blue Monday marking that song's 40th
anniversary now there was a rare outbreak of bipartisanship in the US Congress
this evening as a group of Democratic and Republican senators introduced a new
piece of legislation designed to protect national security as is often the case
in today's America the issue or rather the country which brought the parties
together was China because the legislation would allow the government to ban the
Chinese-owned app TikTok there's growing concern in the US that the social media
company could share users sensitive information with the authorities in Beijing
the Republican senator John Thune is one of the bill's co-sponsors the Chinese
Communist Party has proven over the last few years that is willing to lie about
just about everything it's safe to assume that if the CCP is willing to lie
about its spy balloon and cover up the origins of the worst pandemic in 100
years they'll lie about using TikTok to spy on American citizens it's high time
we address this issue I think this legislation goes about it in the right way to
get something on the president's desk and start to attack this problem well
shortly before the announcement I spoke to Michael Beckerman who's TikTok's head
of public policy for the Americas does he understand the concerns that have led
to this bill I think this is an area where a lot of people get confused and get
it wrong one we are required to comply with the laws in the land where we
operate be that in the UK or Europe or the US TikTok is not available in China
and so we have to comply with US law for the US and UK law while we're operating
in the UK and it's not that we're the only company that has engineers in China
almost all the major tech companies also have engineers in China and so some of
these concerns would extend to all these companies but that's why we're building
out the system to ensure that there's no doubt that data is secure but the fact
that company is Chinese owned that makes it surely fall under Chinese law and
Chinese national intelligence law says all Chinese organizations and citizens
should support assist and cooperate with Chinese intelligence efforts well one
it's not owned by the government and so when you say no not the government is
owned by no not the government the government has shares in that doesn't it no
uh no it doesn't one percent of shares aren't they owned by Chinese government
entities no that's for an entity within China that does not own TikTok that's
for an entity only within China for the local media license which is the
standard practice for businesses in China which has no ownership or control over
TikTok globally so I think it's a little bit of a misconception but still look
we understand the concerns it's on us to make sure that we go above and beyond
but the concerns on national security the concerns on data going to China or
other countries is not unique to TikTok. I mean it's the fact that the app is so
successful that makes this so important isn't it I mean you are doing extremely
well but that means there's an awful lot of information that you have and that
in a way means that the concerns about security are even more pointed. I think
those same concerns would exist on a whole host of apps for us we've been
certainly under more scrutiny than others and we take the responsibility very
seriously in many cases we're actually collecting less data than many of our
peers but we understand because of our growth and where we sit and the origins
of the company that we have a higher level of security and that's why we're
getting so much scrutiny and that's why we're going above and beyond with these
systems that we're building around the world. Are you getting caught up in the
geopolitical environment the fact that relations between the United States and
China seem to be heading downhill pretty rapidly? It would be hard to deny that
we're caught up in those very broad geopolitics that really have nothing to do
with us. I think it's unfortunate if we become a pawn in a larger geopolitical
debate or crisis. And is that what you're feeling like at the moment? A pawn in
a bigger crisis? I do think it's certainly a factor and it's an unfortunate one
and I think if policymakers around the world have concerns with internet
companies or the way data is handled I think that should be handled in a broader
global way that's not just focusing on one app but look these things are out of
our control what we focus on is what is in our control and that's providing a
great experience for the people that love TikTok. The point is these concerns
are not going to go away you're never going to be able to escape from your
origins your links to China and the question marks that that leads to. I think
we can we are dealing with the very specific concerns that have been raised in
different markets and we're addressing them but I think there's a little bit of
a disconnect sometimes between politicians and the people that they represent
that actually love TikTok and want to see us be able to operate and be
successful in all the markets around the world where we are. Michael Beckerman
TikTok's head of public policy for the Americas. Now it's a hundred years this
week since the first BBC radio broadcast in Scotland was transmitted and our
special correspondent Alan Little has been considering the BBC's changing
cultural and political role in Scotland over that time. In March 1923 John Reith
the first managing director of what was still then the British Broadcasting
Company got off the London train here in Glasgow and made his way through these
streets to this handsome Glasgow townhouse in front of me. The ground floor's a
cafe now I've just been in there for a cup of coffee but it was two floors above
that in an attic room that a new chapter in broadcasting was opened when the
first ever broadcast from Scotland was transmitted. At the start the audience
was local and so was the content bagpipes Scottish speech and song Glasgow
talking to Glasgow but soon London would exert control over what it called the
provincial stations even determining what kind of voices were acceptable on
Scotland's airwaves. This is BBC television from Scotland on Saturday night Sir
Compton Mackenzie will be guest of honour at a supper party in Edinburgh to
celebrate his 80th birthday and the publication of his 87th book. I've driven
out into the countryside just off the M8 the main motorway that links Edinburgh
and Glasgow on the hill behind me there's a very distinctive little church known
as the Kirkcoshots. In front of me is the site of Scotland's first ever
television transmission mast it was erected in 1952 by mid-century when this
mast went up the BBC was now in almost every home in the land and that made it a
very powerful unifying force because it created a shared cultural space that
stretched from Caithness to Cornwall. Soon we were all listening to the same
news laughing at the same jokes enjoying the same music and acknowledging and
recognising the same celebrities but the BBC still found room to project what it
thought of as the distinctive character of Scotland within that shared cultural
space. And in that shared space this is how the distinctiveness of Scotland was
represented men in kilts and women in white frocks dancing complicated reels and
strathspays songs of longing and exile. In programs such as the White Heather
Club this Scotland skipped and reeled its way tartan clad onto Britain's TV
screens for decades. But in the cultural upheavals of the 1960s some ordinary
Scots began to seek a more authentic representation of who they were. This is a
panelist on a 1968 discussion show called Talkback. I think that Scottish
produced television programs are introspective parochial nationalistic and
narrow-minded. They portray a false picture of the Scottish people. They
perpetuate the myth of haggis eating, kilted Scottish country dance. It's not
real. It's blatantly not Scottish. The dramatisation in 1971 of the classic
Scots novel Sunset Song with its themes of sexual awakening, domestic violence
and war trauma was a turning point. Get under that at once you shameless
slimmer. Get your clothes on. The BBC in Scotland began to shed its tartan
raffle. I have trust in the good judgment of the Scottish people. I am pleased
therefore now to declare the Scottish Parliament open. When the Queen came to
Edinburgh in 1999 for the establishment of the Scottish Parliament, the power to
legislate on broadcasting stayed at Westminster. Control stayed in London.
During the 2014 independence referendum, some accused the BBC of a sustained
anti-independence bias. For a century after the Scot John Reith created it, the
BBC remains a cultural force from Caithness to Cornwall and an enduring part of
the shared British experience. Alan Little reporting. Our closing headline
tonight, Rishi Sunak has said his new proposals to stop people arriving in small
boats across the Channel are tough but fair and were the only way to deter
people from making the dangerous journey by sea. He was speaking at a news
conference in Downing Street, not Dover as I suggested earlier, although he had
been there earlier in the day to launch his bill. Well that is The World
Tonight. This is James Kimara-Sami. From me and from everyone on the programme,
have a very good night. The studio engineers were Alison Purcell-Davies and Rob
Fanner. The editor tonight was Jack Hunter. Radio 4's feedback airs your
thoughts and questions on BBC radio programmes. It made it impossible to not
stop and listen to it thoroughly. I don't think the BBC should be assuming
everybody in the country feels like that. We take you behind the scenes of how
programmes get made. I absolutely agree, there's always a balance to strike. And
we hold the BBC to account on your behalf on the biggest stories of the day. You
fail by not covering and explaining the issues for the public. Join me, Andrea
Catherwood, for a new series of feedback, starting this Friday afternoon at 4.30
on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. On our Radio 4, we continue our reading of The
Advocate by Marcello Foyce. A young man called Zenobi has fled into the hills of
Sardinia, having been accused of sheep stealing by his employers. His mother has
enlisted the advocate Bustiano and also given him a receipt she's found in her
son's belongings. It's from a photographer's studio in another part of the
island. The readers are Breach Brennan and Stephen Hogan. A week before the
hearing, Bustiano said he was going to visit an old friend in Nosieri. He took
the train from Nouro and arrived in the late afternoon. And there he found
catastrophe awaiting him. The photographer was dead in a fire that had destroyed
his studio 48 hours earlier. In Nosieri, there was a certain Sergeant Tovoni of
the Royal Guard, a tubby little man with a handlebar moustache. In his opinion,
the case already had a name plastered all over it. Zenobi Sanna, fugitive from
justice. This was a blow for Bustiano. He decided to go and talk to this
sergeant. He was sceptical about my being in Osieri so soon after the fire and
confined himself to telling me what I already knew. Two nights previously, a
fire had destroyed the Lecce studio with the owner inside it. From the charred
remains, it was clear that Lecce had been surprised by the flames while at work
in the darkroom. Nothing had survived. Not a ledger, not a photographic plate,
not a receipt. Whoever had started the blaze was out to eliminate an awkward
witness. But witness to what? I am here officially to ask what are the charges
against my client? Arson and first degree murder, as well as robbery and
misappropriation. Need I go on? replied the sergeant. I see no connection
between my client and Lecce, said Bustiano. The sergeant gave him an affable
smile. I have here the record of an exchange of letters with Sergeant Poli of
the Noire Carabinieri, informing me of what I should call an extremely close
connection between your client and the photographer. Bustiano tugged angrily at
his beard. He had supplied that connection himself. At that rate, he said, we
would have to suspect anyone else who had their photograph taken by Lecce.
Anyone might have had something to hide. How right you are, Avocado. How right
you are. There's nowhere in the world with more things to hide than here. The
fact seems to me circumstantial. In a court of law, perhaps, Avocado, smirked
Sergeant Duvoni. But we are simple, laboring men. We do the dirty work outside
the law courts, so we don't have all that much time for quibbles. At this point,
Bustiano began to lose patience. There are no quibbles here. Not in this case.
Moreover, some measure of attention to the details of the matter would not come
amiss to a person claiming to administer justice. What do you mean by that? It
was the sergeant's turn to lose his temper. Do you suggest that I should allow
you to thwart our efforts? To let all those rogues go free to make heroes of
them? I should like to see you crawling on hands and knees into every ravine and
cave. Sergeant, I can only presume that you have nothing in hand with which to
bring charges against my client. The sergeant went purple in the face. What sort
of civilization is this? He thundered. How can we go on like this? How can we
claim to be admitted to human society if all the tremendous toil forced upon us
day by day is reduced to nothing in the courts of law? No one is exempt,
sergeant. We are all bound, as you are, to serve that blindfold lady with the
scales of justice. Moreover, we have to fight against prejudice, against
sentences pronounced before a case comes to trial. This, I fear, is what sets us
apart from human society, as you put it. However, it is late, and I think I have
taken up too much of your time, concluded Bustiano as he got to his feet. He had
all but reached the door when the sergeant stopped him in his tracks. A price
has been put on your client's head, he announced as Bustiano's hand touched the
door handle. Two thousand lire. So Zenobi Sana had become an outlaw, a
bloodthirsty beast in the eyes of all. He had entered the ranks of those who
cause old women to cross themselves at the mere mention of his name. Bustiano
returns from Osieri to find things looking blacker and blacker for Zenobi. Nor
can he get anything out of Zia Rosina, for all she can do is weep. Meanwhile,
for the business with the lambs, the sentence handed down to Zenobi in his
absence is six years' imprisonment. And the months pass. The 13th of November,
almost exactly a year after the event, I set off for my usual walk. I climb
under the seminary archway, give a passing wave to the law courts, and then off
towards the scrublands and the young oaks. I am crunching my way over the acorns
when I hear a rustling sound behind me. Without looking back, I forge ahead
towards the summit. A few bluish clouds are hovering above the sheer bluffs.
Rain's on the way, I think, though the air is so clear, the landscape so limpid,
that I seem to be within the very source of light. I am turning over these
thoughts when, with the rustling behind me, comes the snap of a twig underfoot.
I turn round with a start. Cisenia, asks Wustiano, eyeing the slender figure
that has stiffened to a statue a few steps behind him. She makes a gesture of
assent. Hers is a beauty quite out of the ordinary, in the full lips that seem
stamped in vivid red on the immaculate ivory face, in the deep green of the red-
tinted sky, in the ivory face, in the deep green eyes, the shapely brow onto
which fall a few almost blue-black locks escaped from her headscarf. Will I ever
see him again? she asks in the ghost of a voice, as she worries the black beads
of a rosary. He wasn't even in Noro that night. He wasn't even here. Wustiano is
at a loss what to say. Child, why didn't you say so at once, is the best he can
come out with. And he thinks that this reproof so oft repeated, like the words
of a psalm, makes this story into a story of things not said. Cisenia shakes her
head for a long time before speaking. He didn't wish it, she says at last. He
preferred to go into hiding rather than... And she is shaken with fresh sobs.
Wustiano takes a step towards her, stretches out a hand to lay on her shoulder,
but Cisenia backs away. If he doesn't show up, there's nothing we can do, says
Wustiano. He knows who stole those lamps, she blurts out all of a sudden. Who
was it? demands the ghost. Who was it? demands Wustiano. My father, she answers
almost in a whisper. In short, Cosma Cosulla Pace had put a good face on it when
he realised that Cisenia and Ginobbi were attracted to one another. But he can't
have been too pleased about it. So to get rid of a possible son-in-law who was
as poor as a church mouse but too good-looking, he sends him out of Nuro to a
farm near Galtelli, miles and miles away, to see to a matter of some unbranded
cattle. Awaiting him is the steward, a young man from Posada. The order is to
check over the herd of some thirty head and brand them within 48 hours. Ginobbi
and the steward set to work. My child, you should have spoken out earlier, sighs
Wustiano gently, so as not to add to her alarm. I didn't know, she protests. I
didn't know until now about Galtelli and the herd. And what about this steward
from Posada? Who is he? We may still be in time. He's someone I've only seen a
couple of times. His name's Pereda, Luigi's son. His name's Pereda, Luigi
Pereda. Good. If the charge of robbery is disproved, everything will be easier.
We are in your hands, murmurs Zizinia. Then she rummages under her apron, draws
out an envelope and offers it to him. Wustiano hesitates. What is it? I don't
know. He gave it to me to give to you. Wustiano takes the envelope on which his
name is written in bold, clear letters. He puts it in his pocket. It needs but a
touch to tell him that it contains something more than a mere sheet of paper.
The weather is turning nasty, so just as soon as the girl has vanished from his
sight, Wustiano makes his way back home. When he gets inside, he seizes the
envelope, opens it with a kitchen knife and extracts a photograph. The gilt
lettering at the bottom leaves no room for doubt. Lecce's Photographic Studio,
Via delle Pietà 36, Osieri. The subject is a sturdy, fair-haired youngster
gazing intently towards the photographer yet beyond, as if eager to escape from
the frame and look into the eyes of whoever he had in his own mind's eye. He is
bareheaded. His irises are so pale that they almost shade off into the whites of
his eyes around sharp, jet-black pupils. Finally, I take off my cloak. I pick up
the photograph again. Only the subject himself is in focus and vivid with it,
because that young man wants to live, to live his own life on his own terms,
which are terms acceptable everywhere else, but not here in Noro. My father,
who, as I have told you, knew him well, says that in the days that followed his
meeting with Sisonia, Wustiano had a bee in his bonnet. He could not resign
himself to it when he thought of that youngster who had gone on the run for no
reason. In the salon of the Café Tedamanzi, Sergeant Pauly handed Wustiano a
glass of wine. It was at that moment that Corporal Coguzzi of the Carabinieri
appeared in the glare of the doorway, contracting his brows as he peered into
the dimness in search of his boss. For Sergeant Pauly, who had his back to the
entrance, it was enough to see that Wustiano's expression changed to realise
that his work break was over. He turned, saw Coguzzi, and beckoned to him. The
latter sprang to obey, threading his way between the tables. He saluted and
confined himself to saying, Cosma gazula pes, adding only, ad mereri. And thus
they found him, apparently asleep at the foot of a wild olive tree, his gun
propped up against the trunk. He had been shot at close quarters. We are making
changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third party services and
platforms and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will stop working by
mid-2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this
message please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile,
this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.