TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-21H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 30 on RIDIO 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at 8 o'clock. The Defence Secretary, Ben
Wallace, has said he's pleased Shima Begum has lost her appeal as the decision
to... her appeal as the decision to strip her of her British citizenship was the
right one. The 23-year-old left East London when she was 15 to join the Islamic
State Group. An Immigration Appeals Court found there was credible evidence that
she had been trafficked to Syria, but it also decided that this did not overrule
the government's national security concerns. Her lawyers planned to fight the
ruling. Rugby's Six Nations match between England and Cardiff will now go ahead
on Saturday after last-ditch talks between some of the players and the
professional rugby board. The players had threatened to strike because of a
dispute about new contracts. The BBC's rugby correspondent, Chris Jones, says a
compromise appears to have moved the players away from the brink. The strike
threat was very real. This was not just a case of brinkmanship and the players
were always going to back down. They needed concessions. They needed concessions
over their contracts. They needed concessions over the 60-cap rule, which is the
rule that means if you haven't won 60 caps, you can't play for Wales. If you
play your rugby outside Wales, they seem to have reached some agreement with the
Welsh Rugby Union. But is this just going to be a short-term fix or can the
powers that be and the players get together and put Welsh Rugby in a good place
going forward? Palestinian health officials say Israeli forces have killed 10
people and wounded more than a hundred during a raid in the occupied West Bank.
A top Palestinian official described it as a massacre. Lancashire's police and
crime commissioner has asked the College of Policing to carry out an independent
review of the handling of the Nicola bully case. The force took more than three
weeks to find the body of the missing mother of two and was criticised for
releasing personal details. Andrew Snowden said that there were questions which
needed answers. And Tesco and Aldi have become the latest big retailers to
introduce limits on how much fruit and veg customers can buy. Asda and
Morrison's had already put restrictions in place as extreme weather in Spain and
North Africa affects harvests of popular items such as tomatoes, peppers and
cucumbers. BBC News. In three quarters of an hour and in the final episode of
Fourth Thought, Sheila Cook reflects on what she has learned from producing it
for 11 years. For now on Radio 4, time for The Moral Maze. Live as usual is
Michael Burke. Good evening. It's perhaps slightly strange that the high
watermark of classical antiquity should be found in Bloomsbury. For that we have
Lord Elgin to thank and a fat lot of good it did him. He ruined himself. Some
say rescuing, some say stealing the marbles that bear his name and died all but
penniless in France where he'd fled to escape his creditors. They might not be
in the British Museum much longer. By all accounts they could be returned to
Greece in a complicated kind of permanent loan. The fate of the Elgin marbles is
just one aspect of the current movement to try to write what are regarded by
some as historical injustices. The return of artefacts has its own issues of
cultural ownership, how and where glorious works can be displayed to best
advantage. The wider call for reparation for past wrongs, slavery for instance,
is even more difficult. The Church of England has set up a Â£100 million fund to
somehow compensate for its shameful involvement with the slave trade. This
raises all sorts of questions. How far are we responsible for the actions of our
forebears? Who would qualify for a pay out and why? Where do you stop? As one
commentator put it, if we have to make reparation for the presumed sins of our
empire, perhaps we should sue the Italian government for what the Romans did to
us. Paying for the past, our moral maze tonight, the panel Ash Sarker from the
Navarro Media Group, the feminist author and commentator Ella Whelan, the
historian Tim Stanley and Matthew Taylor, Chief Executive of the NHS
Confederation. Ash, where should the marbles be? I think they should be in
Athens because it will give me a chance to go there and eat some beautiful deep
fried cheese again. But on the demand for reparations, I don't think it makes
sense to say that ill-gotten wealth can be handed down through the generations,
but the demand for restitution can't. And I also think that the argument is
misleadingly presented as being about the sufferings of the past. It's not. It's
about how the suffering of the past never really went away and how it manifests
in the injustices of the present. Ella, Ella, we know. On the marbles, I think
that there's, you know, I'm going to say that there's a sort of a nice fudge to
it at the moment, which is that there's, you can see them in situ and you can
also go to that wonderful institution, the British Museum and see them. I think
you can get different things from both. But on reparations more broadly, I think
we're in danger of letting governments off the hook for their ongoing failings
in the present by looking to the past for the cause and cure of all our ills.
Matthew, Matthew Taylor? Yeah, I'd send them back to Athens and I'd have very
good replicas for us to look at in the British Museum. I support the principles
of restitution and compensation, but I do think they're principles that need to
be balanced by relevance, practicality and some notion of the public interest.
Tim Stanley? On the marbles, I'm tempted to quote Ronald Reagan, who when asked
if America should return the Panama Canal, said, we bought it, we paid for it,
it's ours. But I recognize that it can be moral and decent to gift, to lend, to
be charitable and to try to carry out restitution for past sins. But I wonder to
what extent British museums and British politicians also have a moral obligation
towards British visitors and British taxpayers. Panel, thanks very much indeed.
Our first witness is Dan Hicks, who's Professor of Contemporary Archaeology at
Oxford University, author of The Brutish Museum, on the line now from the Pitt
Rivers Museum at Oxford, where he's a curator, I think. That's right, is it, not
a misprint, The Brutish Museum, how so? It is, absolutely, yes, hi. So yes, I
mean, the book looks at the role of British museums in relation to violence
under empire, and it really makes a point which we've already heard, which is
that in some instances, there are situations where empire isn't over. So we have
to look at objects and look at those instances where a return is asked for in
terms of what's happening now, and not in terms of seeking to right wrongs from
the past, but to look at actually how we make our museums, everything that we
want them to be in the present. Okay, Ella William. What should the requirements
be for a return? What kind of boxes does an individual or a nation have to take
to warrant a legitimate repatriation? So I think it's important that you say an
individual or a nation, because in a lot of cases, we're not speaking here about
the national museums, we're talking about the fact that objects are, you know,
around the country, around the UK, and in museums in which actually restitution
has been a normal part of how we work in museums for a very long time. So in the
very different historical instances of Holocaust loot, or the return of
indigenous human remains, the return of items, you know, it is a part of our
normal work in the museum. Okay, but should, sorry, should we, should anything
be given, should any claim be taken seriously? Could anyone say actually that's
looted, or that was stolen, or that was ill gotten, and so give it back? And so
what we've learned over the years is, is essentially a case by case approach.
We're talking about millions of objects in our museums, most of which are not
accessible to the public, these are items hidden away in storerooms, open items
that, you know, haven't been looked at for over 100 years. And so it's a case by
case approach, but we have to be open to returning, you know, in some cases. And
what's, what is the sort of, what's the upshot of that return? Because you know,
is it just about returning it to the right place? Is it returning it to the
right person? Because obviously, you know, the Parthenon was built by slaves, do
we stop at giving it back to Greece? Or do we find the rightful ownership? I
mean, where's the, where's the moral end point of this process of do-gooding by
return? Yeah, I don't know if I call it that exactly. This isn't about being
good. This is about understanding our museums as operating in the contemporary
world and really wanting our museums to be fit for our times. Yeah. And how
does, you know, you know, what would you say to the argument that, you know, a
museum is something that makes accessible the story of human civilizations, you
know, you know, a kid who's growing up in, you know, not with lots of money to
travel to different countries can go to the museum, British Museum, take for
example, and experience that holistic, universal human story. Don't we lose that
if we give everything back? Aren't you just emptying all the coffers of your own
workplace? So I think first off from, you know, Ipswich to Manchester to
Birmingham, Bristol and Edinburgh, we have items that actually nobody can see.
So a large amount of this is about items that are not in the British Museum. And
build more museums. And that's only the tip of the iceberg. And it's easy to
talk, you know, to have a London-centered conversation about this, but
ultimately it's a national issue. It's also a European issue. And let's remember
that across Europe, you know, returns are being made in France, Germany and so
forth in the context of Africa. So this is very much a normal part of our museum
practice. And I think we actually really have to worry about those who wish to
turn this into, you know, an issue which is about a culture war or indeed the
economy of the model. Okay. Tim Stoney? Right. Hang on a second. Come in.
Professor Hicks, you say others wish to turn it into a culture war issue, but
your issue with the museum goes well beyond one or two objects being out of
place. I mean, you have said that the Anthropological Museum, which Pitt Rivers
is an example of, is and I quote, a weapon and a device for the ideology of
white supremacy to legitimate, extend and naturalize new extremes within
corporate capitalism. You have a much bigger political take on the museum than
just it has some objects that are in the wrong place. Well, absolutely, because
these are legacy institutions. Imagine any other aspect of our art or culture,
imagine, you know, medicine, any other aspect of our universities where we
weren't allowed to improve how we act according to our knowledge in the present.
So I think, you know, actually understanding that the museum is an idea for a
period of time in its history in the later 19th century, early part of the last
century was, you know, put to ends which have no place in the present. We see
that most obviously with the fake racial science, the display of human remains.
I don't think anyone is arguing that we ought to... No, no, no, no. No, of
course not. Of course not. Of course not. But the visitors to the museum, the
visitors to the museum might not share your political outlook. And many people
who come to a museum expect simply to see beauty and knowledge from around the
world put on display for them to look at, them to enjoy and process and
understand as they see fit. Whereas if you take an object away from them, to
what extent are you letting them down? Do you have a moral obligation to them to
see the object? This is about anthropology museums and about world culture and
that idea of world culture and what that means in the present. We've never
needed something like a world culture museum more in the present to see the
world and the different ways of your making, your thinking, experiencing the
world outside of a Eurocentric lens. But that doesn't mean we need to display
items that were taken with violence, where there is a demand for return and to
say under no circumstances will we ever return. So this is where we're looking
at African objects that were taken with violence. OK, let's say we're taken with
violence many, many years ago in the process of it being taken to somewhere
else, does the meaning of the object not change? Is the fact that it has been
kept stored, curated and displayed over time, does that give any claim to
ownership to the nation that now has it? So in those cases, I think we have to
underline where we're looking at African objects that were taken with violence,
how much was actively destroyed and the taking of that object and the cultural
dispossession that was part of colonial war is something with which we have in
anthropology museums to work in the present. So we are working with these
resources in the present. Either we want museums where we put humans first and
we think about the present and the living present or we have some weird idea
that the museum is a thing that will never change, that can never be a part of
our world in the present. And I think that's entirely wrong. I can't imagine any
other sector where we would make that argument. Professor Hicks, thanks very
much indeed. Our next witness is Dr Tiffany Jenkins, who's author of How
Treasures of the Past Ended Up in Museums and Why They Should Stay There. She's
on the line now. Well, in a sentence, why? Well, I think objects can tell us a
lot about the lives of past people. The windows really onto the world. And I
think demands that they are returned for past wrongs turns them into objects of
apology rather than enlightenment. I think museums and objects can do many
things, but they can't solve the problems of history. Understood. Matthew
Taylor. Dr Jenkins, just a thought experiment. I imagine we discovered that most
of the medieval European exhibits in a popular Argentinian museum were donated
by a Nazi fugitive from his hoard of items stolen under German occupation from
European museums. Should we seek to return those objects? I think if you've got
living relatives, people still alive today. No, this is 90 years ago. No one's
alive anymore. They were nicked by the Nazis from, I don't know, a Polish
museum. And they're in an Argentinian museum. Should they be returned to Poland?
Quite possibly. I'm not against return per se. I just don't think it can go past
wrong. So it's not the principle of restitution. So whatever. I think if you let
me, I think you do need to do on a case by case basis and you need to ask where
is best for the object. So where is it best in terms of truth? Where does it
tell us a certain story about those past people access, who gets to see it and
preservation. And my problem is that with this debate, it's become so moralised
and politicised. We've actually forgotten about the object. It's kind of
interesting because that's almost exactly what our previous guest said that he
said we should look at it on a case by case basis, that we shouldn't see it as a
kind of moral question. So I think I'm understanding that your position is
you're not opposed to the principle of restitution, but you think it needs to be
balanced by kind of pragmatism, by some kind of public interest test. Would that
be right? Very much so. But I think you're probably wrong about Dan Hicks. I
think his is a moral quest. It's your views I'm interested in. But if we are to
be pragmatic, public interest, why? Let's take the Rosetta Stone, that's a good
example. We could use laser printing to make an absolutely perfect copy of it.
And we could tell the story, as in fact we're doing now at an exhibition about
how we deciphered it. So what would we actually lose by returning the original
to Egypt? Well, I think the question was best answered by asking, would you be
happy to send a replica to Egypt, or would you be happy to send a replica of all
the marbles to Greece? And no, you wouldn't. There are many things you can do
with replicas. And I'm quite excited about the possibility. But I think
ultimately it doesn't answer the question of ownership. And we may be object
fetishes here. I mean, we love museums, we love objects. So maybe we are. But I
think people do want to see and hold or touch, not that they're allowed to, the
real thing. I guess this is the point then, that if we accept the principle of
restitution, but we say, yes, but it should be reasonable. We shouldn't have to
make enormous sacrifices. People shouldn't not be able to see things. But if you
can make good replicas, given that only 3%, as I understand it, of the museum
collections in the world are currently on show, and there's an enormous amount
that could be brought out of the cellars, giving these things back, it's not
going to ruin our museums. It's not going to stop people being able to
understand the history of things. Some of our most popular exhibits are indeed
replicas. So why don't we just get on with it? It might be a good idea to talk
about specifics. So in the case of the Parthenon in the British Museum, I think
they work very well there in relationship to other cultures. So the Assyrians
and the Egyptians. You can better understand the specificity of ancient Athens
that way. Equally in Athens. But how would it be, sorry, just to be clear on
this, how would it actually be different if they were perfect replicas? What
would that take away? I don't think anybody wants to see perfect replicas. I
think you could do something more creative with replicas. So the Parthenon, for
example, was coloured. It was covered in bling. It looks completely different
the way we see it today. Maybe you could do that with replicas. But I think
people still want the staff. Arstalka? Hello, Tiffany. Just help me understand a
bit better, is your position that great works of art somehow transcend the
context of their origin and that they kind of belong to the world? I think they
do both. So the Parthenon, for example, is both specific to ancient Athens. And
you can see that very well illustrated in the Acropolis Museum. But at some
point, they do become dislodged and acquire different meanings beyond their
moment. That's what's so interesting. But I'm thinking about what artefacts of
great historical importance do. And they kind of provide us an opportunity to
look for ourselves and look for meaning in the place that we find ourselves.
Because look, let's say that I see power in a military coup here in the UK, and
I decide that the Sotunhu mask should be enjoyed by the people of Bangladesh.
They should get a chance to see it as well. So I'll sign it over permanently to
the best museum in Dhaka. Would that be OK to dislodge it in that way? I
wouldn't be against it. I mean, I love the Sotunhu mask. And lots of people be
very cross. And they see they have a particular relationship to it because it is
from Britain. I understand that equally. I understand people in Greece who feel
a particular national relationship to the Parthenon. But I do think, you know,
why should we just have Greek art in Greece? What about sending it to China or
Peru or Dhaka, for that matter? But on a permanent basis, to send over the
Sotunhu mask, you wouldn't think that we were being robbed of some part of our
history, some way to understand ourselves and our history, that we gained
something as the English, as the British, from being able to see it whenever we
want. I love being able to see it whenever I want, whenever I'm in London. But I
think it does. It could do something different in Dhaka. And it could do
something of public benefit there. I think Churchill's letters aren't here. And
Henry VIII's letters to Anne Boleyn aren't here. And I think, I mean, this is
obviously more literary culture. I think the Codex Bible is in Florence, the
first Latin Bible from the north of England. Objects do, in a way, they're like
ambassadors. And I think that's what the Parthenon can be like. It's an
ambassador for ancient Athens in Bloomsbury. And I hear that point. And I
understand the principle of loaning objects out and maximizing the number of
people that can see it. But by keeping, say, the Benin bronzes here, are we not
robbing people in Benin and Nigeria to understand something of themselves
through these objects? Well, I am, sort of, the return of some of the Benin
bronzes to Nigeria. I think there are lots in European and American museums. But
I do, I am cautious about the current repatriations, because at the moment there
isn't a safe place for them. It's very likely that the museums that are rapidly
shoving them out of their collections, you sort of have to ask why they're doing
that, places like the big rivers. Those objects are likely to end up on the
private market. And an idea of them people are unlikely to see them. Dr.
Jenkins, Tiffany Jenkins, thank you very much indeed. Our next witness is
Chinnie McDonald, who's director of the Theos Think Tank and author of God is
Not a White Man. We've been talking about artifacts here, but moving on to the
broader question of reparation. What in a nutshell, because we'll be unpacking
it in a moment, what's the moral case for this generation of British people
paying this generation of African, say, or Indians, because of what happened
centuries ago? Well, I think we tend to over complicate this issue. I think at
its heart, it's pretty simple. We all have an instinctive understanding of
fairness and of justice. I've got two little boys. My five-year-old understands
that if he takes something from someone else that doesn't belong to him, that
the right thing to do is to give it back. At its heart, it is an instinctive
understanding. So we tend to over complicate it and try to find ways in which we
won't do it or we shouldn't do it. But really, it's pretty simple. Do you
understand that? Pick up on that very interesting example. The point is there,
individual responsibility. He's got to give it back because he took it. When
we're talking, however, about great-great-grandparents taking from other great-
great-grandparents, do we have an immediate responsibility for that? I think
it's interesting to say that because we also often talk about remembrance. So
every year, we remember those who died in the war. We say we will remember them.
We have a connection to the past, to those who have come before us. Now, yes, if
my son takes something from someone else, it's his individual responsibility.
But it's not just about the past. It's also about the current, the present, and
the future. We essentially think that lots of people have an interest in their
own ancestry. People who watch, who do you think you are? And when they find out
about their ancestors, they feel a connection to that. So I think we do feel
connected to the past. But you see, you're introducing ancestry here, but we're
talking here about states and the responsibility of states. Now if, for example,
someone migrated here from Poland just 10 years ago, why should they with no
ancestry linked to the British Isles have to, through tax or whatever, pay
reparations for how the British subjects may have treated someone 200 or 300
years ago? Well, that's an interesting example because similarly, why should I,
as someone who was born in Nigeria, who has family who were taken from Nigeria
during the transatlantic slave trade, I paid, my taxes went towards paying off
slave owners when the UK government took out the biggest loan in its history in
1835 to pay off, they said, compensate slave owners for the projected loss of
earnings. And we were paying that from 1833 until 2015. Right, right. Okay. I
mean, others would argue that was done in order to make anti-slavery possible,
that it had to be paid off in order to avoid a conflict or avoid legal action,
etc, etc. But accepting that, when, where does this potentially stop? So we're
taking the example of slavery, obviously, because it's so particularly morally
stark, but one could argue that, you know, the Romans once ruled Britain, the
Vikings once raided Britain. How do we stop in terms of responsibility for what
our societies did in the past? Can we, can I demand reparations from Norway?
Again, I'd say it's not just about the past, it's about the present. So the
difference here is that we are talking about countries and nations, particularly
in the global south, in Africa, in Asia, and Latin America, who are still paying
the consequences of centuries of colonisation, subjugation, oppression,
violence, that has consequences for how they live today. So there are
repercussions to all that has happened over the past centuries. So it's not just
about the past, it's about the present. And it's also about the future. What
kind of people do we want to be? Do we want to be those people who say, wasn't
me? No, thanks. It's got nothing to do with me. Or how might we be people who
say, there's a wrong that has been done, and how might we be play a part in
writing it? Ella? To fix those problems in the present, what would reparations
look like today? It could look like all sorts of things. It could be national
governments paying to national governments, but I think we can also be a little
bit more creative about it. So it can be institutions, it can be the Church of
England has, as was mentioned, put together a hundred million pound fund to in
some way repair some of the damage that was done, its role in the transatlantic
slave trade. But there are also kind of interesting examples, Stormzy and his
bursary for black young people to go to Cambridge. I loved an example of the
Virginia Theological Seminary in the US that tracked down the descendants of
those enslaved people who worked at the college, obviously centuries ago, and
they gave them a thousand pound checks. But they didn't just give them money.
Obviously, some people said, no, thanks too little too late, but some people
accepted it. It wasn't just about money, but it was then also about you can have
this check, but you can also use our library, you can eat for free. It was about
restoring relationship. So there's all sorts of interesting and creative ways
that we can do this. There is already a process through which Western nations,
through their explanation, try to aid nations that are oppressed or struggling
or developing or however you want to call it. So how would this have been to
survey it? And how would that how would it be different? Well, it's correct that
the conversation in international development and philanthropy at the moment is
about talking about reparations rather than aid, because the idea of
philanthropy and of aid is this idea that I am. We are benevolent, rich, wealthy
nations who will give charitably, but actually reparations about saying often
morally dubious. I mean, it's a very it's very politicized kind of way of
looking at it. I mean, it often does more for the Western nation than it
actually does for the Nigerians or the Congolese or whoever are receiving that
cash or whatever. Well, I'd say good development is kind of decolonizing and it
works with the communities in those countries to work out how they want to be
and to kind of develop. Jenny McDonald, thank you very much indeed. Our last
witness is James Orr, who's associate professor of the philosophy of religion at
Cambridge University and a member of History Reclaimed, which is a group of
academics who campaigned against what they see as the abuse of history for
political purposes. He's on the line from there now. Is that Professor Orr, what
you think is happening here and the call for reparations to form the colonies or
the descendants of slaves, an abuse of history for political purposes? I'm not
sure I would go that far, though I'd certainly disagree with Jean Ayn saying
that the issue of reparations is a simple one. I think it involves an
exceptionally complex set of moral problems. It's interesting that the example
she used is of her son, a case of individual culpability. But I think in the
case of reparations, we're dealing with a much more complex issue of collective
moral guilt and harm and even less straightforwardly how collective moral guilt
and harm persists over time. I don't think anyone would deny that there are
situations from the recent past where there's a strong case to be made for
reparations. The obvious example is the 1952 reparations agreement between
Israel and Germany, where Germany financially compensated the Jewish victims of
the Holocaust or reparations made by our own government to survivors of the
Malmauer uprising in the 1950s. But I think the case for reparations gets much
weaker when one leaves the land of the living, as it were, and resurrects
horrors from the distant past when one's effectively asking people who could not
have been guilty of a crime to make atonement to people who couldn't have been
victims of the crime. Understood. Arshaka. Hello, James. I'm so glad you
mentioned the land of the living because that's really where I want to begin.
Have you ever heard of a place called Angola Prison? I think I might have seen
some articles about it. Yes. I mean, just to catch up our audience, Angola
Prison is the nickname for Louisiana State Penitentiary. It's the largest
maximum security prison in the US. 75% of the inmates there are black. And it's
called Angola because that's the name of the slave plantation that the prison
was built on top of. So to this day, you can see disproportionately black men in
a chain gang working for free or very near to free, laboring in the fields,
guarded by white rifle men on horseback. Does slavery in this context feel like
a distant past or does it feel like maybe it's invading the land of the living?
Not at all. I think the case that you point to is a case that's straight from
the land of the living. There may be analogies that we can draw with slavery in
the past, but there would only be analogies. What needs to be shown for
reparations, to make sense, is a clear causal nexus between slavery from the
past and the slave-like conditions that you draw attention to. And the further
we get into the past, the harder it becomes, I think, to provide the kind of
evidential basis for that causal nexus, that you need to command widespread
public support for a big scheme of reparations. But when you see something like
that and you see the descendants of enslaved people toiling in very similar
conditions, do you honestly look at that and go, oh, well, correlation's not
causation? I do. I look at that and I think that that is a problem that relates
to policies of incarceration and inappropriate forms of incarceration in the
present. I think you can't change the past, you can affect the present. And I
would look at a situation like that and seek solutions not in the distant past,
but by seeking, and not by seeking reparations, but by demanding that the US
government or the state government of Louisiana addresses the problem. Matthew
Taylor. Do you think it's useful to have a sense of national responsibility, for
example, for our role in some of the most panacious aspects of imperialism? Yes,
I do. But the question is, how is that responsibility understood? How is it
acknowledged? But I'm interested, should I feel that as a modern British
citizen? Should I feel a sense as a citizen of some kind of responsibility?
Because I think you're saying that I shouldn't, because I didn't do it myself. I
think there's a difference between an awareness of one's individual moral
failings and of course an awareness of our role in the collective and our
attitudes to the past. But the basic principle, I think the basic starting point
for any analysis of moral culpability, blame and harm should be at the
individual level and not at the collective level. But as a historian, presumably
you're happy that we would feel a sense of national pride, I don't know, the
Magna Carta or the Battle of Britain. So it seems to me that a sense of
responsibility for what our forebears have done wrong is the flip side of that.
But should it also be the case that history might teach us that part of the
reason that we are a rich country, relatively speaking, is because we benefited
from the exploitation of the resources and the people of our colonies? Yes,
look, I think the more you look at the phenomenon of slavery through a
historical lens, the more you realise that what's unique about Britain's role in
the slave trade and Britain's colonial past is that we were the first empire,
the first civilisation to not only put a stop to it with the 1807 out, but to
police the seas and to, in fact, we, through the West Africa, Scotland. No, I
understand all that. But the point I'm trying to make is this. We benefited part
of what enabled the industrial revolution and our growth to one of the richest
countries in the world was because of the exploitation of resources and people
under colonialism. And therefore, when we look at those countries now seeking to
develop, those countries that we exploited, isn't it reasonable that not only we
feel a sense of responsibility, but also that we might want to express that
responsibility concretely? Yes, and I think we already do that. We already
hypothecate 0.7% of our gross national income for foreign aid. There's been a
lot of debate over that, but that's a significant contribution. And if you look
back in the 19th century and we've talked already about the 20 million or so
that was given in the early 1830s to slave owners, of course, that was a
controversial payment. But those who think that it was the wrong thing to do owe
an explanation for what the alternative might have been, how we could have
brought an end to slavery faster. But if institutions, whether it's the Church
of England or a university or a gallery or whatever, if they can trace their
origins, their wealth to the ill-gotten gains, as it were, of slavery or
colonialism, isn't it reasonable that they would say, well, actually, we'll use
some of that resource to support the museums, the institutions, the churches, or
those countries that we exploited? That's the principle. What's wrong with that
principle? Well, I'm not sure that it's as easy as that. I think there is a real
difficulty of accurately quantifying both historic harms and inherited harms if
you assume harms can be inherited. Look, I think the historical work that the
Church of England commissioned is a really impressive piece of research on this
front. But I think it makes the mistake, which I think you're making too, of
measuring historic harm against the financial gain made by the perpetrator from
the harm. It's very tempting to do that because then you could get a clear basis
of assessment for any reparation that would otherwise be very hard to establish.
But it's a mistake because it's not at all clear that quantifying the gain is
the same as quantifying the harm. There were plenty of companies connected to
the slave trade, most notoriously the South Sea Company, which failed despite
exploiting slaves. Using commercial gain to quantify historic injustice, this
leads to some very odd results. Both would be odd to claim that descendants of
slaves connected to commercially unsuccessful companies don't deserve
reparations, but descendants of slaves owned by commercially successful ones do
deserve them. Professor Orr, thank you very much indeed for joining us this
evening. Well, panel, we've covered quite a distance. I did think the question
of returning artefacts would be essentially simpler than the wider question of
reparations. But I don't think it quite turned out this way. Tim, did you think
the first witness, Dan Hicks, was going a bit far with his idea of the brutish
museum that seemed to be, in his view, part of the master plan of a master race
to continue the empire project and white supremacy and all? I didn't think he
was open and explicit enough about what he really thinks. I mean, he said, are
we saying that museums should never change? Well, no one says that. The question
is, how do they change? And what is the democratic basis for that change? Can it
be an elite group of curators who have a very specific political view of the
past? Should they be allowed to radically transform museums? I don't think so.
He said there's no other sector where anyone would make the argument that things
shouldn't change. But then again, to most people, when they think of museums,
they think of the word conservation. They think the idea, in a sense, actually
is to keep things the same. And there's something slightly odd about inheriting
a collection that's been built up all over these years and visited and loved by
people. And starting from the prison principle of saying, OK, how can I give
bits of this back? There's something odd about this drive, this fanatical drive,
to hand bits of what Britain has over. And does one not have a moral obligation
to the people who collected it and the people who love it here? Ash? Well, I
think one of the things that Dan Hicks was getting at, and I would have liked to
see more discussion of, is the way in which the museum, as we understand it, is
deeply bound up with colonialism. It was a way of whitewashing looting. And you
lend it a kind of cultural authority and a morality by saying, well, we've done
this to protect it from you savages. I remember actually being at a talk by
Roger Scruton, who said, well, the British in India, they preserved Sanskrit
texts from being burned. Then you go, well, being burned by who? The British. So
I would have liked to see a bit more discussion of that. But it's also, I think,
there's a superiority which stays here with us, where we go, well, we are the
responsible custodians of these objects. And you couldn't possibly look at your
country as a rife with corruption. You couldn't possibly say that you'd protect
them. One is that I don't think that does give enough credit to the development
of museum sectors, particularly in Africa over the last couple of decades. And
then the second thing is, well, isn't the principle of returning stolen goods
something of an absolute? If I've nicked your telly, you don't have to guarantee
that you won't smash it in and return it. Not if you did it 500 years ago. Well,
the argument is so polarised, isn't it? It was like stolen and looted or rescued
on the other side. There isn't very much room for nuance, like the Parthenon had
been used as an ammo dump before Lord Elgin arrived. And the kingdom of Benin
was a pretty unpleasant place where the bronzes came from. Well, I mean, Tiffany
Jenkins, our second witness, made this and actually links to something that Tim
said. One of the important points is that objects or pieces of art or statues
even have a, they don't have a static history. They have a complicated, I'm
thinking of that statue in Glasgow, is it with the cone on its head? You know,
the things change, you know, in an important sense, things change in time and in
context. I just think you couldn't have such a perfect polarisation and
distinction between Dan Hicks and Tiffany Jenkins. And Professor Hicks talking
about the fact that, you know, do we put humans first or he didn't want to say
it or he said, or objects first, was the second part of that sentence. And of
course, Professor Tiffany Jenkins is coming along and saying, well, actually,
you know, as an expert in curating or an expert in objects, you have a moral
responsibility to the thing itself and to situate it in the right place and to
tell its story properly and to do it justice. And I think that there's, you
know, her phrase, objects of apology is such a wonderful way of putting it
because, you know, the moral quest of someone like Hicks has got nothing really
to do with how best to serve the moral importance of the object. But it's
actually all about, it sounded like it's all about his white guilt, which is not
very interesting for people paying the entrance fee to museums. Matthew, on this
wider question of reparation, there was a lot of emphasis on it's about the
present as much as the past, which I'm sure you probably agree with. But it
rests on the idea that these other countries are worse off now because of what
our ancestors did in the past. Is that, do you think, beyond argument,
uncontestable? I think, I'm not saying it's beyond argument, but I certainly
think that any suggestion that somehow there is some kind of point at which we
can say, well, we're not affected by the past in terms of the benefits and
privileges that we have or the countries that we exploited are not affected by
that past. And I don't think that David Orr wanted to deny that. I mean, you
know, I think what's been interesting to me actually, I seem to be listening to
a different programme from other people, I think what's been interesting is
there hasn't been these clear-cut moral distinctions, actually. I think that Dan
Hicks and Tiffany Jenkins could co-curate an exhibition extremely well because
they'd both be kind of interested in how you respond to what people want to see.
And Dan Hicks would say, people don't really want to see things which they
associate with exploitation now. And Tiffany Jenkins would say, people want to
see things from around the world, but it should be based upon a cosmopolitan
view of stuff. And I don't think, as I say, I don't think that James Orr
disagreed with the notion of it. He said, well, how do we do it? What's the
right way to do it? And I think that's absolutely right. I think it's
straightforward, but I absolutely think that the principle applies. Yeah. Tim,
James Orr had two moral arguments against reparations. It struck me. One was it
was a question of collective guilt, which he didn't believe in or didn't think
was morally sound. And also the period of time, they, you know, we weren't the
perpetrators, they weren't the victims, I suppose, in the short term. No, well,
moral responsibilities tend to be immediate. They tend to relate to the
individual. What are they responsible for? What can they do something about? And
it's difficult when you come to geographic distance. It's even harder when you
come to centuries of difference between the individual and the events. And given
that we are then locating the individual within nation states, the notion, as I
suggested, that someone who, say, migrated 10 years ago, here 10 years ago, is
responsible for the British state two or 300 years ago, I just find that very,
very hard to buy. And in fact, I see it as a process of... But Tim, I don't see
why, because I think, wouldn't you accept the principle that if you come to
Britain, what you do is you accept that you're British, and part of accepting
that you're British is you're now associated with the history of Britain. Isn't
that part of the citizenship deal? Well, let's flip it. It seems to me that the
other side of this argument is unhealthily obsessed with genetic ancestry. I
find that really quite strange. Our people keep coming back to, well, of course,
the English do have a responsibility for this. Whereas this is owned by this
group of people in this part of the world. It's a terribly unprogressive view of
history, that culture is located in one location, and a race of people have a
responsibility for someone. If I may jump in as a child of empire, when my
grandmother was born, it was as a subject of the British empire. Bangladesh
didn't exist until 1971. I would not feel that it was inappropriate for my tax
money, tax money that I pay, to go towards some kind of reparations or
restitution. And the reason is, is that I have participated in educational
institutions, have been the beneficiary of wealth which has been passed down
generationally and kept within British institutions, much of which was extracted
from the global south over the period of colonialism. That's not about me saying
I'm responsible, but it's me saying I've benefited from those things. A generous
gesture, if I may say so, Ash. Indeed. And worthy of you. That's it for this
week. From our panel, Matthew Taylor, Ella Whelan, Ash Sarkar and Tim Stanley,
and from me, until the same time, next week. Goodbye. The Moral Maze was chaired
by Michael Burke and produced by Jonathan Halliwell. You can subscribe to The
Moral Maze on the BBC Sounds app. In a quarter of an hour here on Radio 4,
electroconvulsive therapy is one of the most controversial treatments in
psychiatry, but for some people with severe depression, ECT can be the only
treatment that works. After the news at nine, Professor Sally Marlowe examines
who benefits from electroconvulsive therapy in shocking. But now on Radio 4 and
for the very last time, it's Forethought presented by Ollie Mann. Hello and
welcome to Forethought. Today's show is a little different because it marks the
end of this series of talks after a run of 12 years here on Radio 4. Now I've
presented these programs for the past five years, but producers Giles Edwards
and Sheila Cook have been involved since the start, finding speakers, working
with them on their scripts and helping them perfect their mic technique, which
in lockdown basically meant helping them soundproof their bedrooms. So for this
farewell episode, Giles is producing and Sheila is our speaker. Hi, Sheila.
Hello, Ollie. Fancy seeing you here. Absolutely, well, it is very strange to be
this side of the glass as it were across the table from you, as opposed to
trying to whisper sweet nothings about where do we go next in your ear. I think
the thought basically was we can't afford to bring back all our favourite
speakers, so you're the budget option. So you're just going to bring us some
best bits in audio form. Take it away. When the controller of Radio 4
commissioned forethought back in 2011, he wanted a series of talks that would
give the network something different. A point of view was already well
established as the weekly essay slot where a small number of high-profile
writers aired their opinions. Forethought, by contrast, was to be a platform for
many voices, including people who'd never been published or who'd never
broadcast before. Each speaker would take part only once and share not just an
idea, but also the personal experience that shaped it. It was this need to find
speakers who had a story to tell as well as an interesting idea to put forward
that led to over a decade of encounters with remarkable people. I've been lucky
enough to produce 148 out of nearly 400 talks. Each one was different, but
together they left me with a sense of hope, especially when speakers had
overcome adversity. One of the first contributors I had the privilege to work
with was a teacher and headmaster, Dick Moore. Thanks to his job, I knew he'd be
comfortable speaking in public, but how would he feel about broadcasting the
details of a family tragedy? I was apprehensive before our first meeting,
concerned not to intrude on private grief. Dick's son, Barney, had taken his own
life at the age of 21, after struggling for years with depression. I needn't
have worried. Dick's openness and his sense of urgency to help other young
people who were suffering with mental illness made him want to tell Barney's
story. He'd already started to campaign for greater awareness in schools, and
his script reflected his understanding of what needed to be done. "'Sticking
plasters don't work. Bolt-on counsellors and one-off training are but a drop in
the ocean,' he said. Real progress requires long-term commitment and a genuine
desire to change the culture. Life's not about waiting for the storms to pass.
It's about learning to dance in the rain." At the recording of Dick's
forethought, in front of a live audience, I could feel the intensity of the
silence as everyone listened. After the broadcast, the response was huge. People
called it courageous and required listening for all schools, family and friends
of teenagers. And speaking to Dick recently, it was gratifying to hear how
forethought had proved to be a springboard. In the ten years since, he's given
500 talks to schools and 100 talks to businesses in the UK and abroad. Using
personal experience to help others also became a mission for Stuart J. Cole. In
2016, his compelling forethought told the story of how he conquered his
addiction to drink and drugs. He was in what he described as such a terrible
cycle, leading to his own self-destruction, that he decided to take himself as
far away as possible from his home environment in London. Leaving his girlfriend
and daughter behind, Stuart took the extreme step of getting himself arrested
and jailed for possession of drugs on the Caribbean island of St Lucia. During
two years in prison, he wrote the story of his life in tiny handwriting on
scraps of paper, which he subsequently turned into a book. Through writing, I
was able to offload the past, he said, to envision the future and find ways to
make it happen. He returned to the UK, studied and trained as a drugs and
alcohol worker, and married his girlfriend. I spoke to him recently for a World
Service documentary about drugs in prison, and found him still helping others to
overcome addiction and rebuild their lives. We used to go on the road with
forethought before the pandemic struck, often recording at summer festivals for
their atmosphere and a ready-made audience. At Womad, the World Music and Arts
Festival, the Syrian musician Maya Yousaf delivered a particularly moving talk.
She's a virtuoso performer on the Kanun, a 78-stringed Middle Eastern harp. Maya
migrated to the UK after the outbreak of war in Syria. Her voice broke with
emotion as she wondered when she could return to Damascus to see her parents
again. It was a poignant moment which underscored her idea of using music to
help refugees. Maya explained how she realised that the Kanun evoked the sound
of Syria, the sound of home, for people who'd fled their country. So she started
to use her music to help people cope with their sense of dislocation. And she
developed a work called The Seven Gates of Damascus, especially for displaced
children. "'To me, the act of playing music is the opposite of death,' said
Maya. "'It is a life and hope-affirming act. To me, music is my healer and an
antidote to what is happening, not only in Syria but across the whole world.'"
Another kind of hopeful message came from speakers who wanted to preserve
something important from our past or our present way of life. In a fast-changing
world, they urged us to see what was of value, to guard against its destruction
by forces outside our control. The cultural historian Travis Elbrough wanted to
protect public parks as institutions for the people. Andrew Martin argued for
keeping cash in the face of the advancing tide of electronic banking. Cash
spared him, he said, from feeling every transaction was monitored, and it also
acted as an aid to thrift. "'I have become like my dad,' said Andrew, who forty
years ago would be deflected from a whimsical purchase because it would mean
breaking into a tenor." And Dr Mark Williams spoke from his experience as a GP
about the need to preserve the traditional home visit. While he embraced new
technology and artificial intelligence to improve treatment for his patients, he
argued that the home visit still played a vital role. The truth is, said Mark,
that home visits give us the best insights into our patients' real lives. One of
the most memorable forethought speakers and someone who I felt honoured to work
with was Amy Golden. After suffering from meningitis as a baby, Amy was left
severely physically disabled. She can move only her right arm, and she can't
speak. Amy communicated by pointing to letters on a board. "'I could have a
board with an electronic voice,' she said, but I like the attention of the other
person. If you want to know what I want to say, you have to focus on me. You
can't ignore me or pretend I'm not here. You have to concentrate hard to see
what I'm saying.' We always get there in the end. We had to work out how to do
the recording so that Amy could be in her wheelchair, centre stage. The solution
was for an actor, Rhiannon Needes, to sit alongside Amy, reading her script.
Rhiannon's sensitivity and the chemistry between her and Amy made it feel as if
she really was Amy's voice. A composer and director, Craig Christie, who heard
Amy's forethought in Australia, felt moved to write a musical about her life.
Amy herself starred in the glorious show called Get On With It, in a tribute to
her positivity, which I saw on the opening night. As Amy said, I try to get on
and think of other things. Most days are good. It's not to take things too
seriously. If you can't laugh, there's no point. I live in the moment. I go with
the flow. Life is too short. I am happy now, because if I wasn't like I am, I
wouldn't be who I am. When I first met Adam Morse, I understood why he felt he'd
found a new power because of his challenging circumstances. It was as if he
possessed some kind of special aura. At the age of 19, Adam found he was losing
his sight to a rare eye disease. His ambition at the time was to be a film
director, and he was determined that this wouldn't stop him. He eventually found
a backer for his first feature film, despite being registered blind with only
slight peripheral vision. Adam told the producer, cinematographer and lead actor
about his disability, but he kept it secret from the rest of the cast and crew.
He waited until the film was about to be premiered before revealing the truth.
Everyone was incredulous, whereas Adam had always been confident of his ability
to direct actors despite his loss of sight. I may not be able to judge physical
appearance any more, but I can connect onto someone else's frequency to gauge
how they are feeling, he said. It's as though I'm using my inner eye to look
into someone's soul. I reflect on the last 11 years as a period of my life that
reshaped me spiritually. Sometimes our faith is shaken, but I find that the
universe always gives after it is taken. Adam has since gone on to blaze a trail
for differently abled filmmakers and actors. Most recently he appears as a
sighted person in an impressive short film called Suppression. Producing
Forethought has been a delight because of the chance to meet so many interesting
and extraordinary people. Two of them are famous, and yet they all have
remarkable stories to tell. Stories which have left me with a sense of hope.
Hope for humanity, for its resilience, creativity, imagination and will to make
things better. Many have faced great challenges in life. Some of their
experiences have been painful and private, yet they've been willing to share
their stories in order to communicate their ideas and insights, often calling
for society to change. At a time when so much in the news seems bleak, it's good
to remember that our forethoughters are out there. And if we look, their like
are all around us, quietly making the world a better place. Sheila, thank you
and thank you for listening. With that we are done. Remember you can check out
almost every episode we've ever made of Forethought the full archive on BBC
Sounds. And if you head over to the Forethought podcast now, you'll hear Sheila
and I chatting a little bit more about our memories of making this show over the
last 12 years. Sheila Cook was the speaker in Forethought. It was presented by
Ollie Mann and the producer was Giles Edwards. And you can find that
conversation and, as Ollie says, the full archive of Forethought now on BBC
Sounds. It's one of the most controversial treatments in psychiatry, but this
evening we hear from a woman who says electroconvulsive therapy, or ECT, saved
her life. Professor Sally Marlowe examines whose benefits from electroconvulsive
therapy in shocking. That's after the news here on BBC Radio 4. BBC Sounds. If
you own a smart speaker, did you know you can access a whole world of BBC
content through it? To get started, just say Open BBC Sounds. Then ask your
speaker to play whatever you want. You could listen to a music mix like this.
Play Focus Beats. Or try a new podcast. Play Desert Island Discs. And of course,
if you want to listen to live radio, you can just say Play Radio 4. Music, radio
and podcasts, available on most smart speakers. And say Open BBC Sounds
together.