TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-01H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at Midnight. This is Alan Smith. The European Commission President,
Ursula von der Leyen, is to meet Rishi Sunak in Berkshire later today with
expectations rising that they'll finalise a new post-Brexit trade deal for
Northern Ireland. Nearly 60 people, including children and a baby, are now known
to have died after a boat carrying migrants sank in stormy weather off the coast
of southern Italy. The collapsed battery-maker British Volt has been bought out
of administration by an Australian company. And the legal age a person can marry
in England and Wales has just risen from 16 to 18. A deal between the UK and the
EU on post-Brexit trade in Northern Ireland could now be just hours from
completion. Rishi Sunak is to meet the President of the European Commission,
Ursula von der Leyen, in Berkshire this afternoon, with expectations high that
an announcement will then follow. Conservative and Labour MPs have been told to
attend Parliament, while a special meeting of European Union ambassadors has
been called for the afternoon. Our political correspondent Ian Watson has more
details. After hundreds of hours of discussions, Downing Street is hopeful that
these will be the final talks before an agreement is reached. The Cabinet is
expected to meet immediately after the Prime Minister and the Commission
President conclude their discussions. And such is the confidence that a deal
will be struck. Plans have been put in place for a joint press conference,
followed by a statement to Parliament from the Prime Minister. This would allow
MPs to express their initial views on any deal, though there won't be a vote. An
agreement with the EU would ease trade between Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, but it wouldn't in itself restore power-sharing government at stormont.
That would only happen if the largest unionist party, the DUP, agreed. Its MPs
are unlikely to deliver a verdict on any deal until they see the detail. So
today may well be a landmark moment in the EU and UK's post-Brexit relations,
but a rockier road to solving Northern Ireland's political problems could lie
ahead. With his assessment of the challenges still facing Rishi Sunak, here's
our political editor Chris Mason. Let's hope this is one of the last great
rollercoaster moments of Brexit. So said one government figure to me,
anticipating an important moment today, but worldly enough to realise it's not
necessarily the end of the story. These negotiations between the government and
Brussels, the government and Conservative backbenchers, and the government and
Northern Ireland's Democratic Unionist Party have resembled diplomatic Jenga.
Wobbly bricks here, there and everywhere. One element has been all but done for
a while, and we expect will be sorted today, the deal between London and
Brussels. The others will then be tested. Downing Street will emphasise what it
sees as the immediate positives of the deal, a better arrangement for Northern
Ireland and resetting relations with the EU. Re-establishing devolved government
in Northern Ireland, they hope, might follow, but that is far from certain. The
DUP, having sounded rather sceptical, have now gone rather quiet. Then there are
Tory backbenchers, among them one Boris Johnson. It's why a diplomatic
breakthrough for Rishi Sunak is also a moment of political jeopardy. Nearly 60
people, including a baby and several young children, are now known to have
drowned after a boat carrying migrants sank off the southern coast of Italy. The
vessel broke up in rough seas near the coastal town of Crotone in the Calabria
region. Here's our Europe regional editor, Danny Eberhard. Initial reports
indicate the migrants are from Afghanistan, Pakistan, the Middle East and
Somalia, but it's still not clear how many people were on board when the boat
broke up. It's believed to have crossed from western Turkey on what's known as
the Calabrian route. It's lucrative for people smugglers and the Calabrian
mafia, the Indrangheta, is said to be involved. Italy's Prime Minister, Giorgia
Meloni, has expressed her deep sorrow at the tragedy, which she's blamed on
people traffickers. The UN is calling for immediate action to prevent such
horrific events. An Australian company has bought the collapsed brisery-maker
British Vault. Recharge Industries says it will bring proven technology to the
company, which had been planning to build a Â£4bn factory in Northumberland.
British Vault went into administration last month with the loss of 300 jobs. Our
business editor, Simon Jack, reports. British Vault's downfall was blamed on a
lack of battery experience, unproven technology and no customers or revenue. The
new owner looks similar in some ways. Recharge Industries is owned and run by a
New York-based investment fund with no automotive background. Its Australian
chief executive, David Collard, explained why it was different. What we're
bringing which is different to the prior British Vault is we're bringing
validated technology. US Defence has also validated the technology. It's
actually already supplied to the UK Navy through a subcontractor over here.
We've put forward our case and we've been nothing but successful in everything
we've set out to do so far. The new owners will keep the British Vault brand
name but have very different plans for the future. The company intends to start
by focusing on batteries for energy storage and hopes to have those products
ready by the end of 2025. It then intends to produce batteries for high-
performance sports cars. The prospect of a much-needed plant that can produce
batteries for high-volume car makers in the UK still looks many years off.
Israeli and Palestinian officials meeting in Yemen have announced they're
committed to taking immediate steps to end a recent surge in violence. As the
rare summit took place, two Israelis were shot dead in the occupied West Bank.
Our Middle East correspondent, Jolande Nell, has sent this report from
Jerusalem. This is said to be the first time in years that Israeli and
Palestinian security chiefs have sat down together at such a meeting. It's
remarkable that after almost a decade without direct peace talks, the two sides
said in a statement that they'd work towards a just and lasting peace. With
anxieties high about an escalation in the Islamic holy month of Ramadan, which
begins in late March, Israel made a commitment to stop discussing new settlement
building for four months. In return, it's understood that the Palestinians will
not take action against Israel at the UN. No details were given about what would
be done to prevent further violence, but the challenge was made clear during the
talks, as two Jewish settlers were fatally shot while driving near Nablus.
Already, two far-right Israeli cabinet ministers, key partners in Benjamin
Netanyahu's government, have rejected the statement, which has also been
denounced by Palestinian armed factions. Tonight, Israeli settlers in the
occupied West Bank set fire to Palestinian houses, shops and vehicles near to
where the two Israelis were shot dead. One Palestinian man died. The age a
person can get married in England and Wales has just risen from 16 to 18 in an
attempt to protect vulnerable children. Under the new rules, adults who
facilitate the marriage of anyone under 18 could face up to seven years in jail
and a fine. More details from our political correspondent, Rajeeb Sandhu. Nearly
a year after being signed into law, the Marriage and Civil Partnership Act is
coming into force. It makes it an offence to enable a child to marry or enter
into a civil partnership under the age of 18 in any circumstances, removing the
need to prove the child was forced or coerced into it, and also ending parental
consent for 16 and 17-year-olds. The change also applies to religious or
cultural marriage ceremonies that aren't legally recognised. Campaigners hope
this new law will act as a deterrent to forced marriage of children. There are
those with concerns. Mihai Beker from the Roma Support Group said in his
community the word married could be used to describe a boyfriend and girlfriend
relationship. He said he was worried about potential cultural misunderstandings.
The former SNP leader at Westminster, Ian Blackford, has given his backing to
Homsa Yousaf in the contest to be the party's next leader and Scotland's first
minister. Mr Yousaf, who is the Scottish Health Secretary, is in a race with the
Finance Secretary, Kate Forbes, and the former Minister, Ash Regan. The former
Environment Secretary, George Eustice, has said shortages of some fruit and
vegetables in the UK could continue for another month. Several retailers have
placed limits on items in the past week because of supply issues.
Representatives from the major supermarkets are due to meet ministers tomorrow
to discuss the issue. Our business correspondent, Esil Karr, reports. Farmers
and the government have said extreme weather in Spain and Morocco is the main
reason for the shortages of products like tomatoes, cucumbers and peppers. But
UK farmers and growers have highlighted that production here has also been hit
by other problems like high energy costs and labour shortages since Brexit.
Today, on the Sunday with Laura Kunzberg programme, George Eustice, who was the
Environment Secretary until last year, defended the government's approach. There
isn't much different that the government could have done in recent months and
there's nothing they can do immediately. We're going to have three or four weeks
of this and the supermarkets have got to work to get it right. But longer term,
there are things we should be doing. We should be committing to onshore
production. So glasshouse production of cucumbers and tomatoes, we should be
trying to build that here. We should have a more enlightened approach to labour.
Speaking alongside the former minister, the chef and founder of the Oaxaca
restaurant chain Tomasina Myers described the current problems as the tip of the
iceberg. No one's really admitting that our current food system is completely
broken. There's a propaganda that the food system somehow miraculously provided
cheap food for all. But the very system which it depends is rife with
insecurities, whether it's to do with climate, biodiversity or public health.
The government says the UK's supply chain is highly resilient and well equipped
to cope with disruption. Tomorrow, the farming minister is expected to meet
retailers to discuss how to get supplies back to normal. Sport and Manchester
United have beaten Newcastle to win the League Cup, their first trophy in six
years. With all the details and a round-up of the rest of the day's action,
here's Mike McCarthy. Manchester United manager Eric Ten Haag says he doesn't
want his players to be satisfied after their triumph in the EFL Cup final. His
side were 2-0 winners over Newcastle, thanks to a header from Casemiro and an
own goal from Sven Bottmann. Goalkeeper David De Gea was one of three players in
the squad when Manchester United won their last major trophy, the Europa League,
in 2017. It's difficult to describe it in words. It's been a bit emotional as
well because it's been a long time without lifting a trophy. It's great. I'm so,
so happy. Proud of the team, of the players. So happy to see the fans enjoying.
It's a great moment for us. In Scotland, Celtic striker Thiago Kiergo scored
twice, just as he did in last year's League Cup final as his side overcame
Rangers 2-1 to retain the trophy. A domestic treble is on for Ange Potokoglou's
side. Meanwhile, Chelsea boss Graham Potter says he can't rely on support from
the boardroom forever after another Premier League defeat, this time Chelsea
lost 2-0 at Tottenham. In cricket, England's bowlers have made some important
breakthroughs on day four of the second test in New Zealand. Stefan Schemmel has
the latest from Wellington. Lunch at the Basin Reserve and the test match
beautifully poised. New Zealand 325 for five, leading by 99 runs. Two wickets
for England in the morning session. Henry Nicholls was caught at third slip off
Ollie Robinson for 29 and Darrell Mitchell made an aggressive 54 before miscuing
Stuart Broad into the hands of Joe Root. But Kane Williamson remains on 63. Tom
Blundell has 19. England, remembering, forced a follow on and whatever happens,
there will be a challenge of a run chase. They need five more wickets first. New
Zealand 325 for five. The lead is 99. Only Ireland can now land a Six Nations
Grand Slam after Scotland's defeat in France. In an epic match, Scotland trailed
19-0 before coming back to within four points. France eventually came through
32-21 winners. And in tennis, Britain's Cameron Norrie has come from a set and a
breakdown to beat world number two Carlos Alcaraz in the final of the Rio Open.
Norrie won it 5-7, 6-4, 7-5. Mike McCarthy. And one of the most hyped bouts in
the history of boxing novices has taken place in Saudi Arabia between two
fighters better known in the arena of social media. Tommy Fury, who rose to fame
on the reality TV show Love Island, beat the YouTube influencer Jake Paul. The
BBC's boxing reporter Steve Bunce watched the fight. They called it the truth
here in Saudi Arabia and after eight rounds, Tommy Fury won a split decision
over Jake Paul. The two boxers had a rivalry going back three years. They spent
eight rounds battling each other. Sure, it was crude at times, it was raw and it
was ugly, but they never stopped trying. They never stopped trying to knock each
other out. And for that, they deserve a little bit of recognition. And when it
was over and the scores were in and Fury was a narrow winner, Jake Paul wanted a
rematch. Tommy Fury, well, I guess he'll have a rematch because there's so much
money at stake. It wasn't a great fight, but it was a fun event. And now a look
at the morning papers. Can Sunak sell his Brexit deal? That's what the Daily
Mail calls the burning question. It says a new agreement could trigger what it's
calling another Tory civil war. The Daily Telegraph also warns that a revolt is
brewing, reporting that unionists and Tory Eurosceptics are refusing to back a
deal unless EU law is expunged from Northern Ireland. This could be the most
perilous week of Rishi Sunak's political life, says The Guardian. The Daily
Express quotes the Prime Minister as promising the accord is best for Britain. A
picture of a triumphant Manchester United lifting the Carabao Cup features in
the Daily Mirror, which says the club are in Wembley dreamland after their
victory over Newcastle. The Sun heaps praise on their manager with the headline
Hagbags first cup. And students sitting the International Baccalaureate will be
allowed to use the artificial intelligence chatbot ChatGPT to write their
essays, according to The Times. It says the qualification body will allow pupils
to quote work that's generated by the technology as long as they credit it. The
headlines again. The European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen will
meet Rishi Sunak in Berkshire later today, with expectations rising that they'll
finalise a new post-Brexit trading deal for Northern Ireland. Nearly 60 people,
including children and a baby, are now known to have died after a boat carrying
migrants sank in stormy weather off the coast of southern Italy. The collapsed
battery maker British Volt has been bought out of administration by an
Australian company. The Australian Palestinian security chiefs have held a rare
meeting and pledged to take immediate steps to end the recent wave of violence,
but there have been more clashes in the West Bank tonight. And the legal age a
person can marry in England and Wales has just risen from 16 to 18. BBC News.
Read by Alan Smith. Now from the BBC Weather Centre, here's Thomas
Schaffenacker. Thank you very much. Well, let's see what the weather's doing for
the rest of the night and plenty of clear spells across many parts of the UK and
a touch of frost soon developing, especially in Scotland, Wales and also
southern parts of England. However, across the rest of the country, clouds will
thicken through the night and by early on Monday morning, I think it should be
frost free. So places like Liverpool, Hull, Newcastle, around four or five,
whereas other parts of the country could be closer to around minus one or two.
The forecast for Monday then, starting with Scotland and Northern Ireland, lots
of sunshine in the morning. Eastern Scotland and the borders, however, will be
cloudy at times and there is a possibility of one or two light showers,
especially in the afternoon. The temperatures will be about eight degrees in
Belfast, Glasgow, Edinburgh and Aberdeen. Onto Wales, variable amounts of cloud
during the morning and the afternoon. A fleeting shower is just about possible
and the temperature in Cardiff should reach nine degrees Celsius. The northern
half of England now, sunny spells will come and go both in the morning and the
afternoon. Now at times it could actually cloud over and there will be one or
two showers. They should be fairly brief and they are carried by that chilly
breeze off the North Sea. So sure it may be eight degrees in Newcastle and also
in Liverpool, but it will feel a little colder than that. And then for the
southern half of England, many southern counties, in fact, all the way from
Cornwall through the Isle of Wight to the Kent coast, enjoying sunshine in the
morning, but through the morning into the afternoon, I think the clouds will
thicken. That breeze off the North Sea will push the clouds right across to the
south coast. And then the rest of southern England, I think also variable
amounts of cloud through the course of the day. Nothing more than that. A shower
is also possible. Temperatures will be about nine degrees, but it will feel
colder in that North Sea breeze. Back to you. Thomas, thanks very much. Now on
Radio 4, Matthew Sides steps into the concert hall to explore the passion and
the pain of music. Corrine Morris is on stage. She's playing to a concert hall
in Bordeaux. Tonight, it's Tchaikovsky's Variations on a Rococo theme. And she's
the solo cellist, the star. About three quarters of the way through the concert,
I just became aware that I was not going to have the stamina to finish. Corrine
isn't just tired from a busy performance schedule. Her right shoulder, the arm
she uses to bow her cello, is failing her. She pushes on through the notoriously
difficult final variation. Dread, just utter panic. I can't even remember how I
got to the end of the concert, but I did. The crowd suspects nothing. Applause
fills the air. And then I staggered off stage and that was the moment that I
knew I can't lie to myself anymore. There really is something wrong and I have
to go and face it, whatever it is. I'm Matthew Side and this is Sideways, my
show about the ideas that shape our lives with stories of seeing the world
differently. Today, I want to explore the powerful connection that forms between
our bodies and the instruments of our professions and passions and how losing
that connection may feel like we've lost a part of ourselves. I started playing
piano because my mother hated my singing. I was walking around the house
singing, clearly not gifted at singing. And so she put me in piano lessons and
it really stuck. This is our Tina McCain. I'm glad that I'm a terrible singer,
so I ended up playing piano. From her teenage years, Artina knew she was onto
something with the piano. She was selected for the Juilliard Experience, where
she spent time with professors at the prestigious New York Performing Arts
School. She was entering competitions and she developed a taste for the thrill
of adoring crowds. People are telling you you're really talented at this or
that. And you're like, yeah, I feel really great on this stage. I want to stay
here. I want the attention. I think you have to have maybe a tiny bit of an ego
to go on stage and be crucified for every concert. So I had that energy of just
wanting to be on stage, wanting to be in front of people. In her early 20s,
Artina is studying at a conservatory. Everything is falling into place. The
dream she holds of being a concert pianist is looking really promising. I always
felt like I was completely on target to be a concert pianist, which is crazy,
because being a concert pianist is what people tell you not to do. They tell you
to take a safe path. A clarity of mind about the direction she wanted her
musical career to take was a feature of Corrine Morris' teenage years, too. One
of my first defining moments was a concert that I went to when I was around
eight at the Royal Albert Hall. And I just remember those deep sounds coming
from the cello section just caught my imagination. And I suddenly said to my
parents, I must learn the cello. That's just the instrument I've got to do. So
believe it or not, by the age of 11, I knew that that was the instrument that I
wanted to play professionally. Corrine's abilities are clear from a young age.
By just 16, she has a diploma with honours from the Royal College of Music in
London. She's requested personally by one of the world's greatest cellists,
Mstislav Rostropovich, to take part in his festival in Evian in France. And over
the years, a deep bond has formed between Corrine and her instrument. I actually
don't feel like I'm holding my cello, but rather embracing it. We are connected,
the cello and I, as one, as a unit. I feel how the cello is on any particular
day, as you might with a friend, having a good day, having a bad day. I can feel
that with my cello. It could be the weather that's influencing the wood, and
therefore the response of the instrument under my hands. And of course, it can
be down to things such as strings. It's also my own mood and feelings of that
day. I viscerally relate to the idea that certain objects can be taken into our
own emotional and physical world. As a professional sportsman, I had the same
table tennis bat for almost 20 years, and frankly, it wasn't a bat. It was part
of me. Mine was called a Gruber Pro FL, and I can still feel its ghost in my
palm. Once, a tiny piece chipped off at the top, and I took it to a carpenter to
add some resin to the gap. I almost couldn't bear to watch. I flinched when he
started to sand it down. It was like watching an operation without anaesthetic.
Thankfully, when I got it back, it was the same trusty, subtle, wonderful,
pliable piece of wood, and it fitted my hand as it always did, like a second
skin. When we take a tool, something unhuman, inanimate, and connect with it on
a deep, almost spiritual level, it can allow us to perform to our highest
potential. To play involuntary music, you need to have an embodied interaction
with music, and that means that actually your body can play its natural role
when you interact with music. This is Professor Luc Ness. He's a music education
specialist and a philosopher at the University of Luxembourg. To explain this
idea of involuntary music, Luc calls on the ghost of that legendary cellist,
Mstislav Rostropovich. Dmitri Shostakovich composed the fiendishly difficult
Cello Concerto No. 1, specifically for Rostropovich to perform in 1959. He says
at some point, I play music involuntarily. The cello is my tool no more. And
that is exactly what expresses this idea of becoming merged with the instrument.
You don't have to deal with the instrument, you play music. That's actually at
the point where your instrument becomes like a natural extension. Just as you
don't have to think about what to do with your arm to take a glass and drink.
But Luc's also been considering this relationship philosophically, to understand
how musicians might reach that natural extension of themselves, where the
instrument disappears and they just play. It can be achieved by finding a very
important mental state, one that will be familiar to any sports people
listening. It's called flow. In sports it's often called being in the zone.
You're really into it. You feel challenged on the one hand, but on the other
hand, you also feel up to the challenge. You just can do it. We feel in control
and vitally, we feel emotionally invested. If you don't feel like playing the
clarinet, if the clarinet doesn't mean anything to you, at that level, it will
also interfere. So when all these levels are okay, you will be able to immerse
deeply in what you are doing and you will be able to experience flow. Flow
sounds quite hard to achieve. A lot of practice and repetition to lose yourself
in the performance, to merge with the activity, whether it's playing an
instrument or table tennis. But in the end, flow is worth it. When one achieves
a state of flow, it becomes a part of who we are. But when the flow stops, it's
brutal. I was playing the Tchaikovsky Rococo Variations, which is a fairly
difficult piece. I realized that I was losing control of my right arm and it was
becoming increasingly heavy. And from then on, I tried to conserve energy, tried
to get myself cued mentally. I'm going to do this. I'm going to go through this.
And true grit, it's just inconceivable to stop in the middle of a performance
and say, I'm sorry, I can't. I had masked that pain through the grit. I will
make it. But then as soon as I was out of the performance, that's when the pain
really kicked in massively. Corrine has a debilitating shoulder injury. It had
come on slowly, but with a gruelling practice and performance schedule, the
tendon in her right shoulder was hugely inflamed. This performance was the
breaking point. A doctor suggested that she should have surgery. He's basically
telling me if I go back to the cello in three, four years time, I'll wind up in
the same place. Corrine refuses the surgery. I think I went straight into quite
a deep depression as I refused the hope of something, even if it wasn't 100%
guaranteed. And yet I didn't have another strategy to replace it. I was just
trying to give myself time to find the right way forward. I canceled all my
work. I basically closed in on myself. I think if one can imagine trying to hold
a cup or a mug or something small, and that seems like such an easy task, but
even those types of tasks, when you have that type of stiffness in your hands,
can be quite monumental. Pianist Artina McCain was in her twenties. She had been
studying and playing hard at a conservatory for her Masters of Music. She was on
track for the concert pianist career she'd always dreamed of. But she'd started
experiencing pain and loss of mobility in her hands. That's something that's
really probably scary for anyone, but particularly when you use your hands as
your career and your life goals and focus, it's particularly devastating. Each
time she experienced another bout, she'd rest a day or two, hoping to recover
quickly. She felt she just had to keep on playing. Everybody wants to compete
and be the best. And you could definitely experience this no pain, no gain, or I
believe those things. But I also realized that when a person is in a spiral of
pain, it's actually not possible to progress. Artina realizes she has to take a
break from her performing career right when it's taking off. Her only source of
income is teaching, and she couldn't talk about what she was going through. It's
very hush hush. You know, you don't want to tell people you're injured. One,
because they might not call you for engagements because they figure, oh, she
won't be able to do them. They think, for lack of a better word, that maybe I'll
catch it. What is wrong with the way you think about posture or your technique?
Artina takes time trying different methods she thinks might help. She decides to
pursue a doctorate, but again, she faces major pain trying to complete the
performance side of her PhD. She rests some more, and she starts to feel like
she can play in a more low stakes setting, her church. After playing for one
week, I had actually lost the complete ability to open my hand, my right hand. I
could no longer reach an octave. I couldn't drive. I was in excruciating pain at
this point all of the time. There was never a break. And I really thought, oh,
wow, this is the end. It's difficult to describe when your vocation, the thing
from which you derive meaning, is suddenly ripped away. It isn't just about
losing the thing that brought you joy, but like losing a part of yourself. I've
met injured sports people who say that while they're out with injury, they
didn't know who they were. It's a profound loss when your goals are cut short,
when a career no longer serves you, when the thing you love so much is damaging
your health. Luc Ness was a talented clarinetist. I think it was 2002. I think
my first son was just born. And I had a very severe accident with my car. And at
that moment, I could no longer play the clarinet. Everything stops, playing in
the orchestra, playing chamber music, just that it stops because you can't play
anymore. What am I going to do? Luc decided to take another path into
philosophy. And it was his accident that sparked his interest in the
relationship between musician and instrument. When you have such an accident,
you're confronted in such a big way with your body and your instrument. And your
body is actually saying, no, you can't play any longer. Now Luc's research aims
to bring more freedom into music teaching. To celebrate and encourage the role
of movement as a way of finding greater expression. And 20 years since his
accident, Luc isn't a classical concert player, but he is a teacher. And he is
able to play his clarinet again. And when he does, he's free. So I play with six
friends. I play in this Balkan klezmer ensemble. And I move around. I go among
the public. I dance with them while I'm playing. It feels great. It is possible
to redefine yourself and maybe discover a new kind of relationship with your
former passion. Luc found his alternative path. And eventually it brought him
back to music in a fresh way. But that isn't the choice everyone would want to
make. It's the summer before Artina is due back in school for the second year of
her doctorate program. She can't play. She doesn't have an alternative income.
And she's in a state of constant pain. She's back in the same church where just
a couple of months earlier, she'd lost all hand movement. She thought her career
was over. I think I was just sitting there looking depressed. You know, somebody
noticed my down demeanor and said, hey, you want to talk about it? No, I don't
want to talk about it. And one of my friends said, no, you know, Artina, you
should just tell him what's going on. And so I told this woman who happened to
be an amateur pianist and kind of secretly thinking, what can an amateur pianist
tell me? But it's interesting that works in funny ways. And she told me about a
new modality that was in Austin, Texas. And it's actually one of the best
practices in the world called the continuum method. And it uses a hand technique
to turn on your nerve endings at your muscles. Sounded crazy to me. But at this
point, I'm like, OK, I don't have any other hope. I'm going to give this a try.
After two sessions of this muscle activation technique, Artina has the full
range of motion in her hand again, which she says is mind boggling, given where
she'd been. I had lost other mobility in my body. I had suffered from two car
accidents. I wasn't able to turn my head to the left. I was like an old lady at
27. And so he was able to reactivate the nerve endings in my feet. After her
injury, cello player Corrine Morris was also searching for a way to move past
her pain without surgery. She spent nine months working with a specialist in
what's called active release techniques to break down scar tissue in her
shoulder and heal the area. Corrine could finally begin to practice again. And I
remember that first day when I took a bow and drew the bow across the string. I
basically did one minute and that was me done for the day because it was so
tired. It was not hurting, but so tired. But slowly, slowly, minute by minute,
Corrine begins to come back to playing. I needed again to build very slowly into
this and also mentally to trust in myself and trust in my right shoulder that it
was sufficiently healed for me to be able to do this. It was hard for me to even
believe my dream can come back. Six months into my treatment, I gave my first
doctoral recital and you can't believe what that felt like. It was so
incredible. I actually performed a work by Margaret Bonds called Troubled Water.
It felt like a rebirth. It felt like I had been born again. I had been given a
new life, a new opportunity to start over. The piece's meaning really is
symbolic of my story. Troubled Water is actually a Negro spiritual that's based
on the biblical story of God troubling the water for healing. The expression
that I was able to get after being healed, you can only imagine the joy that one
has that exudes not only from just the performance aspect, but from your soul.
Artina McCain is a celebrated concert pianist and is now a scholar showcasing
the work of underrepresented composers and associate professor of piano at
Memphis University. She runs the Musicians Wellness Forum to help her fellow
players find information and create openness. Today, Artina doesn't have the
same relationship with the piano that she did in her twenties, but that's more
than okay. Most of my experiences of practicing over that period of time from
being a teenager to an early twenty-something was negative and painful. And yet
I still want this relationship with the piano. And it's like they took away the
fear I had of the piano and restored it with something that's pure love. Doesn't
feel like a vocation or just this is my career, but it actually feels like an
opportunity to connect with humanity and the human soul. The reality of what it
means to have to rebuild after a break is not simple. Corrine Morris came back
after five years away. She recorded a new album, Macedonian Sessions, recorded
with the Macedonian Radio Orchestra. Her second, Chrysalis, was recorded with
the Scottish Chamber Orchestra. Corrine was back. She was giving promotional
interviews, getting great reviews, and she was on stage to delight audiences. I
suddenly started to have fairly severe lower back spasms. And that was like my
body saying to me, you're going to have to stop because there's no way you can
play when you have a locked lower back. You can hardly walk. It turned out as a
full-blown burnout, of which I recovered after a few months. With a second
setback, Corrine took a new approach to her care. She started to look at the
underlying causes of her shoulder issues. It was obviously due to muscle
imbalances and a lack of recovery time and strength training and many other
aspects of life. From then on, I started to approach my life in a far more
holistic manner for myself. And this has now become also the object of my next
project, which is to build a course for the next generations so they find out
about the realities of managing one's energy, one's time, building in proper
recovery time before it is an injury and doing preventative measures. And
through this holistic approach to her recovery, Corrine is now able to embrace
her cello in a new way, one that allows her to connect more deeply. The memory
of physically playing on the instrument is fully there. And yet when you do it
in real time after a period away, it feels like that's not exactly how I
remembered it. You've moved on as a person and physically, mentally,
spiritually, and you reconnect with this instrument that you know so well, and
yet it feels foreign at the same time until you find your new way. You settle
into your new relationship. You are one with the instrument again. Why are we
creating those notes? And how do we connect with the composer's emotions and his
thoughts that he's poured into the music? And that flow state just allows you to
fly off with that. Flow is one of the most evocative of experiences, a sense of
oneness with your skill, your surroundings, and the tools of your trade. To lose
access to this experience through injury or anything else is traumatic. It's
understandable that so many people in this position seek a pathway back. But
this isn't typically the instant return to form that makes for a neat and
satisfying storyline. More often, it's a jagged path full of compromises, but
this too can lead to its own kind of reinvention. I think there's a lot to
celebrate here about passion, about purpose, about the strangely intimate
relationships we can forge with inanimate objects, and also, of course, about
the nature of reinvention. Obstacles don't need to be the end. They can denote
new beginnings. And true flow may be found when our passions serve our physical
and emotional needs. Now on Radio 4, it's time for Bells on Sunday, which this
week comes from the Cathedral Church of St Mary the Virgin with St Paul in
Blackburn, Lancashire. Raised to a cathedral when the Diocese of Blackburn was
created in 1926, there's been a church on this site since Saxon times. By 1818,
the parish church buildings were in such disrepair that a new parish church was
built and an old ring of six bells transferred from the old to the new parish
church. Today, there are ten bells cast in 1949 by John Taylor of Loughborough,
with a tenor weighing 25 and a quarter hundred weight, tuned to D. We now hear
the heaviest eight bells ringing Bristol's Surprise Major. Those were the bells
of the Cathedral Church of St Mary the Virgin with St Paul in Blackburn in
Lancashire. The shipping forecast is coming up next. So on BBC Radio 4. Now the
shipping forecast issued by the Met Office on behalf of the Maritime and Coast
Guard Agency at 0015 on Monday the 27th of February. There are warnings of gales
in Soll and Shannon. The general synopsis at 1800. High Scotland, 1035. Expected
Cromarty, 1039 by 1800 Monday. The area forecasts for the next 24 hours. Viking,
northerly or northwesterly, three to five, occasionally six in east. Showers,
good. North Utsira, south Utsira, forties. Northerly or northwesterly, four to
six. Showers, good. Cromarty, variable two to four. Fair, good. Fourth, north or
northeast, two to four, occasionally five later. Showers later, good. Tyne,
Dogger, north or northeast, three to five. Showers, good. Fisher, northerly,
four to six, four to six, becoming variable three or less in east. Fair, good.
German Bight, northerly, three to five, becoming variable two to four for a
time. Showers, good. Humber, northeast, three to five. Showers, good. Thames,
northeast, four to six. Showers, good. Dover, white. East or northeast, four to
six, increasing seven for a time. Showers, good. Portland, Plymouth, east or
northeast, four to six. Showers in south, good. Biskey, northeast, four to six,
occasionally seven until later. Mainly fair, good. Trafalgar, north or
northwest, four to six. Rain later in west, good, occasionally moderate later in
west. South Fitzroy, easterly or northeasterly, four to six, occasionally seven
in east. Mainly fair, good, occasionally poor later in west. North Fitzroy,
sole, easterly or southeasterly, five to seven, occasionally gill eight later in
far west sole. Rain later in west, good, occasionally moderate later in west.
Lundy, east or northeast, three to five. Fair, good. Fastnet, east or northeast,
four to six. Fair, good. Irish Sea, east or northeast, three to five. Fair,
good. Shannon, southeasterly, five to seven, occasionally gill eight in far
west. Mainly fair, good. Rockle, southerly or southeasterly, four to six,
occasionally seven until later in west. Fair, good. Malin, southerly or
southeasterly, three or four, occasionally five in west. Fair, good. Hebrides,
easterly or southeasterly, two to four, occasionally five in west. Fair, good.
Bailey, southerly, four to six, occasionally seven in far southwest. Fair, good.
Fair Isle, west becoming variable, two to four. Fair, good. Faroes, south or
southwest, three to five. Fair, good. South-east Iceland, southerly or
southwesterly, four to six. Showers, good, occasionally moderate. We turn now to
the weather reports from coastal stations for 2300. Tyree Automatic, south-east
three, 19 miles, 1036, rising slowly. Stornoway, east by north one, 16 miles,
1036, rising slowly. Lerwick, north-west by west two, 32 miles, 1034, now
falling. Wake Automatic, west-northwest one, 12 miles, 1036, now falling.
Aberdeen, calm, 14 miles, 1036, rising slowly. Lookers, west-northwest one, nine
miles, 1036, rising slowly. Boomer, north-north-east three, 1035, rising slowly.
Bridlington, north by east three, 1032, rising slowly. Sandetti Light Vessel
Automatic, north-east by east six, 11 miles, 1029. Greenwich Light Vessel
Automatic, 11 miles, 1028. St Catherine's Point Automatic, north by east two,
1029, rising slowly. Jersey, north-east four. Channel Light Vessel Automatic,
north-east by east six, 1028. Silly Automatic, east-north-east four, 19 miles,
1030, now falling. Milford Haven, north-east three, 30 miles, 1032, rising
slowly. Aberporth, east by north two, 24 miles, 1033, rising slowly. Valley,
north-east two, 12 miles, 1034, rising slowly. Liverpool Crosby, north-east two,
7 miles, 1034, rising slowly. Valencia, east-south-east three, 22 miles, 1030,
rising more slowly. Ronaldsway, north-north-east three, 1034, rising slowly.
Mallinhead, south-east by south three, 19 miles, 1035, now falling. Macrohanish
Automatic, south-east by east two, 30 miles, 1035, rising slowly. Here's the
weather forecast for the inshore waters of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
valid for the following 24 hours issued by the Met Office at 2300 on Sunday 26th
February. The general situation, a large area of intensifying high pressure will
be slow moving near Northern Scotland with strong north-easterly winds affecting
some southern areas at times. Cape Wrath to Rattray Head including Orkney.
Variable, mainly north, two to four. Fair. Good. Rattray Head to Berwick-upon-
Tweed. North or north-east, two to four. Fair. Good. Berwick-upon-Tweed to
Whitby. North or north-east, three to five. Showers. Good. Whitby to Gibraltar
Point. North or north-east, three to five. Fair, then showers. Good. Gibraltar
Point to North Forland. Northerly or north-easterly, four or five, occasionally
six and south. Showers. Good. North Forland to Selsey Bill. Easterly or north-
easterly, four to six. Showers near North Forland. Good. Selsey Bill to Lime
Regis. East or north-east, four to six. Fair. Good. Lime Regis to Land's End
including the Isles of Scilly. East or north-east, four to six. Showers later.
Good. Land's End to St David's Head including the Bristol Channel. East or
north-east, three to five. Showers for a time. Good. St David's Head to Great
Ormhead including St George's Channel. East or north-east, three to five. Fair.
Good. Great Ormhead to the Mull of Galloway. East or north-east, two to four,
occasionally five later. Fair. Good. Isle of Man. East or north-east, two to
four, occasionally five later. Fair. Good. Loch Foyle to Carlingford Loch. East
or south-east, two to four. Fair. Good. Mull of Galloway to Mull of Kintyre
including the Firth of Clyde and North Channel. Variable, mainly easterly, two
to four. Fair. Good. Mull of Kintyre to Ardnamurchan Point. Variable, mainly
south-east, two to four. Fair. Good. Ardnamurchan Point to Cape Wrath. Variable,
three or less. Fair. Good. And Shetland Isles. North or north-west, becoming
variable for a time, two to four. Showers for a time. Good. And that completes
the Shipping Bulletin. The storyteller and satirist David Sedaris returns to
Radio 4. I thought I'd support the movement the way I had become accustomed to,
by donating money and then telling people I'd donated twice as much. The author
shares his incisive humour and social critiques of modern life and himself. The
moment I got my first vaccine, I started thinking of the coronavirus the way I
think of scurvy. Something from a long ago time, something that mainly pirates
get. A new series of Meet David Sedaris, your Thursday evening comedy at 6.30 on
Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. And with that, we've reached the end of our schedule for
the day, which means we'll be handing over to the BBC World Service to take us
through until 20 past five, when we'll be back with the next Shipping Forecast
and News Briefing. Some other listening options for you if you're staying up.
Phil Williams is live through the night on Radio 2 and on Radio 3 there's music
from the German Symphony Orchestra Berlin. Thanks very much for listening. This
is Ron Brown at Broadcasting House in London. From me, my colleague Alan Smith
in the newsroom and the team here at Radio 4, I hope you have a very calm and
restful night and a good start to the week. Good night. And until next time, bye
for now.