TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-15H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 for at 7.15 and you can listen to past episodes on BBC Sounds. BBC News at two
o'clock. The head of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, says she's
looking forward to a new chapter with the UK as she prepares to finalise a new
deal with Rishi Sunak on post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland.
The hope is the deal will remove some border checks on goods, making it easier
for companies in Northern Ireland to trade with the rest of the UK. A former DUP
member of the Stormont Assembly, Jim Wells, says formal trade rules are not
necessary. 94% of our trade is within the UK and will stay there and we don't
see why there should be any meddling whatsoever in that trade. The 6% could be
dealt with under a trusted trader status that the company's doing will sign an
undertaking that its goods will be compliant with EU rules and the vast majority
of goods produced in the UK are already compliant because not only are they used
within the UK, they're exported to the rest of the EU. So therefore we're using
a bit of a sledgehammer to crack a nut here. The new IRA said it carried out the
shooting of a senior police officer in Oma on Wednesday. Detective Chief
Inspector John Caldwell, who's 48, suffered serious injuries when he was
attacked after coaching young footballers. Six people have been arrested. It's
thought more than 100 migrants may have died when their boat sank in rough seas
off the coast of southern Italy yesterday. At least 62 people are confirmed to
have drowned and it's believed around 200 people were on board the vessel. The
energy regulator Ofgem has cut the price that suppliers can charge customers for
gas and electricity from April, after wholesale costs fell. The cap will drop by
nearly Â£1,000 for an average bill. But households in England, Scotland and Wales
will still see their bills rise because the government's help is expected to
become less generous. The Food Minister Mark Spencer has asked supermarket
chiefs to explain what they're doing to end the shortages of some fresh fruit
and vegetables. Lidl has become the latest supermarket chain to restrict sales
of certain fresh produce. BBC News. Our drama this afternoon explores the
journey of many former radicals from the far left to the die-hard right. May
Days by David Edgar is at a quarter past. But now, got some time on your hands?
Lower Loxley needs volunteers. It's the Arches. What do you think? It's a bit
close to the one at the Arboretum. How about here? Oh that's better. What's
going on? Oh hey Nolotando. It's for our volunteer recruitment day. Your what? I
did tell you about it. Did you? Yeah, last week. Not everyone's as obsessed with
this as you are Freddie. Haven't you come to give us some moral support? I was
just hoping we could hang out. Oh is it all getting a bit much in Ambridge? No
Lily, I wouldn't say that. But I was ready for a change of scene. Perhaps we
could do that some other day. How long are you staying? I go back on the 10th.
When's that? Week Friday. That's as much compassionate leave as I could get.
Then the house hunt starts. Well, flat hunt probably. Not planning to stay on
with your dad and Zipo? No way. I mean when you've been used to having your own
place. So you'll have some time after the funeral? It might be a bit less
stressed then. Maybe. Have you seen much of your granddad? Not a lot. Everyone's
pretty worried about him. Alice is going to take special care of him on the day.
Oh good idea. Poor Brian. Poor Brian. And so how's this recruitment thing going
to work? Ah well it's a drop-in day. Anyone who's interested can find out what
volunteering at Lower Loxley entails. From you guys? And Cliff and Diane. Yeah,
two of our longest serving volunteers. They'll be here any minute. They can
explain what it's like being part of the team. Sounds good. Ah, but I have a
cunning plan. The people coming might not realise but will also be looking at
them to assess how suitable they are. Hmm, I guess you can't just have anybody
representing the place. Well, not everyone's in the front line. There are
different sorts of roles. Yeah, so if someone seems promising but shy, we can
find them something behind the scenes. Or if they're confident and have good
people skills, then they can fill a public facing role like tour guide. Oh, is
this your first customer? No, no. Hello Cliff, thank you for coming. Oh my
pleasure, oh dear why? Oh, you can hang your things up on the coat rail. So what
does he do? Self-appointed chief tour guide. We're especially on the lookout for
more guides. Like Cliff? No, no, no, no, not, not like Cliff. He's only doing
this because I can't get rid of him. He knows his Lower Loxley history though.
Yeah, because he's seen most of it first hand. That's a bit unfair. The trouble
is he's been here so long he thinks there's only one way of doing things. That's
why I'm looking for younger volunteers. Freddie had a rather challenging
encounter with him the other week. Most of our guides are pretty ancient. I
wouldn't say ancient. No wonder young people stare away from the house in
droves. I thought you've got plenty of families visiting. Yeah, for the rare
breeds of the treetop walk. But the house is the core of what Lower Loxley has
to offer. I want it to be for everyone. We have plenty of school parties coming
round. Uh yeah, and who are they faced with? One foot in the grave over there.
You think they might relate better to someone younger? They're bound to, aren't
they? What's he doing now? What does it look like? Don't you provide your guides
with hot drinks? Of course. Cliff always likes to bring his own flask. Probably
got his medication in it. What I've been trying to explain to Freddie is that
older people are more likely to be available. If they're retired you mean. And
the guides have to have a genuine interest in history. Actually, uh, Nolotando,
maybe you could help with that. Me? Well you're a history teacher. You could
help screen the hopefuls. What? Set an exam? No, no, just, just, uh, have a
friendly chat. One historian to another. Would that be all right? Totally. Mum
made me head of volunteering. A temporary volunteer coordinator. Whatever. The
point is I'm in charge. So yes, it would be a huge help. Well, to be fair, it
doesn't sound like you've got much else on today. That's true. All right then.
Excellent. Time to find some fresh blood. What you said in your sermon about
giving things up for Len. Yes. Got me thinking, Alan, in the olden days. Olden
days? I mean, I mean before I was baptized. Oh right. When I gave things up
like, I don't know, chocolates or booze, the fact that it was Len didn't really
mean anything. It's just another month, like dry January. So things are
different now? Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's got a lot more significance. I'm not just
doing it for myself. That's great, Harrison. So what have you given up? Being a
slave to work. Interesting. Well, particularly since I got promoted, it's just
taken over more and more of me life. It's just, it's one of those jobs where
there's always something extra you can be doing. You do very important work. Oh,
but the more I give to the job, the less I've got for other people. Last few
months, all I seem to do is graft, come home and fall asleep in front of the
telly. Oh, you sagging Fallon's choir. Fallon's choir at Christmas, didn't you?
Well, by the skin of my teeth, we had to cancel stuff with my mum and dad so I
could, and even then I couldn't get to all the rehearsals. And you have kindly
agreed to re-hang the curtain in the lady chapel. Oh, that's a ten minute job.
I'll come back later with me tool box. Thank you. No, it's, it's more, I've seen
how much Fallon gets out of organizing these village events, so I'm going to see
if there's something I can get involved in. Ah, sorry to interrupt. Oh, it's all
right, Neil. Just wanted to check, Harrison, if you might be available for
ringing on Friday. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. I'm, I'm going to the funeral
anyway. Oh, I thought you might. I'd like to do grand sire triples to mark
Jennifer's passing, so it'd be good to have a full tower. I know I haven't been
a very loyal ringer lately. Oh, that's all right. I was just saying I'm trying
to rebalance my life. I'd like to do a bit more for the community. Oh, well,
have you considered volunteering at Lower Loxley? Oh, they've got a recruitment
day on today. Well, I thought I might go along, see what's what. Right. Details
are on their website, if you fancy it. Okay. So anyway, I'll see you Friday, if
not before. Definitely. Thanks, Neil. Bye then. Bye-bye, Neil. Bye. So, are you
going to follow in Neil's footsteps? It's not really the sort of thing I had in
mind. No. But with Easter coming up and the coronation, there must be something
I can get involved in, or even take charge of. I'm sure there will be, Harrison.
Yeah. Now then, if you're not rushing off to Lower Loxley, as you know, we've
stopped putting out biscuits because of Lent, but we can still offer coffee and
conversation. Yeah? Well, ever since I stopped being chair of the parish
council, I suppose, I've been looking for another way I could give something
back. That's really interesting, Neil. So, you feel that being a volunteer here
would be giving back? Well, it's part of our heritage, isn't it? It can't be
easy keeping a place like this going. Believe me, it isn't. Is it, Freddie? I
mean, we manage. So, if I can help in some small way... Oh, very good. Um, not a
tandem? Oh, I don't think we need to bother... Yes, Neil. When you say heritage,
is that something you're interested in? Well, yeah, I'd say so, yeah. And how do
you pursue this interest? Well, I've lost count of the times I must have visited
this place, and I like to read about local history. Excellent. Like, you know
that book your grandma wrote with John Tregor and Ambridge and English Village
Through the Ages? Do you know it? Of course. It's very good. In part. I will
challenge some of the assumptions, though. Really? In what way? The chapter on
the Civil War. We don't really want to take up any more of Neil's time, though,
do we? So, thank you. And what other experience could you bring to the role?
Well, plenty. Um, 26 years on the parish council. I'm a church warden and tower
captain, of course. Sorry? Bell-ringing. Oh. And I'm in a management position at
Barrow Farm. But you've no direct experience of, say, uh, talking to school
parties, though, do you? Oh, no, not as such. But I've had kids of my own, and
I've got grandkids. It wouldn't frighten me. Of course it wouldn't. Did you have
any more questions, Neil? No, no, no. You've given me quite a grilling, I must
say. In that case, I'm sure we'll be in touch about the next stage. Oh, OK.
Well, that'd be great. Thanks all. No, thank you. Bye, Neil. Bye. See you. Who
says we're going to be in touch? You'd be mad not to. Neil's a lovely man, good
with people, and he'd obviously take the job very seriously. Yeah, but he'd be
just the same as all our other volunteers. If we want to attract a wider range
of visitors, we really need to find a few guides below bus pass age. But as Lily
said, availability is an issue. Maybe. But we're not going to revitalise Lower
Loxley if we just recruit more clones of Diane and Cliff. Beggars can't be
choosers, Freddie. Can I remind you we've been here for two hours and we've had
interest from precisely one person. Everyone seems to be planning to come on
Friday. Yes. Well, that's a good thing, isn't it? Oh, no, absolutely. It's
really rather silly, but... What? I can't help feeling a little nervous about
it. You? You must have done hundreds of funerals. Oh, well, I have. I mean, this
one does feel a bit different, though. How so? Well, there's always an extra
dimension when it's someone who's been a friend. Oh, I can see that. You know,
there are times when I just like to be in the congregation, paying my respects.
Sure. Especially since I lost my first wife. I do feel for Brian. Oh, it's only
natural. Of course, there's also been tension between me and the Aldridges over
this proposed window. I had heard something. And not that long ago, Kate was
threatening to report me to the bishop when I lost my rag about Chris and Amy. I
remember that. Yeah. I'd hate to imagine her reaction if I messed something up.
You won't, though, surely? Oh, has been known, Harrison. I once got the name of
the deceased wrong. No. Yeah. Her name was Annabelle and I called her Jezebel.
Oh, Alan, how did that happen? No idea. It just slipped out. I mean, Jezebel of
all names. Oh, no. Funerals are a day that families never forget. I really have
to get this one right. Cheer up, Freddy. It was worth a try. It didn't really go
as I'd hoped. You had a few people through. A handful, Nolotando. I thought I'd
be, you know, picking the cream of the crop. Yes. Flo Button seemed quite keen
on helping in the office. And you've got two good contenders for public roles.
Oh, you can't be serious. Oliver's even older than Cliff. Where's my fresh
bland? If you're that bothered, you could try a different approach. Like what? I
don't know. A social media campaign? Hand out flyers in nightclubs. Do a stunt
on TikTok. You're being silly now. Or you could just accept that's the way
things are. No. If I'm going to prove myself to mum, I can't just recruit a
couple more wrinklies. Oh, splendid. Oh, like I said, 10 minute job. I'm very
grateful. You know, Alan, I was thinking on what you were saying earlier. About?
When you've got personal feelings, but you've also got a job to do. Oh, must be
quite a familiar experience for a police officer. More often than I'd like to
admit. When I'm raging inside about someone's done, but I've got to follow
procedure. And you can't let the emotion detract from what you're there to do.
Yeah. The best thing I can do in that moment for everyone involved is just, and
it's a big just, do my job. Absolutely. Obviously, Friday's going to be a big
occasion, but if the Aldridges felt awkward, they wouldn't have asked you to do
the service, would they? Good point. I think you can relax about it. Yeah, I'll
try to remember that. At the end of the day, though, it's not about me, is it?
No, it's about Jennifer and the people she's left behind. We'll be back in
Ambridge this evening at seven o'clock when Kate needs a sounding board. You
just said you failed. You are the Lord Mayor of Manchester. Are you that poet?
Tony Walsh? As the British playwright David Edgar celebrates his 75th birthday,
we begin a new three-part series based on his epic political drama May Days,
first produced by the Royal Shakespeare Company, with hopes for the better post-
war world fading, the young idealists of the 1960s turn to revolutionary
politics, but at what cost? May Days, New Jerusalem by David Edgar. Of all May
Days, we celebrate the achievements of the international working class. The
Daily Worker, 2nd May 1945. Young Communist League activist J.H Crowther, 17,
addresses an enthusiastic May Day crowd in Leicester. Fascism has been defeated.
The war is won. At last we can build a future of peace and progress. 26th of
July, Labour election landslide. We face a new era, says Attlee. Question mark.
14th of August, 1947. At the midnight hour, India awakes to life and freedom.
Tick, tick, tick. We communists have been asked a thousand times what we mean by
socialism, as throughout the world the toiling masses rise to forge the new
Jerusalem, we can at last say, this is what we meant. Me in my Army Cadet Corps
uniform. Wearing my ban the bomb badge. In the rain. 3rd of December, 1962. Er,
Glass, isn't it? Glass, Martin B, yes sir. I'm Mr Crowther, Jeremy H. I teach
General Studies. Yes sir. It's pretty wet out here, Glass. Yes, it is that, sir.
Now you're in St Augustine, am I right? No, sir. Sir Thomas More. I see. Well,
um, whatever. Shouldn't you be there? I mean, parade fell out, what, best part
of two hours ago. Glass, what are you doing here? I was ordered to stay here,
sir. After fallout, sir. By Mr Sands, the adjutant. Yes. Why? Gross disrespect
for the Queen's uniform, sir. Um, you mean the badge? And did Mr Sands give any
indication of how long? Till further notice, sir. I see. You know, the badge,
it's interesting. The shape, I mean, the actual construction of the symbol. Is
it, sir? Yes, it's very clever. The, um, two arms at the bottom are the
semaphore for N, nuclear. The top bit is the semaphore for D, disarmament. The
middle as a whole is the broken cross, symbolic of the death of man. While the
circle you see represents the unborn child. Look, this is madness. You'll catch
your death. I think you must come in. Is that an order, sir? Well, if you like.
It's not really a question of what I like. All right, then, it's an order. Sir!
Look, glass. Tea was two hours ago. Sir Thomas More is miles away. My cottage is
just over there. I think you ought to get something hot to drink. Yes, sir.
Bloody right. So, what did he say, then? Who, sir? Mr Sands. In summary, loyalty
to queen and country, better dead than red, send all the darkies home. And if
you don't agree with that, it's because your people are too la-dee-da. And are
they? No, sir. My pa's a vicar. They can hardly pay the fees. I'm sorry.
Horlicks? Thanks. Why do they keep you here, then? Oh, I think some sad,
pathetic concept of propriety. My mother's concept, that is. Military stock.
She's a very proper woman. I mean, like the vicarage is next door to a US Air
Force base, bang in the firing line. So she supports the annihilation of the
species as a simple point of social etiquette, you know? I mean, they've got a
1957 Morris Oxford, and when they come to speech day, she insists they park it
half a mile away and walk so as not to show me up, as if I cared. You sound as
if you care. Well, it makes me angry, as if it mattered where I came from. And
the bomb? That makes you angry, too? Not in the same way, no, sir. That's
because I think the cause is right. As I imagine you think, too. Well, as it
happens, I have sat down in my time. Then I imagine you'd resent as much as I do
the idea you only want to ban the bomb because of who your people are, that you
don't think what you think, and you don't feel what you feel. Um, uh, glass.
Look, sir, I'm sorry, but it has been quite a day. Do you have a light? A light?
Sir, a light to light my cigarette. Look, glass, strictly speaking... They're
terribly bad for you. I'm always keen to see, sir, how far people are prepared
to go. Well, are you now? It's particularly interesting to me how you end up
teaching here at all. Why is that? Being a communist and so on. Um, what makes
you...? Wavish, Roger P and Sir Isaac Newton, has this pa who was a Red at
Trinity, Trinity, Cambridge, and for a birthday present he gave me a copy of The
Daily Worker for the day that I was born. May 2nd, 1945. I assume that you're
the same J.H. Crowther, sir? Speaking to an enthusiastic crowd in Leicester,
throughout the world the toiling masses rise to forge the New Jerusalem. I mean,
a band of bomber, you could just be a Methodist or a Nudist or a Vegetarian, but
actually a communist, actually in the party. Wavish and I view that as really
cool. Well, I'm afraid I'm not in the party anymore. Why not, sir? Because I
left it over hungry. Communist hungry? Yes, sir. Hence the Soviet invasion in
1956, suppressing democratic reform. Which our party decided it approved of. The
invasion, that is, not the reform. Why? All right. They sent this apparatchik up
from London to explain the party line, accusing those brave, wild
revolutionaries in the streets of Budapest of being objectively the agents of
American imperialism. And I joined the party to liberate the oppressed. The
toiling masses rising. And here it was telling me I have to back the people
doing the oppressing. And I thought, oh, come on, do you really want this man to
run the country? And I left. But surely, sir, you're still a socialist. Well, I
suppose... I mean, you haven't left the left. Look, I'm not Wavish Senior. I
wasn't a Reddit Trinity. In fact, I was born in Mansfield, and I went to grammar
school and I had a lady teacher whose husband had died fighting for the
Republicans in Spain in 1936 when I was eight. And the reason why he had gone
was his unshakable belief that once the world was liberated from the shackles of
the capitalist system, every worker could become an Aristotle or a Michelangelo.
Oh, Christ. And then when I was 17... Like me. Like you, we'd won the war and
got our Labour government, which set about to free the toiling masses from the
poverty and misery which I'd seen around me in the 30s. And indeed, the workers
got their national assistants and their council houses and the National Health
Service, but also unthinkable material prosperity. All those television sets and
tumble dryers, even Mini Coopers. But... But I have to say, I wondered... I
still wonder if all that was really what we meant at all. You mean as opposed
to... No, look, Glass, it's nearly curfew. As opposed to every brickie being
Aristotle. Well, perhaps that was a silly way of putting it. Oh, do you really
think so, sir? Because it seems to me, sir, there's a danger. You can see the
mass of people just as victims of the poverty and misery, passive and inert, but
just because the Communists have let the revolution down, let you down, does
that mean we have to give up on the whole idea? Well, of course, I haven't.
Couldn't there be other ways for the workers to build socialism and other people
who might help them to do it? Young people, black people, people who we haven't
thought of. And if those people, all those people, really cracked the shackles
of the system for themselves, who knows how many Michelangelos could bloom? I'm
sorry, sir. No, no. But I'm with you. I'm with the brave, wild revolutionaries
in Hungary, and I'm sure if I was you, I'd want to be a Red at Trinity or
anywhere who'd fought with the Republicans in Spain. Thanks for the Horlicks,
sir. Good night. Glass Martin. Go to America. If I had a hammer, I'd a hammer in
the morning I'd a hammer in the evening Seize the Time, From Resistance to
Rebellion, by Martin Glass. Stick Up, 8th April 1968. In 1962, when I was 17, 59
young Americans met in Port Huron, Michigan, to draw up a manifesto for a body
called Students for a Democratic Society. A new left, freed from loyalty to the
Soviet Union, dedicated to the liberation of all humankind from exploitation and
oppression. Starting now. I have a dream, declares Martin Luther King in
Washington, 29th August 1963. In America, I saw young men and women, some the
children of former Communists, many Jewish, marching, riding, fighting, and
sometimes dying alongside Negro activists to desegregate the South. Three civil
rights workers murdered in Mississippi, 1964. Civil rights marchers attacked by
police, Selma, Alabama. I met students, insisting on their right to campaign for
civil rights on campus, fighting the drafting of students into the army,
stopping the war machine by any means necessary. Me, blocking troop train,
Northern California, June 1967. Seeing the future of the revolution with the
marginalised and the excluded, the liberation armies of the Third World and the
First, the children of the enemy prefiguring the New Jerusalem, bringing down a
president. I shall not seek, and I will not accept, the nomination of my party
for another term as your president. Don't you want somebody to love? Don't you
need somebody to love? And for me, child of the enemy, becoming a new person,
never going home. Power to the people, teaching, Great Hall, 9am to 7pm, 13th
May, 1968. Comrades, my name is Gray, and I'm on the central committee of an
organisation called Socialist Vanguard. Comrade, this is an extraordinary
meeting, and it is a measure of the extraordinary epoch through which we are
moving. As countless speakers have stated here today, we have witnessed over the
last five months events that would have seemed unthinkable even a year ago. In
the new year, a guerrilla peasant army fights its way into the US embassy in the
capital of South Vietnam. As a result, in March, the President of the United
States effectively resigns. April. April. The assassination of Martin Luther
King provokes uprisings across America, and now, today, in France, not just
protesting students, but striking workers pose a challenge not only to this
government or that, but to the power and legitimacy of the state itself. And
even here, today. But, comrades, forgive me for one note of caution. Comrades,
read the writings on these walls. Don't demand. Occupy. Yes, that's fine.
Victory to the Viet Cong. That's good, too. We don't just want peace in Vietnam,
but American defeat. The revolution is the festival of the oppressed. That's
very good indeed. But, in fact, it's only half the story. It's a quote from
Lenin. Yes? Yes, I'm afraid so. Lenin, let me read the whole of it to you.
Revolutions are festivals of the oppressed and exploited. At such times, the
people are capable of performing miracles. But we shall be traitors and
betrayers of the revolution if we do not use the festive energy of the masses to
wage a ruthless and self-sacrificing struggle for the direct and decisive path.
Right on with that. Yes. What is that path? Where should we go? What is to be
done? Let me explain. I don't believe this. So, then, what do you think? Of
what? The Romeo? Yes. What exactly is it doing in my kitchen? It's a duplicator.
I got it knocked down from the Catholic Association. Apparently, they need the
cash for a trip to Lourdes. They should have sacked this along as well. Try
giving it a bash. Are they Maria? Amanda! Martin. What's this? Phil's
duplicator, my kitchen. Right on. Hi, Phil. How was the conference? Weren't you
there? Tanya's three. Of course I wasn't there. I was there for the course.
Mowis all morning, trots all afternoon. Which trots? Socialist vanguard. Take
care, sir. You speak of the party I love. Yeah, I meant to ask you about that.
What? Why I'm in SV? No, why you haven't tried recruiting me since Friday. I may
have changed my strategy. Finished. What do you think? Students strike, all out
on Tuesday. No more exams. Good day. Far out. Crazy, adventurous, but far out.
Facts of ten. Don't tell me you're tempted. What by? Joining SV, the wicked
trots. Why shouldn't I be tempted? Because I'll tell you what they'll say. We're
not like the commies. We don't do labour camps or purges. Our hero's Trotsky,
for Christ's sake, and Stalin did him in. But come down to it, like Trotsky,
they're all for the party line. Ends justifying means. Revolutionary discipline.
Dick down, it's power. Just the same. Yeah, well, you know what they say about
socialist vanguard? If you want to be a member, they tell you the ten funniest
jokes in the history of the world. And if you don't smile once... You're in!
Good evening. I'm James Grain. Oh, yes, hello. And I assure you I'm a laugh a
minute. Sit down, James. Thank you. And you're Martin Glass? I am. And this is
Phil. My temporary lodger. And yes, Martin, who's my permanent lodger, allegedly
working on his MA in the anti-war movement in America. Actually working on his
MA? Yes, I read his pieces. What was it? Insurrection? Stick up. Seize the time
from resistance to revolution. Yes. So? Tell him. Tell me what? Amanda thinks it
might be time you joined. Surprise, surprise. Joined what? A revolutionary
organisation. Does she have one in mind? Socialist vanguard is a revolutionary
grouping of militant youths, students, intellectuals and, above all, workers.
We're not to be confused with the Socialist Alliance, from whom we split, or the
left opposition, who split from us, or the workers' struggle, who split from
them, or with the League for Revolutionary Socialism, who never split at all.
They just burn people out. Hence the ten funniest jokes joke, which was first
used about them when you were still in nappies. All clear so far? Yes,
absolutely. What's the difference? They're wrong. We're right. Right about what?
Well, where to start? I would say, primarily, we're right in being
internationalists, in ascribing the failure of the Soviet revolution to Stalin's
attempt to build socialism in one country. Not the purges and the show trials
and the labour camps. Of course not the show trials and the camps. But we're
also right to put no faith in this or any other Labour government and their
doomed pursuit of the parliamentary road to socialism. And their craven support
for the Americans. And we're right, too, to believe that the worldwide uprising
of young people against that war in Vietnam, what you describe so elegantly in
your articles about America, is in some ways a genuinely revolutionary
phenomenon. No, no, no. I'm going to watch the news. Oh, I couldn't put it
better myself. Believing that you can build the new Jerusalem within the very
belly of the monster, in the here and now, that if you don't live the revolution
every day, then the revolution that you make will unmake you. I think, in fact,
that is how I put it. How do you agree? I think, in fact, about your articles,
the word I used was elegant. Go on. Because our fundamental difference with you
is that we see the essential agent of the revolution not as students or hippies,
but as a working class of the capitalist West, just as Marx and Lenin said.
Well, as I understand it, the agent of the current uprising in Paris... The
students. Certainly. The children of the enemy. And, in fact, it all kicked
off... With protests over male and female students' dormitory arrangements at
the University of Nanterre. Absolutely. But if you're serious about a
revolution, then it can't end there. Which is why we're in the business of
turning anarchists and hippies into revolutionary socialists. Because if we
don't, then the question is, where will they be in five years' time? When the
festival's over and it's back to the long haul, where will you be? I'm sorry, I
don't understand. Well, they will find that in the long term all the communes
and collectors just won't work, that you actually can't build islands of pure
socialism in the capitalist sea. And when they realise that awful truth, they
will either drift back to the politics of their parents, or they'll take revenge
upon the inadequacies of the world by turning to the bullet, the bomb, the
weapons of despair. So when you say the politics of my parents... I mean that
you wouldn't be the first young revolutionary who swerves back to the right in
middle age. And what makes you think that I'd do that? Oh, so it's legitimate to
ask? What sacrifices are you prepared to make to prove that you're serious about
all this, that I'm a real traitor to your class, that you're not just on
holiday? You think that I'm not serious? Um, I don't like to interrupt... What?
But there's all these revolutionary students on the streets of Paris. How many?
They say a million. And the general strike? Spreading. Right. Look, for 20 years
or so, the myth's been growing that the working class has been bought off by...
How did you put it? Television sets and tumble dryers. But do you know what's
happening? Catastrophe. The workers haven't heard that they've been bought off.
Someone forgot to tell them. Obviously, and millions of them are out on strike
in France today, which is why, although we have no truck with labour camps and
purges, we do believe in the need for revolutionary discipline to protect
ourselves from the very forces of the state which have been unleashed on the
students and the workers on the streets of France. Do you agree with this?
Martin, it would be wonderful if it could all be nice. Make love, not war.
Marchers singing We Shall Overcome as they shuffle through a dripping English
Easter afternoon. What, to protect the planet from destruction? Kind of like to
save the world? But there comes a point when you have to think about the people
on the other side. What other side? Like, my father-in-law is in the building
trade, employs three men and treats them better than he treats himself. How can
it possibly be moral, right or good to take that firm away from him? But the
point is that that little firm is just the bottom of a pyramid and at the top
sit General Motors, Standard Oil and Bank of America and he understands that if
they go, he goes. And there are millions like him. Little people owning their
own houses with privet hedges, carriage clocks and Morris miners and maybe a bit
of private income which they can't afford to lose. The kind of people who
supported Hitler in Germany not because they liked him, but because for them the
alternative was losing everything and who, come the crunch, will take up arms,
will fight and kill to keep it. Yeah, there is that phrase of Trotsky's. Oh,
what's that? Human dust. Deep down, just the same. Yes. Now, look, it's half
nine. Phil, do you fancy one before they close? Wild. Let's go. Told you. Told
you what? Oh. Human dust. Good night. Well, I guess it's only rock and roll. I
must go too. Oh, must you? Catch the last train. We've an emergency political
committee early in the morning. Well, of course. Unless... I've got some scotch,
I think, in case you'd like one for the road. Well, that might be very nice.
And, in fact... In fact, there is a train at 7.30 in the morning. Gets you into
London, oh, by 9.15. If you should care to. Oh, that might be even nicer. Here
you go. Father-in-law? We separated shortly after Tanya... Yes. It might be
nicer. Would be. Look... Yes, Martin? Look, the point is that I didn't mean... I
didn't mean... But I have decided... No. Well, history will have to model on
without you, Martin. 31st of March. French general strike reaches 10 million.
Tick, tick, tick. 20th of June. Gaullists... Gaullists? Win massive election
victory. This is Monday, 20th January, 1969. Today, Richard Nixon will be
inaugurated as the 37th President of the United States. So this is how I see it.
How it was. 1946, the Communists begin their guerrilla war in Vietnam. War of
liberation! In the war, trained by the Chinese, the Vietnamese Communists take
over the north of that country. The north finances and directs an insurgency by
the Communist Viet Cong against the south. Long live Ho Chi Minh! By 1965, we've
sent in 200,000 young Americans to protect it. War mongers! U.S. out! U.S. out!
In 1968, the Viet Cong New Year offensive kills thousands of civilians. Victory
to the Viet Cong! And now here, in 1969, an American professor is invited to
join a panel on these matters at a British university, which is occupied by
protesting students who think she shouldn't be allowed to. And the panel has to
be conducted in a sports hall under police guard. Yes! Yes! No! No, war mongers
on campus. M-U-N-G-E-R-S. The University of Life. Sadly, in fact, the University
of Leeds. Who's that? Excuse me. Excuse me! Yes? Who are you? My name's Jeremy
Crowther. I teach English studies. This is my office. Who are you? How did you
get in here? I walked in. Through the lobby? No, the mezzanine. It's easier from
where I park my car. Why do you ask? I'm sorry, Mr Crowther, but you shouldn't
have got in. Doctor. The building's occupied. I see. By who? By us. Who's us?
The Students' Union. I thought you had a building of your own. I'm sorry. What I
mean is... Good morning. The reason for this occupation is that the university
is allowing imperialist warmongers to speak on campus, namely Phyllis Weiner of
the American Committee... And you're a student here? No. I'm an outside
edutator. My name's Amanda. I'm a student here. Please, do take a leaflet. Well,
now, look, I'm sure it's most objectionable... Then why don't you object? But
I've got a class to give. Oh, go on, teacher. Be a traitor to your class. Are
you aware that in this document you have, at a cursory glance, split two
infinitives? What? And that the person whose free speech you are currently
suppressing, Phyllis 2L's Weiner, is a distinguished professor of international
relations at the University of Georgetown. A distinguished warmonger? Look, it's
very simple. Military propaganda... Yes, Amanda, I fully understand the casus
belli, but I must insist... Beg pardon? Casus what? It's an expression taken
from the Latin. Latin is a language spoken many years ago in Italy... My dad was
in the war. He was conscripted from a back-to-back in Huddersfield. He didn't
see an inside tattoo. He was 17. At 19, half his face was blown away on a beach
in Normandy called Gold. You take one step, I'll kick your balls in, sir. I
fought for this. I fought for you. Wrote books and articles, gave evidence to
commissions to cut a clearing in the groves of Academe for people just like you.
Well, thanks a bunch. Hey, they've sent the pigs in! Swarming through the
mezzanine! Well, there you are. Let's go. Enjoy your office, sir. Right. I
think... A letter. To the editor of the Times, etc. Dear sir, with regard to the
current wave of student protest... No, actually, start again. Dear sir,
following your report on the United States' moves towards dÃ©tente with the
Soviet Union, I would like to bring to your attention the case of P. M.
Lermontov. That's P for Pure Isle, M for Mayhem, L-E-R-M-O-N-T-O-V. A translator
in a Moscow research institute who has recently been sentenced to three years in
a labour camp for circulating a petition in support of protests against last
year's Soviet invasion of Czech... That's C-Z-E-C-H-O for Outrage, Slovakia. In
view of the hostility currently displayed by British student protesters, in
inverted commas, to dissident opinion... Yes, what? Dr J. H. Crowther. Yes,
officer. Have you seen a group of student protesters? That-a-way. Ta. Tonight,
American and South Vietnamese units will attack the headquarters for the entire
communist military operation in South Vietnam. This key control centre has been
occupied by the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong for five years in blatant
violation of Cambodian neutrality. May Day. This is not an invasion of Cambodia.
First May Day of the new decade and the President of the United States goes mad.
Martin? Amanda! Well, have we not had the very merriest of May Days? Oh, shit!
What's happened? What does it bloody look like? Phil, your head! Well, Amanda,
what's happened is the South African ambassador was addressing a meeting of some
neo-fascist Tory frat... I meant to Phil! Like me, part of a peaceful picket of
this noxious gathering... Shit! In protest against the upcoming all-white,
equally neo-fascist, apartheid cricket tour. Phil, you need to go to hospital.
I'm not going to no bloody hospital. Daddy! Well, at least let me join... Well,
I say peaceful, which it was, until the storm troopers of the West Midlands
Constabulary decided we were an obstruction to the highway. Phil, you know, you
really should... And resolved to set freedom of assembly back to the 11th
century. Who owns the hospitals? Well, we do. Phil, this may hurt. Hello, my
name's Martin Glass. I need a lawyer. Mummy! Oh, shit! Criminal or civil? Well,
that all depends which side. Mummy, please! Um, was anybody busted? You bet.
Yes, I'll hold. With the pigs in hot pursuit. Yes? I'm going back. What? You
mean they followed you? Mummy! Look, Phil, stay there. Yes, hence my ringing.
Mark, see ya. Hang on. Phil, you can't go. Watch me. I'll call you back. Look,
mate... Four years. Marching, chanting, give peace a chance. Well, a lot of
notice taken, eh? We've really had the bastards shaking in their shoes. OK,
mate, but still... Hey, you know why there'll never be a revolution in this
country? Because the revolutionaries don't think it's going to happen. And the
only people who do think it's going to happen are the ones who've got the job of
stopping it. Phil! But, oh, we've got the party, so, yeah, that's all sorted.
Mate, you can't go back. Dead right, mate, I'm never going back. Bombs and
bullets, weapons of despair. Tell that to the Black Panthers and the Viet Cong.
By any means necessary. Burn, babies, burn. Martin. Amanda, I'm going. Martin,
no. You heard him. Oh, I heard him. Bombs and bullets. Which, actually, on a day
like this, is an instinct you can understand. No, Martin, no. Today is May Day,
and we must remember all the May Days. The days when what we think should happen
did. The Paris Commune and the general strike, the Spanish Republic and Red
Barcelona, the Prague Spring and the May event in France. Which all flamed out,
right? And, of course, remember, we must absolutely not forget the superhuman
things the masses can achieve. Through revolutionary discipline. And, of course,
the party isn't always right. We make mistakes, but at least we have the tools
of understanding to be right. What are you saying? I'm saying, never be like
that. Like Phil. I'm saying, never be tempted by the anger. I'm not. It's
just... Martin, do you remember what James said? What, about the weapons of
despair? Good. Comrades, if they're not organised... Amanda, I've just spent the
afternoon....how they can drift off to the right. I'm drifting to the right? Oh,
piss off, man. I didn't say you were. I said you could. Not now, but in the
future, if there's nowhere else to go but home, could we bear that happening? So
what's his bloody number? Give me the phone. He'll kill me. Who will? Phil. This
is for Phil? Of course. Of course what? Of course I've thought about what James
Grain said. James? Me. I've got Martin Glass for you. A traitor to his class.
Join, baby. Join! Exhibit A. The people's chemistry. CommuniquÃ© number one. The
so-called Marxist parties tell you that the agent of the revolution is the
working class. But Marx got it wrong. 19th of June, 1970. Prime Minister Heath
promises to tame trade unions. Exhibit B. CommuniquÃ© number two. Capitalism has
mutated. Now the theatre of struggle is not the factory, but the supermarket.
The working class is owned by what it buys. 20th of November. BBC van bombed in
protest against Miss World. Of all things. Exhibit C. CommuniquÃ© number three.
The people's chemistry. Behind this consumer spectacle there lies an
increasingly sophisticated state machine of corruption, surveillance and
repression. It's co-option. Sergeant, please hand the suspect Exhibit D. August
1971. Internment without trial is introduced in Northern Ireland. What's this?
Why not just read it? CommuniquÃ© number four. We insist that state actions which
perpetuate bad housing, raise rents and evict the homeless from empty properties
are violent acts. Acts of revolutionary violence against the perpetrators of
such actions are thus justified. So I wrote this. You're claiming that I
duplicated this. Like I'm a duplicator. So what if I did? Well, first, because
it locks you into a conspiracy to cause an explosion at the country home of the
right honourable Hugh Trelawney, Minister of State for Housing. And for two,
because it's crazy. Phil. 9th January 1972. Miners' all-out strike. Blackouts,
flying pickets, Arthur Scargill and all that. Martin. Mr Crowther. Jeremy. So
you're in London now? Yes. A chair at UCL. Would you like a drink? No, thanks.
Unless you've got a bitter lemon or... Well, I'm sure I've something along those
lines. It's my effort at revolutionary discipline. Oh, yes, I see. Am I... I
don't recall you as a person that amenable to discipline. Well, people change.
Indeed they do. So you're in London too? That's right. Stoke Newington. Of
course. Do sit. And did you finish your MA? Ah, no. I see. So what... Oh, I'm
doing it full-time. The revolutionary bit? That's right. I've got this small
trust fund and it seemed the only thing to do. Well, it's your money. Yes,
that's what we felt. Oh, is there a Mrs Glass? The party? Please, do you have a
copy of the paper? Socialist vanguard. Now, you'd be fans of Chairman Mao? More
Leon Trotsky. Ah, all out for the miners. That's this bloody coal strike. Yes.
Oh, and bring the dairy murderers to justice. That'll be the IRA? No, that'll be
the British paratroops on bloody Sunday. And you think that's an argument that
cuts the mustard with the British working class? Why shouldn't it? I mean, I'd
assumed your average flying picket wouldn't give the time of day to an Irish
psychopath, or would he? I merely ask for information. Do you still smoke? Yes,
but not now. And yes, I think you're right. But it's remarkable how fast things
move. I mean, take this bloody coal strike. Who would have believed the poor old
working class, written off by everybody with their washing machines and cars and
tellies, passive and inert, would actually suddenly behave like heroes? Ah, yes,
is it not Lenin who reminds us... And who's to say in 12 months' time they
wouldn't do the same to get British imperialism out of Ireland? I'm sorry, you
were saying? Lenin? Lenin, actually. Forgive me, whenever I hear the word
imperialism, I reach straight for the bottle. John Lennon, isn't it? What is? A
working class hero is something to be. Why did you come and see me? I'm sorry, I
don't know what's happened. Well, you rang up and you asked me if I'd mind... I
meant to you. You could say I was brutally assaulted by the real world. I have a
friend who was brutally assaulted by the real police. I'm sorry. And has just
been jailed for ten years. Good God, whatever for? For running off a stencil on
his duplicator. Oh, yes, the bombings trial, the people's chemistry. They tried
to blow up, um, what was it? Cottage in the Cotswolds? Belonging to some
ludicrously junior minister of state? Yes, Hugh Trelawney, man who wrote the
housing bill. There's a campaign, Free Phil Mandrell. We're picketing the appeal
court in protest at his sentence and demanding his release, raising a petition.
And that's actually why I came to see you. Oh. Oh, dear. It being thought, in
fact, by me, distinguished man of letters, record of support for various
progressive causes. Silly of me. I'm sorry, how embarrassing for you. Do you
think he's innocent, your friend? I've really no idea. I've just stopped being
sorry. Was there a moment, road to Damascus, sudden burst of light? No, I don't
think so. No waking up one morning and, guess what, why don't we put the new
Jerusalem on hold, sell off all the council houses, send the blacks home, bomb
Russia? Well, if you insist, I think there was a Kronstadt moment. Kronstadt?
Sailors' uprising against the Bolsheviks, Petrograd, 1921. Put down by your hero
Trotsky, as it happens. And the moment? Oh, I assumed you knew. It's the moment
when you realise the revolution has eaten its own children, whether Kronstadt or
the purges and the show trials in the 30s, or Hungary. Yes, well, we've no truck
with that. Whilst for me it was an incident in October 1969 at Leeds University.
And the issue was, oh, I can't remember, banning something, or a visitor whose
views weren't to the student taste, and I thought, oh, come on, Jeremy, this
isn't what you meant at all. Well, it may not have been what you meant. And then
I learned about a Russian dissident called Lermontov who'd been arrested for the
crime of circulating a petition. A petition, I may say, not concerned with the
right of people to throw bombs at members of the government, but about the right
to public demonstration, a privilege which in this country is, as you know,
quite reverently protected. Not in my experience. And the man was sentenced to
three years in a labour camp for discrediting the system. And I thought, now,
that's the type of man I admire. I'm with the malcontents and the subversives. I
don't think I've changed. Well, I'm naturally very sorry. Naturally. But one
thing's clear, at least. What's that? A middle-class hero is something to be.
You know, the only thing you've said that gives me any hope at all What's that?
That this bomber is your friend. Because that means that your love for the whole
of humankind has not yet strangled quite your capacity to love the people whom
you actually know. Yes, you know, Jeremy, I think the real problem is you feel
the working class has let you down. What, by not all turning into Michelangelos?
No, the reverse. For not being proper victims. Not starving children, begging on
the scrap heap. Not the wretched of the earth, but people being uppity. Fighting
for their rights, like your students. I do think that's the problem, really.
Well, for you, of course, the problem comes, or will come, when the oppressed
stop being heroes. Who? Well, I don't know, the Viet Cong, the miners, your
bomb-throwing friend. I mean, who else are you hero-worshipping today? And
you're not hero-worshipping your dissident? Well, yes, I think he is a kind of
hero. And, interestingly, before he was a dissident, he served with Russian
military intelligence as a loyal member of the invading force in Hungary. Oh,
and what happened? Well, he clearly changed his mind. Yes. You know what strikes
me, Jeremy? What's that? That I was wrong. Well, mercy. That the thing that
really pisses you right off is that you weren't a Red at Trinity, to be quite
frank, sir. Bye. This is the BBC World Service. An imprisoned Soviet dissident,
Pavel Lermontov, has been convicted of smuggling out an expose of the Soviet
prison camp system. Already serving three years of hard labour for discrediting
the system, Lermontov has been sentenced to a further seven years for
circulating slanderous fabrications which defame the Soviet state. In Maydays by
David Edgar, Martin was played by Mark Quartley, Jeremy by Geoffrey Stretfield,
Amanda by Ellie Kendrick and James by Jonathan Forbes. Phil was Colin Ryan, Judy
Ruth Everett, Mrs Glass, Jane Slavin and Tanya, Ria Marshall. The Detective was
played by David Hounslow, The Policeman by Lloyd Thomas and The Newsreader by
Roger Ringrose. The Director was Toby Swift. Maydays was a BBC Audio production
for Radio 4. And Maydays.