TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-11H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at 10 o'clock. The former Health Secretary Matt Hancock has denied
claims that he failed to follow expert advice at the start of the pandemic,
which recommended that all residents going into care homes in England should be
tested for Covid. The Daily Telegraph, which has obtained a huge collection of
Mr Hancock's WhatsApp messages, alleges that he decided instead to only commit
to testing people going to care homes from hospitals. A spokesperson for the MP
said the claims were flat wrong, as our political editor Chris Mason reports.
Their view is that not only is this a partial account because it's merely the
text exchanges rather than the meetings and the minutes that took place and the
advice that was given away from WhatsApp screens, but they also say that the
proper forum for proper establishment of the facts here is the public inquiry
where all of the facts will be there rather than those just from WhatsApp which
they believe have been partially released to suit an agenda. Dozens of people
have died in northern Greece after two trains were involved in a head-on crash.
A passenger train derailed after it collided with a freight train and then
caught fire near the city of Larissa. More than 60 people are in hospital.
Police are continuing an extensive search for a missing baby near Brighton using
dogs, thermal imaging cameras and drones. The child's parents, Constance Martin
and Mark Gordon, have been arrested on suspicion of gross negligence
manslaughter but have not given any information about where the child might be.
Nationwide says UK house prices have seen their biggest annual fall for more
than 10 years, dropping by 1.1% in the year to February. The price of an average
property is now just over Â£250,000. The Building Society warned that it would be
hard for the market to regain much momentum in the near future. A record number
of people have volunteered to help in the training of guide dogs in response to
concerns about a national shortage. The charity, Guide Dogs, says more than
4,500 people have put themselves forward. BBC News At 11 o'clock this morning
you can hear the next episode of the Shamima Begum story. This week, Raka falls,
the so-called caliphate crumbles and a pregnant Shamima Begum is desperate to
come home. Josh Baker continues the story in an hour. And that hour is Women's
Hour with Nuala McGovern. Hello, yes, you are very welcome to Women's Hour.
Well, we have a superstar with us today, the actress, singer and songwriter
behind this. Stand up, take my people with me. Together we are going to a brand
new home. Far across the river, can you hear freedom calling? Calling me to
answer, gonna keep on keeping on. I'm gonna spread my wings. You might know
Cynthia Erivo from her role as Harriet Tubman in the 2020 film, which that song
Stand Up is from. She'll be joining me to talk about her brand new film where
she acts opposite none other than Idris Elba. And, you know, I was scrolling
through her Instagram feed last night and she sometimes posts working out really
hard while also singing beautifully. Quite an accomplishment. I want to know how
she does it. So I will ask that. But on the subject of working out, did you see
the photos of the Princess of Wales competing with her husband, Prince William,
in a spinning class? And she won, wearing heels, might I add, on that cycle. And
it got me to thinking, are you competitive with your partner? In what way? Is it
exercise or maybe something like Scrabble? Maybe it's who makes the best
lasagna, who gets the most sleep? I don't know. You tell me. Maybe it's parking
skills. The text for our programme is 84844 or on social media, we're at BBC
Women's Hour or you can indeed email us through our website. Some of you might
prefer to leave a voice note or a WhatsApp message. That's 03700 100444. Also,
when I stopped scrolling, I was also reading, Outside the Sky is Blue. Now, this
is a memoir by Christina Patterson looking at the intricacies of family
relationships. We're going to talk about how a sibling with a complex mental
illness can affect the whole family. Now, if this is something that is
resonating with you as I speak about it, please do get in touch. The text number
again, 84844 or on social media at BBC Women's Hour. But I want to begin with
eating disorders. According to BEAT, which is an eating disorder charity,
approximately 1.25 million people in the UK have an eating disorder and 75% of
them are female. Now, eating disorders are mental illnesses such as anorexia or
bulimia, where people use disordered eating behaviour as a way to cope with
difficult situations or feelings. The disorders impact men as well as women, but
in a smaller number. Today, there's a new podcast launching on BBC Sounds. It's
called The Way Up, where a woman called Molly tells the story of her anorexia
journey and thankfully recovery. But not everyone is so lucky. The Parliamentary
and Health Service Ombudsman UK, that is Rob Berens, he has warned that people
with eating disorders are being repeatedly failed by the system and that radical
changes need to be made to prevent future tragedies. And he said there actually
has been little progress made in the past six years since the publication of a
report that was called Ignoring the Alarms, also by the PHSO, which highlighted
failings in the services for people with disordered eating. Rob Berens joins us
now on Woman's Hour. Welcome, Rob. Good morning. Good to be with you. So that
report I mentioned was published in 2017. We're now in 2023. What were the
serious failings that you were highlighting and what you feel now has not been
addressed? Thank you. I remember this report very clearly because it was the
first big report that I published when I became the Ombudsman. And we were
shocked to find the state of dealing with eating disorders in the health
service, a shortage of expertise in eating disorders, partly because it was
insufficiently placed on the curriculum for medical training, inadequate
provision in the NHS with cut-offs between those who are 18 and under and those
who are adults and no continuity between those two things, and a lack of
continuity between community and inpatient provision. I'm afraid there was also
a lack of coordination between NHS Trust and other providers, given that people
move around the country and young people go to university, not always at home.
And finally, in addition to a lack of rigour in constructing care plans, there
was and still continues to be insufficient listening to the families of people
with eating disorders. So that makes for sobering reading, Rob. To bring our
listeners up to speed, in 2019, there was a response to that previous report.
They said eating disorders would be made a priority. But from what you're
telling me, there has been little progress made. Why? I don't think there are
villains in this case. The NHS is under great pressure. This is not a criticism
of individuals in the NHS. Some of the issues which we raised have been
addressed in terms of incremental development of the curriculum, greater
investment in mental health provision and the dissemination of good practice.
And certainly more money has been spent. So this represents some good work by
the delivery group of the NHS England and the GMC and others. But two things.
First of all, the select committee in Parliament was not convinced that
sufficient progress had been made in 2019, having heard the evidence. And
secondly, as we now know from a comprehensive National Audit Office report in
February of this year, the situation has become much more serious as a result of
Covid and the impact that Covid has had on young people, the rise in eating
disorders and mental health illnesses in young people, resulting in greater
waiting lists and a kind of postcode lottery in the provision of adult services.
I'm just thinking with that particular aspect though, Rob, perhaps that was
something that could not be foreseen. It certainly was not foreseen in 2019. And
what I'm saying is that even then the select committee and we had the view that
insufficient focus and attention had been played to this issue. What I'm saying
now is that from the cases that I'm seeing on a regular basis, the situation has
not improved and young women in particular, women, teenagers and also women in
their 20s and 30s are tragically dying avoidable deaths in the health service
because of the inappropriate provision which is given to them. You did mention
some of the areas where there has been progress, for example, children and young
person support services. But I am interested in that aspect you raised about a
lack of parity between child and adult services. And obviously an 18 year old
will age out of those child services. Why have the adult services for eating
disorders lost out? Well, I think, first of all, mental health provision has
lost out in comparison to other provisions in the health service and the
government has done something to redress that balance. But in redressing the
balance, the focus has been on mental health in general rather than eating
disorders in particular. And so the inadequate provision of adult services has
not really been addressed and has actually got worse as a result of the rise in
mental health illness coming from Covid. What provision is needed then for a
complex mental illness like an eating disorder within a medical system? Yeah,
well, you know, the elements of it are there. There has to be a balance between
community provision and inpatient provision in the NHS. And what we are seeing
is that community provision is being overwhelmed with people needing to get
early recognition of their eating disorders. But because of the waiting lists
and delays, that is not happening. And people are getting into very serious
trouble as a result of that lack of capacity. And until that is addressed, the
situation is not going to improve. And my concern is that although there has
been increased funding into the NHS, we know from the data that there are still
a staff shortages, b failures in expertise and the lack of expertise and c a
failure to join up provision so that people who move around are not properly
supported in doing so. I do want to just read a statement from the NHS. The
spokesperson said, while the pandemic has taken a huge toll on many people's
mental health, improving care for people with an eating disorder is vital, with
the NHS treating 55% more young people for eating disorders compared to pre-
pandemic, as well as rolling out a rapid early intervention eating disorder
service for people aged 16 to 25. But that would seem to go against what you're
saying, Rob. They went on to say next year, the NHS is investing around Â£1
billion into adult community mental health services, which will expand and
improve these services and will help join up, using that term, with the local
GPs to help more people get the care they need. I think it's hard for our
listeners to know what does a billion pounds mean in this scenario? Yeah, I
mean, we know that Â£12 billion a year is spent on mental health provision. So
that is a significant investment. But my point is that for the government to say
we're doing quite a lot since 2019 doesn't address the issue that the situation
has deteriorated drastically as a result of COVID. And we know from coroner's
reports that since 2019, there have been at least 19 avoidable deaths from young
people whose families say they have not been properly supported, that there
hasn't been expertise to help them. And that the families and this is the worst
thing, the families say they have not been listened to by doctors in a way that
suggests there isn't proper communication. So let's drill down into that. You
are the ombudsman and you mentioned 19 avoidable deaths, which is a terrible
number. I do know since April 2019, you've received 234 complaints relating to
eating disorder services. What are you recommending to make that listening
happen? Well, there has to be a cultural shift, not only in the NHS, but across
government in terms of listening to people in terms of joining up services and
making sure that core things like care plans are properly constructed and worked
upon. And that isn't happening to the extent that it should be. And it won't
happen until we have an increase in the capacity of doctors to understand the
issues. And I know from the select committee and the good work that's been done,
that it's been extremely difficult to increase the amount of training that
doctors get on eating disorders, because there's so many multiple bodies who
have responsibility for the education of medics. And that hasn't happened as
quickly as it needs to be. So there's no magic bullet here. But there needs to
be a cultural shift focusing on citizens and people who are in difficulties and
responding to them. Rob Barron, Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman UK,
thank you so much. And for my listener, if you are worried about yourself or
someone you know, there is more information about eating disorder charities and
services on our website. And we see Jacqueline getting in touch. She says, our
doctor wouldn't let me speak when my 16 year old daughter and I went to talk to
him about her very poor eating. A school nurse eventually picked up on her
skinny appearance and started regularly weighing her. And I was so relieved. Not
listening to parents is a silly approach. So do keep them coming 84844. We have
in studio with us now, Christina Patterson, the writer and journalist. Good
morning. Good morning. Now, I think you have faced more than your fair share of
tragedy. I think our listeners would also agree as they hear your story. You are
the only surviving member of your family. You grew up with two parents and two
siblings. Your older sister, Caroline, was often very troubled as a little girl,
and she was eventually diagnosed with schizophrenia in her teens. I am asking my
listeners, you know, their experience of a sibling with a complex mental illness
and how it affects the whole family. You've written this memoir, Outside the Sky
is Blue, about just that. But I should say also that it is an uplifting read. Do
you want to talk a little bit, perhaps for our listeners, about your childhood?
Because to me, as I read it, it seemed idyllic in some ways with these two
loving parents and a brother and a sister. That seemed to be an awful lot of
family adventures. Yes, well, I mean, I was extremely lucky in so many ways. And
when you talk about having an unfair amount of tragedy, I do know, I think on
balance, I still count myself lucky because all of these things are relative.
And actually, I mean, I don't want to sound too kind of earnest here, but all of
us in the Western world are lucky in the kind of global lottery. And I still
think that, you know, my own life, there is masses of joy and beauty in it. But
my parents were extraordinary people. They met, my mother was Swedish, my father
was British, they met on a hill in Heidelberg. It was apparently love at first
sight, which of course, I was never able to live up to. They got married in a
church in Sweden, lived in a bed, sit in Earl's Court with a shared bathroom and
shared kitchen. And then my father got his first posting in the diplomatic
service to Bangkok, where suddenly my mother arrived aged 22 with five servants
and a white grand piano and having been brought up on free school meals and
hand-me-downs in Sweden, it was quite a shock. So my parents had this very
glamorous life in Bangkok where my sister was born, and then moved to Rome and
my brother and I were born. And then when I was nine months old, and my sister
was probably five, nearly six, they moved to a 1960s housing state in Guildford.
And I later discovered that one of the reasons, in fact, probably the main
reason they did that was because they thought my sister would not be able to
cope with the peripatetic life of a diplomat because she was already showing
signs of being very difficult. But we did have, you know, a lovely suburban
childhood and we went to National Trust houses, we went for walks in local
beauty spots and we went to summer holidays to Sweden. So, you know, in many
ways it was a very privileged middle-class childhood with loving, as you say,
two loving parents. But you allude to your sister there, Caroline, and even at a
young age that she was troubled, they didn't know why exactly. Tell us a little
bit more about how it evolved to understand that she had this illness that was
going to affect the family. Yes, well, my mother very sadly blamed herself and
I'm sure she was wrong to do that. But there was, incredibly now looking back,
they didn't fly to Bangkok. Their journey back to the UK was on a boat, which
took something like five weeks. And there was a ridiculous thing where children
were not allowed to eat at the captain's table with my parents. And she was, you
know, stuck in another room and she screamed and screamed and screamed. And my
mother said that, I think she was about 18 months or two at the time, and after
that she was never the same again. So she was, I mean, she was a sweetie. I do
want to make that clear. She was a very, very sweet person and she was deeply
loved and she was very curious. She had many friends, but she found life very
difficult. And she did have what my mother called scenes, I suppose you would
call them tantrums, very frequently through childhood, which were very difficult
for all of us. And then when she was 14, she went off to stay with a family in
Norway, had some kind of traumatic experience. I think she was homesick, she was
isolated. She was on an island with one girl and her grandmother for a while.
And when she came back, I later discovered, but I didn't realise at the time,
she'd had psychotic symptoms. And my mother told us she'd had a breakdown. She
disappeared to the adolescent unit of a psychiatric hospital. My brother and I
had no idea what had happened to her and things were never the same. When she
came out, she was heavily medicated, she'd put on loads of weight, she had
severe acne, she was shaking from the largatchil which she took. And she took
that drug for the rest of her life. She died when she was 41. So she had a very
hard life and was an exceptionally brave person. But of course, in many ways,
the family revolved around her after that. AMT â Throughout the book, you are
looking back on files and folders. My God, this meticulous history between many
family members. They kept everything, various photographs, files, what happened
when, how, which I was astounded by. But learning, I suppose, that your sister
was going to have a difficult life, which happened throughout your teenage years
as well, I suppose the full impact of it became realised or more materialised.
When you look back at that now, how do you understand it? KK â Well, it's
interesting what you say about the records. My mother, I'm the journalist, but I
think my mother should have been a journalist. AMT â Oh my goodness, the
photographs at every moment. KK â I'm totally chaotic in keeping this stuff. But
she wrote a diary every day of her life. Interestingly, the one day she didn't
write one was the day Caurine went into the adolescent unit at the psychiatric
hospital. Her diary entry for that day is blank. But when I look back, I
suppose, I think all kinds of things. And one of them is that my parents were
absolutely heroic. You know, my mother, her world had completely fallen apart,
but she, you know, kind of held it together. She had a full time job. She
obviously kept the family going. My parents would go to visit Caurine at this
psychiatric hospital every single day. My father, when she was allowed out, they
begged for her to be allowed out and he would get up at five o'clock in the
morning to drive her there and pick her up in the evenings. But I think it took
a very heavy toll on all of us. And, you know, I went a bit mad, I think, in
retrospect. I went to a youth club in order to meet boys. And when I â AMT â
We've all done that. KK â Sorry? AMT â We've all done that. KK â Well, it didn't
work out very well because the youth club was attached to a Baptist church and I
shortly discovered that you were not in fact allowed to touch the boys because
you were meant to be married to the Lord Jesus Christ. And I became, in effect,
a fundamentalist Christian from the age of 14 to 25. And I also developed all
kinds of physical symptoms. I developed very severe acne. I developed very
debilitating pains in my knees. And looking back, of course one could never
know, but looking back I think so many of these things were signs of my own
distress that I didn't know how to deal with. Because I think one thing we just
don't really talk about is what happens to the other people in the family and
particularly what happens to siblings of someone going through a mental illness.
Of course the person who suffers most is the person with the mental illness, but
the horrible reality is that everybody suffers. AMT â And your family, from my
reading of the book, was incredibly close-knit. So it wasn't like you could put
them away to one side or compartmentalise that mental illness, for example, if
it's ever possible to do that. How would you describe your relationship with
your sister Caroline? PC â Oh that is such a hard one to answer because there is
one of the things I write about in the book and it was incredibly distressing
when I discovered it. My mother, after Caroline died, I told my mother I wanted
to find out more about her illness and my mother gave me one of her diaries. And
maybe she shouldn't have done, but I found two pages sellotaped together and of
course I slit open those pages. And I saw that my sister had written the name
Christina Patterson makes me want to choke with hatred. Dear God, please may
Christina die of cancer. And sorry, but I read that after I'd had breast cancer
and was obviously deeply shocked. Now Caroline was 20 when she wrote that, I was
15. We all have feelings of intense hatred, envy and resentment. And I think we
loved each other and we also had enormous resentment of each other. She
completely understandably resented having a sister who apparently had a very
easy life in comparison to her. And I resented the fact that in my view she
ruined everything all the time. Of course she didn't. But at her, when she was
ill, when she was having her scenes, when the attention was on her as a child
and as a teenager, I felt at some level deeply resentful of that. But I have to
say that I loved her deeply and I think she loved me deeply. And when I did
develop terrible pains in my knees in my mid twenties, which was subsequently
diagnosed as lupus and autoimmune disease from which I did thank goodness get
better. I think in one strange sense, maybe I was doing that unconsciously to
equalize things between us so that she had an illness and I had an illness. And
I felt at that time when I was going through great pain and I ended up
unemployed and severely anxious and depressed with an incurable autoimmune
disease in my mid twenties, which obviously was a very difficult situation. I
felt at times that she was the only one who looked at me with, who would look at
me, who would be a kind of witness to my pain. And I think there was, in spite
of everything, a very profound love between us. And when she died of suddenly of
cardiomyopathy when she was 41, I was devastated and I felt, I believed and I
said at her funeral that she was the bravest person I knew. Yes. And of course,
what you hated was the illness, not your sister and what that, the havoc really
that it wreaked at that time. And I know it must be very emotional to speak
about these things. Your brother, Tom? Yes, sorry. Tom died four years ago, very
suddenly of a heart attack. And he was very close to my sister. They had a
wonderful relationship. She actually, when he, from the moment he was born, I
can see in the photos, my mother wrote this, she absolutely adored him and he
adored her. He didn't have an easy life either. He had his own struggles with
anxiety and depression. He was a sweetheart. Everyone called him a gentle giant.
He was six foot six. Children loved him. He had an unconventional life in many
ways, but he was a very, very good and lovely person. And one of the reasons I
wrote the book is that I really feel and felt that every member of my family,
they were all profoundly decent, good people. And I do believe that ultimately
that is the most important thing in a life. It does come across. And as I read
about Tom, who was kind of a golden boy in his early years, to me, it seemed
just as an observer having absolutely no expertise at all. But it was, again,
that schizophrenia illness that was the ripples of it that were going through
your family and everybody trying to cope in whatever way that they could. And
our listeners might be kind of realising, we've talked about your mum and dad
and Tom and Caroline in the past tense because they have died. You are this
person who has left that was looking back on all those memories. And I'm sure I
have many listeners that are in that same position. And I'm just wondering how
it feels because it was something that was so, such an intense, really web
around you, these people that are not here physically now. That's such a tough
question to answer. I think, I think, of course, I miss them. I think we all
have our own strategies for dealing with grief. I'm lucky in that I was single
for most of my adult life, but I met my wonderful partner, Anthony, before my
mother died and before my brother died. And I think, if I'm honest, it would
have been much harder if I'd still been on my own then, because I don't feel
completely on my own in the world. I feel proud of my family. I feel they should
have lived longer. My brother and sister should have lived longer, but I think
they had good lives. And I think we get through how we can. And I, I'm a great
believer in Keats. Well, I don't have to believe in Keats, he existed, but I
love Keats's poetry. And in his ode on a Grecian urn, he says, beauty is truth,
truth beauty, that is all you know on earth and all you need to know. And in a
way, that's the maxim I live by. I believe in beauty and truth. And that's what
keeps me going. Yeah, so that's where you find the joy in your life. It's a
beautiful book, I have to say. I feel like I got to know your family very
intimately. So thank you so much for coming on Woman's Hour and for sharing your
story. Christina Paterson, again, the book is called Outside the Sky is Blue. If
you know somebody who's been affected by mental illness, you can find help and
support on our website. I do want to read a comment that came in. My sister
became psychotic as a teenager and had further episodes and she was put in a
boarding school with a psychiatric unit. I was heartbroken. People comment on
her behavior sometimes now and I wish they could understand what she has been
through. It has had a significant effect on my life. So Christina, people very
much hearing you today. You are listening to Woman's Hour. If you want to get in
touch with us, it is 84844. But now I want to turn to the actor, singer,
songwriter and all round South London superstar, Cynthia Erivo. She's joined me
to talk about her role as DCI Odette Raine in the upcoming film Luther, the
Fallen Son. Now you might know that Cynthia has collected a Grammy, a Tony, an
Emmy for her role in The Colour Purple on Broadway in 2017, Oscar nominated for
her portrayal of the American abolitionist Harriet Tubman. That was the movie
Harriet in 2020. And as well as acting opposite Idris Elba in the new Luther
film, which premieres globally on the 10th of March on Netflix, Cynthia, because
she's not busy enough, is also currently making the movie version of the musical
Wicked in the lead role of Elphaba. Welcome, Cynthia. So great to have you on
Woman's Hour. Thank you for having me. Hello. And you're looking incredibly
glamorous, I have to tell our radio listeners this morning in various shades of
grey and oh, my goodness, the nails are incredible. We're going to have to put
that up digitally and people to check it out at BBC Woman's Hour. Let us talk
about Luther. As I was watching it, very action packed, this gripping drama, I
was thinking it is relatively unusual to see two black actors in the leads in a
film like that. And I was wondering, was that what you were thinking about,
Cynthia, as you looked at the role? I guess to a point, to a degree, yes. But
mostly I was thinking about how fabulous these two roles were opposite each
other. They're like oil and water. They don't necessarily mix, but they seem to
have a commonality between the two of them. And I just thought the role was
really fun to do. It's really different to anything I've done before. And I
wanted to jump at the chance. I thought it was a wonderful opportunity to see
our two faces in those spaces. And we did. And you as DCI Lorraine, what was it
about her in particular? Because she's a complicated character in some ways.
Yes, she is. That was the reason I loved her. I think there was this sort of, on
the outset, you think that it's all black and white for her. There's no grey
area. It's good or evil and there's nothing in between. And as you get to know
her and as you move through the film, you realise that she has to come to terms
with the fact that there is a grey area and sometimes we all have to step into
it. And I think that her discovering that she's both darkness and light is just
a really fun thing to discover myself and really fun thing to play. I love the
fact that she is tough without really needing to be tough. I love the fact that
she has the power in the room without having to force it on anyone. And it was
fun to play with those ebbs and flows and the colours of that. It was great to
do. Let's listen to a little of her now. Earliest crime goes back 11 years. The
most recent dates back to last year. So where were the bodies stored in the
interim and who would have the kind of space, time or money to do something like
that? This has been carefully planned and executed over a number of years, so
there'll be a lot of data to pass. But you find me one point of commonality
between these victims, just one. And you'll have our killer. Yes, let's get to
it. Find me that connection. I guess, Cinthia Erivo as DCI Odette Raine. Your
character is put under severe pressure, I think it's fair to say, without giving
away the plot, but she keeps it together the whole time. Was there anybody from
your life that you draw on to play her? Oh, there's a few women, actually. I
think she's an amalgamation of different women that I've met and different
people that I know, friends and family. But I think she just sort of was created
by Neil's wonderful writing. You kind of want to, you know, there's the mother
in her and then there's the businesswoman and there's the fighter. And it's all
sort of like different people that I've met and different people that I know.
And then a bit of me, I think. And I think my want to survive as well, I think
is sort of injected into her. She's kind of brilliant. I really enjoyed her.
Different. Yeah, the storylines are harrowing. I jumped about 10 times during
the movie. How did you deal with that as an actor? Something that was that fast
paced, I suppose shocking at times? Oh, I loved it. That's my catnip. Do you
know what I mean? I love that physical and that sort of like hands on all the
stunts and whatnot. Me doing it. That's incredible. Yeah, yeah. I love all of
that. I love being able to use my body in that way. I love being able to inject
those kinds of moments into characters that I get to play. Yeah, sure. As I was
just thinking, sorry to step on you, as a Londoner, I was just thinking about
some of those stunts because the London backdrops are amazing. Fantastic. We
took over Piccadilly Circus for about two nights, I think, two or three nights
and did that whole, there's a big set piece that happens and we did it right
there. And it was brilliant, thrilling, very thrilling. I'll never look at
Piccadilly Circus in the same way again. I'm not giving away the plot. Did you
know Idris Elba before making the film or was it the first time? No, I did know
him before the film. It was the first time working with him, but I had met him
before and we knew each other very well and we're good friends. I'm just
thinking as well, you were talking about all your stunts and being so physical.
You have so many aspects to your career. People will know you for singing,
acting, West End, Broadway, could be a TV show or a massive film, of course. Do
you have a favourite? A favourite? No, I think what's really fun now is that I
get to combine all of those things in one. So Wicked is sort of like a dream
come true just because it's got everything in it. And I love doing Luther
because that also was like a, it's everything, physical, movement, I'm running
around. I'm also diving into drama. So whenever I can play more than one thing,
more than one facet of myself, then I'm more than in. I love it. And of course,
going in a completely different direction was playing the title character in the
film, Harriet. That's the story of Harriet Tubman, the American abolitionist.
Did it feel like a responsibility to play that figure that is an icon for so
many? Yeah, it was a huge responsibility. And from the very beginning, the
director and I, Casey Lemon, knew that we were taking on something that was
really big and really special. And we wanted to treat it with care and love. And
we took every day, step by step and worked through it. And it was sometimes
very, very tough. And other times very, very joyful. But it was a really
enlightening experience for me. And with that, you were double nominated for
Harriet, Oscar nominated in 2020. But you're just an Oscar away from this
coveted EGOT, as people say. So Emmy, Grammy, Oscar and a Tony. I know when I
might put my bet on, but what's your best bet on when you're going to complete
that set? And I say when, not if. I have no idea. I don't know because things
can change and things can shift and no one really knows what's going to happen.
But your lips to God's ears and thank you for even putting it in the universe.
We'll know. I will know. But as we look at your career, it's so vast and you've
done so much to break down barriers. Is there any particular role that you're
intensely proud of in expanding representation? I'm really proud of all of them,
to be honest. I pick really, really specifically. I pick really carefully
because I tend to go for the roles that I haven't met before. One of the reasons
I love this role is because I had rarely seen black women in those spaces as a
DCI, in places of power and not having to ask for it necessarily, just having
it. I thought there was something really special about that. And then obviously
with Harriet, it was a really special role to play and it was a special woman to
learn about. And there was such history and ancestry in that, that it just was a
special thing. I pick all of these roles really special, really particularly. I
did a small TV role in a series called Raw and I liked that because it was
horror, like actual horror. And this woman was all over the place and it was
happening to her. And I had never seen anything like that before. And I think
what I try to do is pick roles that wouldn't necessarily on the outlook be a
face like mine playing them. And hopefully it opens the doors a bit more for
more of us. Beautiful face like yours. I have to tell our listeners if they're
not looking yet. There's been a lot of discussion really about the importance of
representation in awards and nominations so much, whether we talk about the
BAFTAs or the Oscars. What's your view of it now? Do you think there's been
significant progress? For the nominations, yes. For the wins, maybe not. The
nominations are changing. The way the nominations look are changing. The way the
wins are aren't necessarily making leaps and bounds. We're moving forward, but
we're still not shifted yet. Why is there still that hill to climb? Why do you
think it's not translating into the wins? I don't know. I think sometimes there
aren't the roles to even be seen. I think that sometimes the films that are
picked to be seen don't necessarily have leading ladies that are black always.
Or there are very few of those roles going around. There are very few of them
that get seen by larger audiences. So there are a few of them that get
nominated. It starts there really. It starts at studio level. It starts at
casting level. And if the casting doesn't necessarily go to us or anyone of
colour, then you're not going to see them during award season because they were
never made. So you feel in the right direction, but still a lot further to go?
Yeah, we've got lots of work to do still. I want to turn back to some of your
singing for a moment and your stunts and your workouts as we were talking about.
You do these strenuous workouts and on Instagram, people can watch them. And you
do them while singing. Is that for added endurance training? No, it's because I
enjoy it. I like music and I listen to it when I'm working out and I can't help
but sing along. And it's just like an added bonus that it helps with my lungs. I
just enjoy myself. I don't necessarily think I sound great when I'm doing it,
but I feel good when I am. So I just kind of have fun. Probably better than the
average bear, but at 3.40 in the morning was one I was looking at recently.
Yeah, yeah. I mean, my pickups are so early in the morning that the only time I
can get it done is earlier than that. And so because for me, the way to get my
day started is to work out. I have no choice but to do it as early as I'm doing
it. And so that way I can move through the day focused and energetically. Yeah,
I love it. You did sing Staying With The Singing. You sang Ada Weiss for Dame
Julie Andrews as she won a Life Achievement Award. What was that like? That was
phenomenal. It was amazing. She was right opposite me and at the end, she
thanked me and blew me a kiss. And I thought that was the end of it. I was happy
enough after that. And then a couple of months later, I received a letter from
her thanking me for doing that performance to her. And I framed the letter
because that was possibly one of the biggest dreams ever to come true. It was
really cool. I just knew she'd have wonderful manners. I mean, impeccable.
That's what we'd expect. But you mentioned that your pickups are really early.
What time does somebody come to pick you up? Anywhere from four o'clock to six
or something. And if I'm lucky, I might get an eight o'clock pickup, but usually
it's about four to four forty five. OK, so I'm thinking is that for Wicked?
Yeah. OK, so you are currently filming the movie version of the musical, so
taking the lead role. So that's the Wicked Witch of the West. Ariana Grande, I
see, is playing Glinda. How is it going? Really well. Really, really well. We're
having really good days and we're getting a lot done. They're long days because
there's lots to do. But I'm enjoying myself. I really am. And when can we expect
it? Christmas 2024. OK, wow. That sounds like a pretty... That's going to be a
blockbuster as well, I am sure. You came out as bisexual last year. How
significant was that for you? If you want to talk us through the decision and
reaction. I think I just wanted to not hide another aspect of myself that was
taking up room and letting that go meant that there was more room to be creative
and more room to just be. It's meant that I can just sort of exist as myself
fully. And I really enjoy doing that. Did you feel a difference or an impact on
your work from when you came out? I did. I think it's not that you care less
about... You care more about the work and you care less about what everyone
thinks about you. That's what sort of happened to me. I think I just got to be
myself as much as I could be. I think I show up now fully as who I am. And it's
really refreshing. I think that's the thing I noticed the most about and it
meant that I could walk into work and just be. And now all of the energy is
about my work and about the people I love. It's all in the right place now. It's
been so good to have you on. Your latest film is Luther, The Fallen Son. And I
want to thank Cynthia Erivo for joining us today on Woman's Hour. Thank you very
much. Absolute superstar in our midst there. I want to read some of your
messages that have been coming in. I was asking you earlier, are you competitive
with your partners? Talking about Cynthia Erivo's working out at 3.40am. But did
you see The Princess of Wales? She beat her husband Prince William on a spinning
class. It's on the front of all the papers. So I asked you, are you competitive?
Here's some. My husband and I have competitive who is the most tired sessions.
That's Elaine. Thanks, Elaine. And you see, Paul says my wife and I are both
archers. She's much better than me and has the medals to prove it. My partner
and I are not competitive in the slightest, says another. I get so much joy from
him doing well at something and vice versa that I don't feel the need to one up
him. It's nice that we're both good and bad at different things. On we go.
Melanie, I met my partner a year ago playing tennis and board games. It has been
a joyful, competitive aspect of our relationship. So much so that the day after
we got married this July, congratulations, we're planning a newlywed tennis
match. Competition between us stays fun and healthy in large part because we're
closely matched. Let me see one more from Joe. My husband and I try and beat
each other in Wordle and the Daily Blossom word challenge every day. It's good
fun. Most of you are competitive. Just having a quick look down here. I don't
know. It doesn't really surprise me. 84844 if you want to get in touch. I want
to move on to a very stark question, really. Would you want to know if you were
likely to get cancer? Journalist Hilary Osborne was diagnosed with breast cancer
last year. She's currently recovering from a double mastectomy, but she regrets
not finding out whether she had the faulty bracket two genes. You might have
heard of those before being diagnosed. Australian comedian Michelle Brazier has
been told by doctors she has a 97% chance of developing either bowel, stomach,
pancreatic or ovarian cancer. Her show about her diagnosis, Average Bear, is on
at the Soho Theatre from the 6th to the 11th of March. So how do you face the
stark reality of living with a hereditary, potentially life shortening illness?
Is it better to find out or not? I have a feeling you might have something to
say about this as well. 84844. I'm glad to say that Hilary and Michelle both
join me now in the Woman's Hour studio. Good morning. Good morning. Lovely to
have both of you with us. And Hilary, first off, because I know you're
recovering. How are you doing? Oh, I'm fine, thank you. Yeah, yeah. I mean, it's
everyone says it's a roller coaster having cancer. And it's, it's a cliche, but
it's, it's absolutely true. So I have really good days, I get good news. And
then there's quite often some bad news to follow. But I'm on the up at the
moment. Definitely. So I kind of led a little bit with some of your story. But
how did you find out you had breast cancer? Well, I had been having some pain
and kind of down my chest. And I decided it was to do with riding my bike or
exercise. So I ignored it for a little while. And then one day, I thought,
really does hurt and started prodding around. And I thought, Oh, that feels a
bit strange. And so I felt a lump. But I'd had an abscess 12 years ago when I
had my son. I'd had my status when I breastfed him and it developed. So I'd had
some scar tissue there. So I'd always been able to feel something, but this
didn't did feel different. So I phoned the doctor and they saw me straight away,
which was brilliant. They they were quite relaxed because my lymph nodes felt
okay. But they referred me to the cancer specialist, well, the Macmillan Cancer
Hospital. And I went there the next week, I wasn't really worried. The doctor
who saw me, first of all, didn't seem very worried. They sent me for a
mammogram, had the mammogram and then went for an ultrasound. And that's when
they started saying, Oh, there's something not right. But yeah, I really had no
idea that's what it was. I wasn't concerned. It was probably a little bit silly
of me. But you know, these things, they're so wrapped up in a myriad of emotions
and history, but you had reason to believe that potentially you could be at
higher risk for breast cancer. Yeah, that's right. My mum died when I was just
before I was 10. And so she was in her mid 30s, which is a signal that it's an
inherited cancer. And my great grandma on her side as well had died of breast
cancer, although we weren't entirely sure if that's that was the case a few
years ago. So I had been to be checked out when I had the abscess. My grandma
had been quite insistent that I push the doctors and went and spoke to someone.
But I don't know whether the sort of what went wrong, but they asked me about my
grandma. They asked me about my grandma's sister. They were all fine. My grandma
lived into her 90s. So they seemed quite relaxed about the possibility of it
being genetic. I wasn't offered a blood test at the time. And then I just got on
with my life really. And it didn't really occur to me to to kind of push for
one. Yeah. And nobody had suggested it to you? No, no. And when I wrote the
piece, I mentioned that I'd seen all the Angelina Jolie story. I mean, that was
an amazing story when she came out and said that she'd gone down that track and
Because she had the BRCA genes and had decided to have a mastectomy. And I think
afterwards also have her ovaries removed. Yeah, that's right. And so it was a
real talking point. And I think I had conversations with people about what she'd
done. But still, no one had said, well, why don't you go and get yourself
checked out? And so I just didn't really think to do it. And I should say for
our listeners, the NHS advice is to speak to a GP if cancer runs in your family,
if you're worried that you may get it too, and they'll be able to advise you.
But I'm just wondering, as you tell that story, I have huge empathy for you. I
mean, how do you feel when you look back on that sequence of events? I suppose I
mean, I've forgiven myself for not doing anything, because I think I if the GP
had or someone had said to me, look, I've made an appointment for you next week
to come in and have this test, come and do it. I would have done it. It wasn't
that I was avoiding actually finding out it was just that life was just kind of
going on. And it didn't occur to me. But obviously, when I when I found out that
I had it, my tumour was five centimetres. And I went into an absolute spiral of
thinking it must have spread it must have and I, I had a couple of weeks where I
was just beside myself and, and I would have saved myself that pain. If I'd been
in the cycle of having regular checkups, it would have been caught a lot
earlier. If I'd been in the cycle of having regular checkups, I might not have
had to have such aggressive treatment. I think I'd still be in the same position
I am now where I've had the mastectomy. But I yeah, I would have saved myself a
lot of heartache if I'd known about it. And let us not forget that the pandemic
was in the middle of all that as well. Let me come to you, Michelle, how did you
find out that you have genes that I have that 97%? Is that a real figure that
somebody gave you that you might get cancer? A real figure which, listen, what a
treat to hear. I found out my father passed away, he was diagnosed with cancer
and he died a week later, which was a big surprise. But he was, you know, he was
he wasn't an old man by any stretch of the imagination, but he wasn't a very
healthy man. So we sort of thought, okay, you know, that's fine. But my brother
got cancer when he was 42. And he passed away within a year as well. Sorry.
Thank you. That's all right. But you know, it just got me thinking and my sister
had precancerous polyps in her stomach lining. And so it just sort of all added
up, I suppose. And I'm very proactive about my health. I'm, you know, I'm here
for as much time as I can have. So I went to my GP and I explained, you know,
this is my family history, do I need to get checked for anything? I'm a lot
younger than my brother and sister. So I've got a head start. I'd love to use
it. And they referred me to a genetic counsellor. And yeah, they told me, yeah,
it's a 97% chance. But that doesn't mean, you know, it doesn't have to be doom
or gloom. It doesn't have to mean that I'll get cancer and I'll die. It just
means maybe I'll get cancer and it will be caught. So how, oh, so and it will be
caught because I was about to say, how do you rationalise that or live with it?
Through stories. I mean, that's why I do what I do. I've always been an actor,
but I started telling my own stories because I wanted other people to hear those
stories and, you know, maybe be luckier than yourself and be able to know that
they might need to get into a cycle of that because we don't know how to
advocate for ourselves. And I think that it's really difficult to know what to
ask for. It can be really scary and intimidating. So I think I just bring humour
to it. And I just want to share my story with as many people as I can so they
don't feel alone and they don't feel clueless. And I have read that you
mentioned you hoped to be here for a long time, but you know you're here for a
good time. Yes. Well, I mean, if I, you know, my show's called Average Bear. The
whole question is if you found out you had less time than the average bear, how
would you spend it? And how are you spending it? Well, I'm in London and I live
in Melbourne. I'm having a great time over the BBC. I mean, I work in film and
television. I have a wonderful life. I'm so lucky to have done that. But I've
also built that, you know, I work really hard. I write my own things and I just
kept making noise until the industry looked at me and went, all right, no, she
is good enough. Okay, great. And I just don't waste my time. I want to enjoy it.
And I try not to be afraid of things. And I try to really embrace everything
that I can, whether that's, you know, a piece of toast or patting a dog or
coming to London to do a show at the Soho Theatre. And what about, I don't know,
processed meat, a couple of drinks? Processed meat, no. Couple of drinks, yes.
You have to draw your line somewhere. Because that's the other thing is like,
you have to have treats. Not that alcohol is necessarily a treat. That's a whole
cultural thing to unpack. But, you know, but I think there's just there's part
of me that rationalises, okay, well, you go to yoga, yoga in the morning,
whiskey in the evening, you know, balance it out as best you can. I get checked
as much as I possibly can. And I really advocate for myself. And I'm lucky that
I'm a confident person. I can do that. But yeah, it's just I think it's about
balance. And coming back to you, Hilary, because you've had a double mastectomy.
Is the fear gone? I'm just picking up on one thing that Michelle mentioned there
to not live in fear. No, I think I'm doing everything I can to stop it coming
back and to stop a separate instance of disease coming back. But I mean,
ultimately, there's only so much you can do and all of these things, there's
still percentage chances that I could get it again. So it is about trying to
sort of put those in perspective. And I think I will probably be afraid for a
long time that I'm going to go through this again. But again, it does. It's not
something that I've been wanting to do things because now I think, well, I've
got to do that now. You also have at least one boy, I know from what you've
said, and there is a chance, I suppose, that your child may carry the gene. Has
your thinking changed for him or her than for yourself? Yeah. And it's not. I've
got a son, so I don't have to worry about breast. Well, I do have to worry about
breast cancer because men can get breast cancer. He's also got a higher chance
of having pancreatic cancer than the general population. So obviously that does
cause me quite a lot of concern. He won't be able to be tested on the NHS until
he's an adult. So at that point, we'll have to have a conversation with him
about whether he wants to have that. It's a big deal. And Michelle, what advice
would you have to other people that might have family members or are worried to
find out their possibilities? It's absolutely up to you if you want the
information or you don't want the information. I personally think it can be
really freeing. And either way, just knowing that it could be true, I think can
make you appreciate life more. So regardless, I think just spend your time
wisely because even if you don't have the gene, you could be hit by a bus.
Michelle Brazier, thank you so much for coming in. Also with Hilary Osborne,
wish you all the best in your recovery. Woman's Hour is back tomorrow with Anita
Rani at 10 o'clock. One of her guests will be Jo Cheatham, an unlikely activist
who found herself at the helm of the campaign to get rid of Page 3. Remember
that. And don't forget, if you miss any of our programmes, you can listen on BBC
Sounds. Just want to give the last words to our listeners. I was asking about
competitive partners, you know. I'm very competitive with my partner. Quiz shows
on TV, Sudoku, Wordle, you name it, I'm on it. Also, Rachel getting in touch
saying she had no idea that she carried the gene. She really wishes that she had
known before she was diagnosed with breast cancer at 44. We're thinking of you,
Rachel. Thanks so much for getting in touch. Woman's Hour was presented by Nuala
McGovern and produced by Lottie Garton. The studio engineer was Donald McDonald.
This year as part of Red Nose Day, you could win an iconic BBC treasure. How
about Pat Butch's earrings from EastEnders? Heavier than you might think? Maybe
a House of Games winner's suitcase? Or Craig Revel Horwood's ten score paddle
from Strictly? Not that he uses it much. These are just some of the BBC items
that could be yours as part of Red Nose Day. Hey, not the microphone! To enter,
find out more or donate to Comic Relief, go to bbc.co.uk forward slash Red Nose
Day. We'll find the terms and conditions and privacy notice. You must be 18 or
over to enter. The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday, 18th of March, 2023.
Good luck. After the news, we've got the next part of the Shamima Begum story.
This week, after she and her husband have walked out of the ashes of the Islamic
State group, we've got the following.