TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-15H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC Sounds, on Saturday night at 8. BBC News at 2 o'clock. Police in Northern
Ireland have arrested three people in connection with the shooting of an off-
duty officer. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell was shot a number of times
after coaching a children's football team in Oma in County Tyrone last night. He
is in a critical condition in hospital. Police say the dissident Republican
group, the New IRA, is the primary focus of their investigation. The PSNI Chief
Constable Simon Byrne has condemned the shooting. Clearly, as an organisation,
we are utterly shocked and angered by last night's brazen and calculated attack.
John's colleagues are understandably extremely distressed by last night's
shooting. However, they remain resolute and committed to bringing those
responsible for this heinous crime to justice. The Labour leader, Sir Keir
Starmer, has set out five missions which he says will give Britain its future
back if the party wins the next general election. Among them are pledges to fix
problems in the NHS, raise education standards and achieve the highest sustained
growth in the G7 group of developed economies. Official figures show that a
record number of asylum seekers are waiting for a decision on their case, with
166,000 currently in the backlog. Of those, 110,000 have been waiting for more
than six months. The government is planning to scrap interviews for some
applicants and instead ask them to fill in a questionnaire as part of efforts to
reduce the delays. Ministers say a shortage of some fruit and vegetables is
expected to last for another two to four weeks. Tesco, Morrisons, Aldi and Asda
have introduced limits on how much customers can buy. The shortages have been
triggered by extreme weather in parts of Europe and North Africa. The former BBC
football commentator John Motsen has died at the age of 77. During his 50-year
career he covered 10 World Cups and 29 FA Cup finals. The former England striker
and Match of the Day presenter Gary Lineker described Motsen as the voice of
football for generations. BBC News. This is BBC Radio 4, our drama series
charting the rise of the Nazis continues in 15 minutes. But first, will things
ever be normal again between Tony and Lillian? It's the Archers. Lillian! I've
got to get back. Will you wait a minute? There's something I wanted to show you.
Sorry, but I don't have time right now. So when will you? Did you have your chat
with Mum? Yes. What was it about? Well, if you must know, I was here on behalf
of Alice and Kate who are making the funeral arrangements and need to know how
we're all planning to get there. That's all sorted. Mum, you and me and Pat can
all travel together. Actually, Tony, the way things are at the moment I'd rather
travel in a separate car. What? I've explained to Mum and she's in agreement
that I'll go with Leonie and James and she will go with you and Pat in another
car. Is this really necessary? Yes, I feel it is. Can't we show a united front
for one day? For Jennifer's sake. She would have wanted us to. Please don't tell
me what Jenny would have wanted. Lillian! I know full well the last thing she
would have wanted was for any of us to be upset or to upset Mum on the way to
her funeral. Now, if you'll excuse me. It doesn't have to be like this, Lillian.
I'm truly grateful to you for making the time. Of course, David. Although you're
about to start carving soon, aren't you? Any minute, yeah. Linda! Oh, Ardill,
good morning. Morning. Just a quick reminder. Sorry, I'm running late. I have a
parcel arriving today between one and three p.m. Not to worry, one of us will be
here. Great, thanks. Better dash? Ardill? Yes? Don't forget the packed lunch you
requested. It's on the hall table, fully labelled. Of course, will do. Thanks.
Wow. You make your guests a packed lunch. Is that a thing? Certainly not
something we've factored in. Well, if you mean, is it a regular service, then
no. But given enough notice, I don't mind. Ardill is an exception, of course.
He's been here so long, it's less of a B&B and more of a home to him now. Wow.
It really is the full experience here. Don't be disheartened, David. Ambridge
Hall is a high-end, long-established outfit. You really can't compare yourselves
to us. No, I see that. Anyway, as we were saying, you seem to have all the right
fire and safety measures in place, tea-making facilities in the room itself,
which is vital. Now, I see that your room doesn't have an en-suite. Yes, we have
the shared bathroom, which has been given a freshen up. Mum has the en-suite, so
that's one less person using the bathroom. And Ben, Ruth and I have decided that
we'll try and use the downstairs loo as much as possible. Not ideal, but needs
must. It's imperative you make it clear to anyone interested in booking that the
bathroom is shared. Oh, of course. Yeah. Now, it's more any, you know, last-
minute snags or issues we may not initially have thought of that I was hoping to
get some ideas about. David, I can't know what would be required or best suited
to Brookfield, even with my extensive experience and success rate, unless I see
it for myself. You mean visit? Yes. I could squeeze you in at some point this
afternoon. But the main reason I'm asking is to help Ben. Remember, it's his
venture now. In which case, I will definitely find some time to visit today and
cast a final eye over everything. Oh, but we'll most likely be with the cows,
Linda, and I wanted to save you any trouble by coming here. David, do you want
Ben to make a success of this or not? Yes. Good. I'll see you later. These
adjustments to the architect's drawings are very good, Roy. She's managed to get
the square footage we were losing into the suites on the perimeter. Yeah. Is she
out on site? Yes. She's gone walkabout with Peter. They'll discuss materials and
costing, which I don't need to be involved in. I'm sorry I got me timings
muddled up, Ardill. I should have been here when she arrived. Don't worry. Peter
was on site, and Andrea's no shrinking violet. If we're not about, she gets
stuck in and makes use of the time. If one of us can be here in future,
though... I'll make sure I'm here next time. I would have been here myself, only
I was way late on calls this morning. Everything OK? Yes, fine. Just my sister
and her kids doing my head in. Oh, right. You too. Why? Who's been bugging you?
Don't get me started. Not your neighbour again? Yep. This is the man who lost
his wife recently? I mean, I feel for him, honestly. Once upon a time, he was
family, but he's taken me and Kirsty at our word, and now he's popping around
all the time. He was over last night for dinner. Brought a shepherd's pie and
some posh wine. That's nice. Only, Kirsty's right. He does love the sound of his
own voice, and once he's got some wine in him, it's like he picks a topic from
the news and just rants about it like he knows all there is to know. And when he
finally stops, Kirsty and myself have to think of something to say that doesn't
unintentionally come out as being insensitive. Oh, it's a minefield ordeal. Now,
I do understand the most innocent comment can seem offensive or hurtful to
someone who's suffered a tragic loss, and I'm known for putting me foot in it,
so the whole thing just makes me nervous. So stop inviting him over. Simple. We
can't, because it's the right thing to do, isn't it? Not if you don't mean it.
Well, we do, sort of. Just, I mean, his family's always calling round to check
in on him, and he says he hates it. Makes him feel like he's being babysat. So I
reckon he keeps coming over to ours to avoid the family checking in. Well, that
doesn't sound too bad. As soon as things settle, he'll get back to his new norm.
And now he's invited me and Kirsty round to dinner tomorrow night to thank us
for the dinner he brought us last night. So decline. So another awkward night on
the cards for me and Kirsty. Roy, you've just spent ages moaning about the guy.
Why on earth would you accept a dinner invitation? Because... The right thing to
do has to come with the right intention. Otherwise it's hypocrisy. Um... PHONE
RINGS PHONE RINGS HE CLEARS THROAT Hello? We'll be right out. We need it
outside. Can I give you a hand with that? Oh, you're all right, Lee. I should
look where I put things. Here, let me sweep up the soil. You put the trays back.
Everything OK? No. A case of more haste, less speed. Planted the broad beans and
then I go and knock the trays over. Idiot. Accidents happen. This was avoidable.
Have you spoken to Helen today? Oh, as a matter of fact, I have and she seemed
very happy. Did she? Well, I tell you, Tony, since I switched my perspective on
the whole situation with the girls, it's like this massive weight's been lifted.
OK, California's a long way away, but we can all still talk as often as we can
online and they can come here and maybe Helen and I can take the boys over
there. Oh, that's great news, Lee. Yeah. And I wanted to say thanks, Tony. For
what? If it hadn't been for your sound reasoning, I'd still be moping about
thinking Helen wanted to get rid of me. You are very welcome. If only everyone
was open to a little sound reasoning. Is this about Lillian? Afraid so. She'll
come round, surely. You don't know my sister. She's as stubborn as a mule.
Linda! No, there's no need to be alarmed. Hope you don't mind, I let myself in.
Now, there are many things here that need addressing. But you're not going to
step into this kitchen in those boots, are you? Of course I'm going to remove my
boots, but, you know, this is a working farm. And our guests will know that
comes with all the reality of a working farm. No, no, no, David. That's a rookie
mistake. Your guests want to experience their idea of farming, not the stark,
smelly, muddy reality. Smelly? Oh, yes. There is a distinct odour life in here
that's a little too close to reality for my liking. Well, with all due respect,
you're not our guest, so your liking doesn't really... I have come to help,
remember? Now, I don't see a space for the guests when they're not in their
room. Please tell me they're not expected to be in here. No, we've cleared the
dining room for them. Well, yes, you may think you have, but you'll need a
television in there. They can have breakfast without watching telly, surely. Or
you could install a television in the room. And you may wish to consider a
cleaner. Linda, we want to make money from this venture, not fritter it away.
Right. That's it. What? Clearly, you have no idea what it's like to have a real
live guest staying at your B&B. And I cannot in all good conscience let you
loose on the world of bed and breakfasting without a trial run of this place. I
will be making a booking and staying here in row as a guest tomorrow night. Oh,
no, no, no, I'm sure that's not necessary. We've got your notes. David, learn
not to look a gift horse in the mouth. And please address these matters before I
arrive. You sure you don't want to share this? No, thanks. I've got my packed
lunch. We'll take a quick half hour and then get back out there with Andrea
before she heads back to London. Sure. Ardill. Yeah? I'm sorry if my going on
about Brian upset you. It's just... I'm sorry. Don't worry about it. Right.
Good. Only I didn't mean to... Look, if you want to feel sorry for him, then
feel sorry for him. If you want to moan about him, then moan. But doing both is
crazy. You're complaining about him for taking you and Kirsty at your word.
Yeah, you're right. I bet he sleeps in your armchair with the television on
because it makes him feel normal. How do you think he'd feel if he could hear
you now? Yeah, I'm an awful person. It's probably the only real sleep he has
right now. Yeah, of course. And I'm sorry again if I've spoken out of tone. Roy,
stop apologising. Sorry. I lost someone. Close. A few years ago. It's bad enough
you're going through hell. The last thing you need is people being insincere and
offering fake support. So that's two taster sessions. And anything for the boys?
Oh, they'll be with Helen. I'm getting some quality time in with my girls before
they leave. Well, they'll have a wonderful time with the horses. I can see that
Evie's already taken to one of the ponies. She's not stopped stroking them since
we arrived. Looks like she's a natural. Is she the youngest? Evie? Yeah. But
will Alice be taking the lesson? Well, it'll depend on the rota, but we have a
lovely team here. Animals and stuff. Honestly, they'll be fine. I'm sure. I just
wondered. Perhaps if they come back for a longer visit, you could book some
lessons for them. We'll see. You don't sound too sure. Actually, they're about
to move abroad with their mum. Move? You mean permanently? Yes. So I don't quite
know how it's going to work once they're settled. I want to make the most of the
time I've got with them while they're here. Good plan. It's going to be such a
wrench when they leave. I can imagine. We never know what tomorrow brings, so we
may as well make the most of today. I'm sorry, Lillian, if I'm speaking out of
turn. I was so sad to hear about your sister. But for the life of me, I can't
think why you'd want to make more distance between you and your brother at a
time like this. Lee, I know you mean well, but... He's hurting, Lillian, because
of Jennifer's death and because of the distance between you two, when you could
be closer than ever. It's not always that easy. It is if you let it be. I'm
sorry, I know it's not my place, but we should make the most of the present
while we still can. If a sudden loss doesn't teach us that, then what does it
teach us? And there's a real character coming to stay at Brookfield in this
evening's Archers at 7. And before that, in our 6.30 comedy, we'll be observing
everyday life through the lens of another character who's rather well known to
us here at Radio 4. The master of satire, David Sedaris is back with his unique
blend of wit and wisdom. I know that people are now taking pictures of
themselves at funerals because when I looked up selfies at funerals was the
third option. The humorous laughs at life and himself. I've been studying
Japanese and I'll say something to Hugh, I'll say, oh, did you know that this is
how you say, and he says, we're only going for four days. A new series of Meet
David Sedaris starts this evening at 6.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. And if you
missed David's recent appearance on Desert Island Discs, you can find that on
BBC Sounds. Well worth a listen. Now on Radio 4, we continue with our drama
series Nazis, the Road to Power. Based on extensive research from documents and
diaries of key witnesses. This is the story of the rise of the Nazis under Adolf
Hitler, an unknown army corporal at the end of the First World War, who within
13 years would become Chancellor of all Germany. We really do need. The fact is,
Schleicher, I'm getting the blame for all this and I don't like it. This? This
so-called, what do you call it? Deflation, father. Well, yes, there's no money.
Everyone's getting poorer. The thing is, General, the Chancellor can only govern
as long as my father signs decrees each time. They're jumping all over me. It's
not your fault. Mr. President, the new Chancellor has no support in Parliament.
If it's not to be your decrees, we must enable him to form a coalition. A bit of
national unity, General. Damn it, that's what the country needs. And the Nazis
are now the largest party in Parliament. Hitler's lot, they all bang on in their
speeches. But frankly, best job for him is postmaster. So he can lick me from
behind on my stamps. May I approach Herr Hitler, then? Schleicher, good God! We
simply cannot allow that man anywhere near government. He's nothing more than a
carnival barker. Sir, to be blunt, either he takes the blame or you do. If you
spoke to him, you might convince him to join the government. Charming idea, but
how do you shut the man up? How many hours he went on last time? You think he
manned the entire Western Front single-handed? Ask him to come with someone like
Strasser. He talks sense. And maybe with some words from you, soldier to
soldier, he would join the government as Vice-Chancellor. Oh, Germany, the shame
of it! Nazis, the road to power. Part 7. Hitler, whatever happened to him? The
elections in July 1932 made the Nazi Party the largest in Parliament. 230 out of
600 seats. But still short of a governing majority, and with no other party
willing to join them in coalition. The new Chancellor, Franz von Papen, a one-
time diplomat, has been installed as Chancellor by General Schleicher, the Army
Minister. Look at them out there. They've come to see history. Hope to God they
will, Herr Döller. Tom, please. Since 28, I've been Beaverbrook's man in Berlin.
Hitler's going to walk out in an hour or so, our new Vice-Chancellor. Fact is,
with perfect German, but no family connections, no private income, and a second-
class degree, I knew I had a much better chance as a newspaperman than a
diplomat. He's turned you down before. But look what's happened since. All the
state elections. The Nazi vote is going south. They've peaked and he knows it,
and he knows we know it. This is his last bloody chance. And I put in the hard
yards, greasing up to Ernst Röhm, boss of Hitler's storm detachment. And it's
Röhm who gets me in with his old mucker Schleicher, which is how I come to be in
Schleicher's office, watching Adolf Hitler arrive to meet the President.
Shouldn't you be in there, General, steering negotiations? Papen will keep an
eye on the President for me. And Meissner? Can you trust him? The President's
Chief of Staff is a civil servant. Duty before opinion. And the son? Is he in
there too? Young Oskar? As if this country doesn't have enough problems. That's
not the quotation. Sorry, Tom. Please sit down, sit down. Let's talk, you and
me, shall we? Like old comrades. Otto, will you take notes? Sir. You know the
Chancellor, Herr von Papen, and this is... My party manager, Herr Strasser. Your
Excellency, if I may, our expectations are modest. Chancellorship for Herr
Hitler, Interior Ministry for Frick, Air Ministry for Goering, Labour Ministry
for... well, me. And a new Ministry for the People's Education for Dr Goebbels.
Herr Hitler, we really must all pass our cloth. I also require the post of
Minister for Prussia. Non-negotiable. Might I suggest instead, Herr Hitler, I'm
only empowered, we would be honoured if you joined my government as Vice-
Chancellor. Again, why should the leader of the strongest party in Parliament
subordinate himself to you as Chancellor? Because you are unable to form a
parliamentary coalition. Surely, sir, you don't intend to remain permanently in
opposition. Given the status of the National Socialist Movement, gaining 37% of
the vote... Almost twice as many as any other party. I have no option but to
demand full leadership of the government. I must be Chancellor. Forgive me, but
in front of God, my conscience and my country, I cannot justify giving the power
of government to a party that is openly inimical towards those who are
different. He's been listening to the Jews again, Grimm. His Excellency has wide
responsibilities. Herr Hitler, if I may, you and I were old battle comrades and
I wish us to remain so. For the moment, may I simply request that your
opposition is conducted with courtesy, with chivalry. Here he comes. Oh my God,
it's not even been half an hour. He doesn't look too chipper. He certainly
doesn't look like a Vice-Chancellor. Excuse me, gentlemen. I have been lured
into a trap. They, they, they, they drag me in here in front of everyone and
we're never going to walk away more than this. It's grotesque, grotesque. It's
over for the President, over. We'll bring him down. Stupid old man. Chief, come
on, let's get you out of here. I'll never sell my birthright for a mess of
pottage. Never, never. Our opposition will be implacable, ruthless, resolute and
the outcome, the blame will not be ours. No, they have brought this on
themselves. Sir, sir, any comment for the British press? Herr Hitler, you don't
have to. Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. Write this down, Delma. The question is
not whether we shall march on Berlin, but rather who has to march out of Berlin.
Why should I march on Berlin when I am already here? I only need two years.
Quotation. General background again. Sorry. People only vote for the National
Socialists out of despair. A lot of despair. You've seen it. On the streets,
beggars everywhere, professors begging. But it's getting better. In two years,
with a strong economy, the Nazis will be unthinkable. And until then? The
President must suspend the Constitution. We have to talk him round this time. We
must end party rule once and for all, Your Excellency. At the election, sir,
more than half the electorate voted for parties who stand to dismantle the
Weimar Republic. Bruno! I can guarantee the army will see off any trouble from
the left. Bruno! Heel! Oh, good boy. We require your decree dissolving the
Parliament. Already signed. Use it when you want. But we must also postpone the
elections beyond the 60-day limit. We have Council's opinion, sir. Article 42 of
the Constitution clearly states the President's duty to preserve the German
people from harm. Which, in these circumstances, overrides the mandated 60 days.
If you decree it, sir. Do I have a choice? Come on, Bruno, inside. Work to do.
So Papen and Schleicher are ready when the next session of Parliament opens.
But... Mr Speaker, Mr Speaker, I insist. Mr Speaker, a point of order. The
member for the Communist Party has the floor. With Goering now elected Speaker.
Herman Goering. We move an immediate vote of no confidence in the government.
Any objections? If there are no objections, I shall proceed with the vote on the
motion from the KPD. I have here a decree for the dissolution of this
Parliament. Does any member have a point of order? No? We go to the vote. Sir,
the Chancellor of Germany demands to exercise his right to speak. The vote is
underway, I'm afraid. No, Mr Speaker, I have here a decree signed by the
President. This Parliament is disowned. We are currently proceeding with the
vote of no confidence. Sir, sir, sir. Strasser's organising the Nazis to vote
with the Communists. Christ. Christ. Happen's got to get a vote on the
dissolution decree first. The government... The government is defeated by 522
votes to 42. With five abstentions and one spoiled ballot. Also, I have just
received this dissolution order from the Chancellor. Unfortunately, the
government has already fallen, so the order is definitionally invalid. Look at
them, that smirk on Goebbels' face. We can hardly declare a national emergency
now. Looks like one to me. What's 60 days? 6th of November. Elections on the 6th
of November, then, gentlemen. Hitler will get a majority this time. Let's see. I
have a sense that our National Socialist friends have lost their mystic aura.
They're short of money, the state is short of money, the storm troopers are
hacked off, they're losing party members. No, no, no! I have no desire to become
a minister by grace of some aristocrat. Would you care to join my cabinet of
barons? No! If God wanted things to be like that, we'd have all been born with
monocles. See this? Told you. Nuremberg, the festival hall, look, half full. No,
half empty. The only political outcome I seek is leadership itself. True power.
And we National Socialists have a holy right to it. We now realise that Hitler
is simply another misguided fanatic, the kind to overreach and achieve nothing.
A falling star in the November fog. See, Tom? He's done for. I have chosen this
path and will follow it to the very end. A man like me may die. A man like me
can be beaten to death. But a man like me cannot yield. And look, he's back on
the Jews. And who wrote Herr Papen's economic manifesto? Jakob Goldschmidt. Yes!
Either the German people will escape from the clutches of the Jews, or we will
degenerate into nothing! So he's desperate. They can't muster those huge crowds
any more. Capitulation? I do not know the meaning of the word! The 6th of
November and the votes are counted. 2 million less than last time for the
National Socialists. The Nazi vote is down and they've lost 34 seats in
Parliament. But Schleicher, for God's sake, the seats have gone to the
Communists! The point is, he's lost them. The bourgeoisie, they've seen through
him, and then, unlike all this storm troop of violence, the lefties, they've
seen through him. The magic is gone, Franz. Everything now seems to hang on
luck, and the good or bad mood of four individuals, five including French
Schleicher. My aim, Herr Hitler, is to form a government of national
concentration. I'm speaking to every party leader, but I do very much want to
see your movement brought into government. Surely, Herr Hitler, you agree that
times are too serious for everyone to merely seek his own personal interests, go
his own way. Yeah, quite, Otto, well put. I am willing to form a coalition...
That's marvellous...as long as the President first calls on me, as Chancellor,
to form a government. Your Excellency, knowing how much you hate getting the
blame for these decrees, I have a suggestion. My government would aim to receive
an enabling law from the Parliament. That would require a ruling of national
crisis. Remind me, Otto, this enabling... Herr President, an enabling law allows
the government to act without a parliamentary majority and without you
constantly having to sign Article 48 decrees. So there would be no oversight?
No, no. I'm sorry, Herr Hitler, you must form a coalition, presumably with the
German National People's Party. Work with Hugenberg, unthinkable, no. An
enabling act would lead too easily to a single-party dictatorship. I see, I see.
You want to make me Chancellor of a government which will unquestionably fail.
It's another trap to destroy me. Don't think I can't see that. Our door is
always open, Herr Hitler. General, how can you ever move forward without the
Nazi votes in Parliament? I'm hearing things, Tom. Not everyone agrees with the
Führer. The Nazi Party is splitting. But who else can form a government, become
Chancellor? Sir, I must request that you do not charge me with the task of
forming a government. Franz, you are abandoning me. It is beyond me, sir. Not
unless we suspend elections indefinitely. Your Excellency, I regret. Hitler
won't negotiate, won't even come to Berlin. Then we must revert to actual
postponed elections. We believe that might provoke a communist uprising.
Followed by a Nazi counter-revolution. It'll be civil war, Father. Your
Excellency, we have submitted a written report. The National Defence Force has
been running a war game and does not believe it could quell internal unrest
without leaving our borders dangerously vulnerable. As you see, sir, the case is
somewhat altered. With God's grace, we shall have to let you try your luck as
Chancellor, General. Your Excellency, I would be honoured. No one in Berlin
expects Kurt von Schleicher to assume the top job. And now he must go pell-mell
to form a majority coalition. Everyone has an Achilles' heel, Tom. And Hitler's
goes by the name of Gregor Strasser. I agree with you, General. This all-or-
nothing strategy of Adolf's, it will never bear fruit. The public don't like it.
The party doesn't like it much either. Your storm troopers really don't like it,
yes? We lost 40% of our vote in those state elections. And a party based on a
psychotic belief in victory cannot be seen to lose. As you know, the President
has charged me with forming a cabinet. And I need to appoint a Vice-Chancellor.
How many National Socialist members do you think he could bring with you? At
least 60, maybe 70. More, once the first step is taken. That could give us a
majority in Parliament. Of course, Schleicher doesn't tell me about this tete-a-
tete. It's Ren Papen who spills these particular beans. Dahmer Express. Good
evening, Herr Dahmer. This is? Franz von Papen, soon to be Chancellor of
Germany. Again, sir. Restored, one might say, after a needless hiatus. Is this
an exclusive, sir? What I am about to tell you is definitely exclusive. I
presume your chum General Schleicher didn't tell you who's sipping tea in his
apartment in Alstenstrasse at this very moment? Herbert Hoover? Joseph Stalin?
Satan himself? You're getting close. Gregor Strasser. Strasser? There? Yes, Herr
Dahmer. Strasser is being lured into friend Schleicher's new cabinet. Almost
certainly as Vice-Chancellor. And the smart money says Adolf doesn't know a
thing about it. Then the money is very smart. Toodle-oo. Jesus, Jesus, Jesus,
Jesus! Hempstalk, listen. We're doing that silly thing of translating names
again, are we? Listen. Your friend and mine, Gregory Streeter, yes? Strasser,
yes. Is right now having a little one-to-one with General Todi in private at his
flat. He's with Schleicher? Just wondering if your Mr. Hutman knows about this.
Is Streeter there to patch things up, or is our Gregory flying solo? Do you
happen to know? I'll get back to you. Yes! Sally, quick, in here! Dictation!
Coming! Coming! Faster! Faster! Heels off, young lady! And when he arrives back
at the Kaiserhof, poor old Gregor doesn't know that they know. This is sabotage.
Sabotage. You have not followed any single program since the summer except to
become Chancellor at any price. Nothing else befits me, befits this party. There
is no realistic chance of this happening. You're a madman, Adolf. They will call
on him. No one will ever enter a coalition with us, and the price we pay will be
the disintegration of the movement. They will appoint me. It is the path to
power. Right, right. I would happily take the illegal route now. We have the
storm detachment, and I will happily follow them into the struggle. I have no
intention of wasting the blood of my troopers on something so fatuous. Germany's
youth will not march into Schleicher's machine gun. Then accept the Vice-
Chancellorship. Once we're in the cabinet, we can lever it any way we want.
You'll do anything just to become a minister. This chaos you are creating, it's
not in the interests of this country. The interests of the Nazi party are the
interests of Germany. Then I shall resign. I'm going. Where? Holiday. Italy, I
fancy. I am done. You can't just... Is this a conspiracy? When I return, I shall
take my place in the rank and file. No hard feelings. Gregor! Stop! Somebody
stop him! Let him go. Does he mean it? We'll find out. Chief, tomorrow's paper.
Sorry. Hitler is to be pushed aside at last. The Nazi party is finally seeing
sense, and that sense comes in the form of Gregor. If this party falls apart,
I'll put an end to it in three minutes. I will. Chief. We can handle this,
Chief. We can. We shall dismantle Strasser's entire organisational structure.
The SS will happily step into the secretariat. This is a rebellion. We must
flatten it. Flatten it tonight. My God! 1932 has been one endless run of bad
luck. Let's just smash it to bloody pieces. But for Chancellor Schleicher, it
turns out to be the best possible outcome. The Nazi party is a laughingstock,
Tom. Look! Look, the Frankfurt Times. The massive Nazi attack on the democratic
state has been repulsed. Look, the Berlin Times. There, second paragraph. Hitler
is to be pushed aside at last. Berlin Daily News. Historians will later write,
all over the world, people were talking about... What was his name again?
Adelbert? Alphonse? Adolf Hitler. Whatever happened to him? He just disappeared,
didn't he? Hitlerism has perished according to the very laws by which it lived,
Tom. Germany is safe! It's the 3rd of January, and the two excluded men of
German politics are brought together for a secret meeting. Adolf Hitler commands
the largest group in Parliament. Franz von Papen has the ear of the President.
Each needs the other to complete a path to power. But someone else knows what
they're up to, and Papen is photographed on his way in. You and I, Herr Hitler,
I believe we could find a way. I surely do. I have been picturing a du umvirate.
Which would mean? A sharing of power between us. It's the cabinet which... Your
people could hold defence and interior, which I know... Du umvirate, call it
anything you wish. However, I must be Chancellor. My party expects it. Do you
wish to see the end of Schleicher? More than you can possibly imagine. Then...
Do you wish someone to speak on your behalf with President Hindenburg? Ha ha ha.
If Schleicher dissolves Parliament, he can still govern. The President has
refused him a dissolution decree. Refused? A vote of no confidence is therefore
inevitable the moment Parliament sits. He's up the swanny. You have this from
the President himself? The President trusts me. The President insisted I keep my
apartment in the Chancellery. You know that. I pop in through the garden, under
the linden trees, give him my advice. Not a civil servant in sight. How would
you like me to advise him? Was it you, General? Did you tap his phone, send the
photographer? Actually, it was my dentist. He does strasser as well. Tipped me
the wink. Who is this dentist? I think I might have a sudden cavity. Anyway,
turns out Papen was only trying to help things along. He explained it. Makes
perfect sense. The General is convinced that Papen was just trying to find out
what it'd take to inveigle Hitler into his cabinet. But what Schleicher needs
even more than that is a dissolution decree from the President. He needs to
govern without Parliament. If Schleicher goes into Parliament without one, they
will call a confidence vote. He will lose. And then there must be an election.
If they vote no confidence, Parliament will be dissolved. But I am also asking
for you to decree a state of emergency and thus postpone elections longer than
the mandatory 60 days. The precise manoeuvre you refused to support when Herr
von Papen was Chancellor. The circumstances have changed. Which you said would
bring on a civil war. Something beyond the army's power. The defence forces are
now much better. No, General von Schleicher! If it was extra-constitutional
then, it's extra-constitutional now. Then, if the Constitution is so sacred, may
I ask you not to hold any meetings with former Chancellor Papen without me being
present? Was there anything else, General? And in this looking-glass world,
those photographs haven't done Herr Hitler any harm at all. All the papers are
talking about it, Chief. I have seen. We thought that photograph was a disaster.
It's the complete opposite. They're all talking about you again. Some of us
predicted this, Putsy. We're inside the President's circle and they know it. You
trust Papen? He needs me. I'm his route to undermine Schleicher, he's my route
to Hindenburg. I still wouldn't trust him. Putsy. You're absolutely sure you
want to go ahead with this election? All this effort for such a... It's perfect.
A state election in a tiny state. Lippe-Dettmoldt has barely more than a hundred
thousand voters. It's all small businesses, no factories. No one votes
Communist. We can flood it. Posters, speeches, all Joseph's tricks. Just the
thing to lift morale. It really couldn't come at a better time. Or worse, if we
do badly... We currently have one member in the state assembly. We'll win half
the seats this time. But if we don't... If we end up looking like losers... We
have no choice. Joseph? I'm going to hire giant tents. There just aren't the
venues anywhere in the state. I found a tent that takes four thousand. And
trains. Every speech, every event, we bring people in. From all the surrounding
states. Six trains for your opening night. Huge audiences guaranteed. And the
stormtroopers, where will they sleep? We'll find barns and things, you know? In
January? Baron von Eunhausen has offered us his estate. You'll be staying there,
Chief. No one will know. Tom, get this into your paper, I beg you. Half the
people at the rallies are just Nazi members bussed in from other states. Three
quarters. I don't get it. Isn't he just showing how weak he is? Having to drive
out to tiny villages. Thought he was the Führer. And every speech is about the
system. The system is the people's enemy. What blessed system? It's anything you
want it to be. The Marxists, the Jews, von Papen, you, me, the military.
Anything you want to blame. The man hasn't got a single policy. It's all anti-
this, anti-that. What does he stand for? He'll win, though, won't he? If he
does, it'll be like a fly impaled on the tip of a broadsword. Yes. Yes. 39...
39.5% of the vote. 9 out of 21 seats. See, Putzi, I told you. A 70% increase on
last time. 70% more voters want the Nazi Party. Except, and math was never my
favourite, we've done worse than July last year. We got almost 4,000 more votes
then. Didn't we? Six months ago, I mean. The parliamentary elections. For
Parliament. You're right, Putzi. Arithmetic is not something you should dabble
in. I've started my editorial. From this small sector of the trenches, the
offensive has been resumed. This is no time for lily-livered compromise. Poor
old Gregor. He really did miss his moment. No one will go near him now. Strasser
is over. Meanwhile, Herr Hitler has a new acolyte. Joachim von Ribbentrop, a
one-time wine salesman who bought his von off his aunt and married the boss's
daughter. He oils the way for a Papen-Hitler rapprochement. Oil is rather his
strong suit. Please, please, I'll send for another bottle. I hear you met with
Hugenberg. Yes, a man with a political vocabulary of 80 sentences. He does have
a constituency. His party controls the centre-right. And 51 seats. You two would
make a formidable combination. I must be Chancellor first. The President has
declined that possibility twice. Look what happened in Lippe-Dettmold. Yes, now,
Lippe... We took 40% of the vote. If that isn't a clear instruction to former
government... Lippe is not Germany. Its population is less than one-half of 1%
of Germany. They're bellwether, utterly bellwether. You couldn't afford to
repeat it nationally. I've heard about your unpaid bills, your personal loans to
the party, another national election, and you'll all be in debtors' prison. I do
not require another election to demonstrate my right to be Chancellor. Maybe I
was thinking I could introduce the Führer to the other Hindenburg, my friend
Oskar. The son unforeseen by the Constitution. Or... If you don't think you can
talk the President round, maybe his son can. The man can barely form a coherent
sentence, his entire life in the army. His father's the boss, and he's still
only a lieutenant colonel. Best of luck with that. And what does Adolf Hitler
do? He goes to the movies. This is marvellous, this bit. You've... you've seen
it before. Yesterday. Oh? Couldn't wait to see it again. Look, look. Look what
he does now. Magnificent. The whole of the Tyrol is rising up and following him.
I see, yes. One man, one man changed it all. But he dies in the end, doesn't he?
That's the best bit. He gives himself at the last, the supreme act. We do need
to get back, Chief. The Chancellor's... Shh, shh, shh. It's the big fight scene,
the ambush, can't miss that. My plan for Germany can be reduced to two words.
Create work. For himself. Few on the right of German politics like what they
hear from Chancellor Schleicher. My predecessor favoured means testing, wage
cuts, and increased funding for industries, for businesses. He told us that
would generate employment. For his friends. We've all seen how that has failed.
Utterly. No. The Schleicher government will directly create work. Financing
projects throughout the country which will generate thousands of jobs.
Ridiculous, how will that restore Germany's growth? I have also heeded the well-
made arguments about our rural lands going uncultivated. Too many bountiful
fields in the northeast go unused while people starve in the cities. We will
accelerate the seizure of these bankrupt farms and make them available to a new
homestead project. Excellent, that'll make him plenty of enemies. As we planned,
Herman, it's no accident. Not as a socialist, but as a problem solver. Some call
me the Social General, and yes, I wear that badge with pride. Officers of all
German armies have always, first and foremost, sought the well-being of... Um...
The man's a socialist, a crypto-Marxist. That land resettlement plan, he's
doomed. He must surely know these estates belong to Hindenburg's friends, the
barons, the Junkers. This is Bolshevism, Schleicher! That's a tad. How is this
different from Lenin? Divide everything into the smallest portions and dole them
out? Yes, you're taking land from the people who know how to manage it and
chopping it up into ridiculous parcels. Small holdings, we call them. And then
you plonk a welder or a machinist or a I-don't-know-what on it and expect him to
grow things. A man who's never left his grimy city ghetto. We've been
subsidising estates in Prussia for years, sir. Millions of marks. And now we're
hearing the big landholders spent it all on motor yachts, racehorses, holidays
on the Riviera. Are you making an accusation, sir? The newspapers, Your
Excellency, they're the ones reporting it. They are... It isn't easy for the
government to ignore some of the more egregious accusations. And all this
blither about my own estate! It was a gift on my 80th birthday! My father's
ancestral estate, a token of appreciation from the nation. I can hardly sense
that, though. Is this some sort of threat? I'm sorry? Are you telling my father
to kowtow to your policies or there will be more of this muck-raking? Is that
what this is about? Is that what it was about? Not in the least. I don't like
seeing my father blackmailed like this. Do we understand each other, Herr Social
General? Thank you, sir. And Parliament must sit by the end of the month. I am
aware. And you must find a majority of members to support you. I have reopened
negotiations with Herr Strasser. Even if the man has the guts to abandon... A
chemist! Even if he came over to you with 60, 80 members, you still won't
command a majority. I don't wish him to come over. He is more valuable to me
outside the Cabinet than in. Then how do you...? The possibility, the mere talk
of it, will bring Herr Hitler down from his mountaintop, force him to join me as
Vice-Chancellor. But he's their messiah. At the bottom of his heart, you know. I
don't think he wants the chancellorship. Truly? Every time he comes to the
table, he demands something that cannot possibly be granted. Defence and
interior for himself. That's what he demanded when he met Papen and Cologne. How
could you ever grant him that? Quite. He's a little man, and he's scared of
power. Thank you, Chancellor. That will be all. Thank you, Your Excellency.
Which only makes it easier for Herr von Ribbentrop. Must be absolute secrecy. I
agree. And yet every single time it leaks. It's the servants. Papen says
Schleicher's got army intelligence tapping people's phones. If they are,
Schleicher would get a lot more right than he does. Right. Sunday then. Sunday
evening. Your chap, can he really be trusted to keep any agreement he makes? As
Chancellor, Herr Hitler would take the oath of office. But he's always talking
about the need for dictatorship, an end to the republic. Talk to him. You'll see
that's just... You need to meet. It's essential, even if news of it gets out,
that we can plausibly deny that we met. We need one of those... What's the...?
An alibi. Yes, that's the fellow, that's the chap. I have it right here. Four
tickets for the Ban on Love, Berlin State Opera House, Sunday night. Wagner?
Don't worry, it's a comedy. Didn't know he ever... Really? Comedy? You arrive on
Sunday. It's a seven o'clock start. Settle into your box, private door. Laugh
loudly. LAUGHTER Applaud loudly. Bravo! All right, Oscar. Circulate frantically
during the interval. That soprano, she is truly magnificent! We take your seats
for the second half. Enjoying it, darling? Let the darkness settle. I think it
opens in a prison. Oh, yes, the frightfully common room. And slip out of your
seats and down to the street. Snow will help. Collar up. Taxi! Taxi! Check
you're not being followed. Actors in films don't even do this. And get him to
drop you at least three streets away. It's, um... It's this one here, I'm sure,
I'm sure. It's the next left, Oscar, trust me. And before you know it, we'll all
be sipping sect in front of the fire. Prost! That hits the spot. From the
family's reserve cellar. You married well, Joachim. Tzat-tzat, the man's in
love. Ah, here he is. Let me get you a glass, Herr Hitler. No, I have... Mineral
water. Thank you. It's frightfully good. Yes, terribly. I prefer... Thank you.
So, did you chaps see the march today? Worthy, sadly. 35,000 stormtroopers
marching right in front of Communist Party headquarters. In bullo clads. Did you
hear them? Perfect unison. We shit on freedom. We shit on the Jew Republic. Full
police permission, slap in the face for the KPD. A fine victory. They sent
14,000 coppers to protect us. I was told General Schleicher turned down the
request for a Communist counter-demonstration. Is that right? He was there,
watching. I heard him. He said he saw our chaps marching past. Perfect
formation. He said these chaps would make first-rate fighting men. I'm sight
better than his defence force, Leoboz. Now he has French permission to begin
rearmament. Will you and I have a word, Colonel? Of course. Maybe in the
library. To the library! What do you think they're going to talk about? Maybe
some tax thing for his father's estate. That would ease the path, certainly. And
we have plans to restore the monarchy. That would also help. Thing is, Franz, if
you can't swing it, we need someone else to whisper in the President's ear. Who
better than his first-born? I can swing it. Well, then, why haven't you? He
wants me for Chancellor, but I have nevertheless reached a decision. Oh, yes?
This Gordian knot must be cut. I will support Herr Hitler at Teetotaler to
become Chancellor, and I shall take the role of Vice-Chancellor. Will that make
a difference? With Oskar's help, I believe it marks the end of Chancellor
Schleicher. Does Oskar know? They used to be such good friends. Not any more.
Not remotely. Naturally. Oskar was informed in readiness for... He's in that
room with the next Chancellor of Germany. As long as Schleicher doesn't find out
first, he mustn't know a thing. We're all in great danger of overestimating.
Schleicher is a very poor man's Machiavelli. Shall we eat while they talk? My
chef has left us a venison casserole. It's one of his true masterpieces, I
assure you. Newly refreshed, Otto Meissner arrives for work at the President's
office the next morning. Meissner? Good morning, Otto. Good morning, General
Schleicher. How is the venison? He does claim it's the best in Berlin. Is it?
Yes. Herr Meissner? Oskar Batterham, Edward Bennett, William Chubb, Melody
Grove, Corey Johnson, Scott Kareem, George Kemp, Saoirse Kennedy, Jack Lasky,
Michael Maloney, Forbes Masson, Lynn Miller, Alexander Vlahos and Andrew
Woodall. Sound design by Adam Woodhams and Mark Smith. Original score by
Metaphor Music. The producer was Nicholas Newton. It was a Promenade Production
for BBC Radio 4 and BBC Sounds.