TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-22H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Point of view was written and presented by Trevor Phillips. The producer was
Adele Armstrong. BBC News at nine o'clock. Ukraine's allies have offered more
support on the first anniversary of Russia's invasion. The US announced further
sanctions on Russia and another Â£1.6bn worth of weapons, while G7 leaders agreed
to punish any countries helping Russia get round sanctions. At the UN Security
Council, Ukraine's Foreign Minister Dimitro Kaleba described a peace plan put
forward by China as a step forward. It calls for talks between the two sides,
respect for national sovereignty and an end to hostilities. But Mr Kaleba said
the proposal needed further scrutiny in the light of the resolution passed by
the UN yesterday, which calls for Russia's full withdrawal from Ukraine. There
are some elements which we agree with. There is at least one element that we do
not agree with. On the reluctance of sanctions, we believe that sanctions is an
important tool. But in total, it's an interesting document. We have to examine
it from A to Z and draw our conclusions. It's good that China actually presented
the position, the comprehensive view on this war. Police in Northern Ireland
have made a fifth arrest in connection with the attempted murder of an off-duty
officer. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell remains critically ill in
hospital after he was shot at a sports centre in Oma on Wednesday. Police say
they're treating the attack as terrorist-related. Thousands of junior doctors in
England have announced they'll be walking out for three consecutive days next
month in their dispute about pay, which they claim has not kept pace with
inflation. Sir Bernard Ingham, Margaret Thatcher's press secretary while she was
prime minister from 1979 to 1990, has died after a short illness. He was 90. Sir
Bernard had continued to write a column for the Yorkshire Post until last month.
The publisher Puffin says it will release what it calls a classic collection of
Roald Dahl's books after it was criticised for editing his works to remove
potentially offensive words such as fat and ugly. The 17 titles will be released
later this year and will be sold alongside the newly rewritten books. BBC News.
Now ready for the second half of an epic adventure with Flight of the Ospreys.
It's late autumn 2022 and the Ospreys have traversed Europe and made the
perilous crossing over the Strait of Gibraltar to Africa. And so have the team
of environmentalists following close on their tales. Emily Knight follows the
story. The autumn migration is tough for Britain's Ospreys. They're heading for
the warm waters and rich feeding grounds of West Africa. But as we've seen in
this series, they can be blown into the wild Atlantic, attacked by goshawks or
simply distracted by fish-filled rivers and reservoirs en route. We're following
the Ospreys in the company of the biologist Sasha Dench and her team from
Conservation Without Borders. It's the 1st of October and the team has just
arrived in Morocco, keen to learn how we can make the life of the Osprey and all
other migratory birds a little easier. The site we had opted to stay on the
first night in Morocco was directly the other side of the narrowest point of the
straits. So from the balcony you can watch birds arriving from Spain through
these really high mountains. And Jabel Moussa, I think, means Mountain of Moses.
We had a plan to go and visit the Jabel Moussa Raptor Rehabilitation Centre that
takes in all kinds of birds. Our first objective is the rehabilitation of
vultures. Here we are located in a globally important corridor for vulture
migration, the Straits of Gibraltar. Every year we find vultures that arrive
weakened, either because of the long distances that they fly during migration
north, south or south-north, or for other reasons such as illness. We find
vultures poisoned because of uncontrolled discharges. Rashid al-Kamlishi of
Birdlife Morocco is Sasha's first guide to the rehabilitation centre, which does
take in injured ospreys but gets most of its business from exhausted vultures.
There are a lot of birds that are found exhausted or injured from doing the
crossing. So fishermen reasonably regularly actually have found ospreys in the
water, but quite often it's vultures that are trying to make the crossing and
relying on thermals, and there just aren't any thermals there. There have been
many cases where fishermen have found vultures floating on the water. They've
noticed that they're there because of gull attacks, not always, but in most
cases. Sometimes vultures who are migrating for the first time in their lives
can't calculate the altitude of the departure flight and they fall into the sea.
There are so many cases like this. The main threat for raptors in general are
electricity lines and the infrastructure and transportation of electricity. We
also have wind farms. The worst problem is electrocution. Last year we had a
vulture that arrived with a dead foot. The foot was attached but dead. After a
veterinary examination we knew that the bird had been electrocuted. The level of
damage meant that they had to amputate the vulture's foot. We kept the bird to
breed in captivity. It serves now as an example for people to understand this
environment better and the risks and threats to birds here. The relationship
between birds and fishermen on this coast is complex and fascinating. Some
fishermen used to follow the ospreys to find the richest fishing grounds, but
when they found them they didn't just throw a net into the water. You need to
realise that dynamite fishing has a long history. Some historical writing talks
about its activity existing for over five centuries. Nisan Niobani is a
biologist and teacher, fascinated by the ospreys that land on his shores. In
dynamite fishing people use biomimicry, they put themselves at the same height
as the ospreys, and they gaze follows out of the osprey, searching for a show of
fish going past. A second person, that is signal, throws the dynamite, and the
impact of the dynamite is enormous because not only do they kill the fish that
they collect, but in the process they destroy everything from small
invertebrates to mammals. I believe that the loss of an important species like
the Mediterranean Monksill is due to the atrocious use of dynamite. All of that
together, the damage to the sea floor, but also the disturbance of the birds,
and at particular nesting time, had over the years caused the population to
dwindle to next to nothing. He had decided to work with the fishermen to get rid
of this, to look at alternative forms of fishing, trying to avoid areas where
there might be conflict with the birds was important. They also then looked at
the sort of fishing gear they were using to move from stuff which created
plastic waste, to traditional fishing traps and pots and nets and things made
out of organic materials, and there's now an industry developing, and we saw,
yeah, managed to sit there on the coastline and see three ospreys there still
fishing. So it's a fabulous story, and still easy for the seabirds there, which
is great. However, we then went out with one of his friends of many years, that
he's made through the Dynamite Fishing Project, a fisherman called Kai Kai. He
took us out to an evening fish market, like there's a vast range there, but they
all look very small. When I was small, I and young people like me went fishing
with a line or by boat. There were many types of fish and birds. Life was
beautiful. We only fish close to the coastline and close to the port. Now the
boats travel far out to sea to find something to fish, all the local fish have
been erased. There were ten fish processing factories, employing thousands of
men and women in the sardine and anchovy industry. All the factories have
closed, the last one closed in the 1990s. They closed because there was so
little raw material. I had some great times when there were stocks of fish. I
never thought that we would have this misery, this crisis. Fish is our only
resource, our only work. People have lost a great deal, and the area and the
town have also lost a great deal. The osprey is part of the heritage of our
area. It's the basis for attracting tourists and scientific investigation. These
species need to be respected, and they're a great indicator of resources. If we
have ospreys, we have fish. When we no longer see the ospreys, we will know
there is nothing left, once and for all. From the Mediterranean crossing points,
the ospreys follow the coast of western Morocco, passing through northwest
Africa's most densely populated regions, the fast-growing urban centers of Rabat
and Casablanca. These are disappearing around Morocco at a drastic rate. We had
a fantastic guide in Mohammed Hilmi, who's in his late 20s, he's studying birds
and bird ecology, has been interested in it since he was young. He lives in
Salih, which is a city next to Rabat. Within Rabat, there was one remaining
wetland, which was home to a couple of species that were basically found just
there. It was also the only freshwater wetland for quite a long distance. And
plans appeared to drain the wetland, fill it in, and build a storage facility
for produce. It's going to be basically a market, a huge market where the stock,
fruits and vegetables, grains, there was a lake on all this area here, with very
thick freshwater vegetation, which was very important for birds, either for
hiding, having a shelter, or for breeding. In fact, there were many rare species
that were breeding here. And by rare, I would say that for some of them, there
were not more than 20 pairs in all of the country. Are there other wetlands
nearby that they can use instead? Unfortunately, in this area of Rabat, and all
the area next to it, there is no freshwater lakes or rivers, because even the
rivers, when they constructed the dam, it's become brackish, salty, because the
dam stopped the freshwater from coming from the mountains. And now it's
practically only marine water that goes all the way up to the dam wall. Has this
made you give up on conservation in Morocco? Well, it didn't make me want to
stop trying to change things, but it made me very angry, because our future, the
future of all of us, depends on this nature and this wildlife. It's late
October, and the conservation convoy is heading south through Morocco, en route
to the Sahara Desert. As the team drove on, it was getting drier, it was
flatter, it was hotter, but this was a landscape that none of us had seen
before, so it was actually quite exciting. It was one of the things we'd come
for. But I think, actually, whilst it is hard, it's still absolutely stunning.
The priority for almost every migrating bird is to get past the Sahara as
quickly and as efficiently as possible. That's why Sasha was so intrigued when
she got a call from a fellow Osprey fan in Norway. My name is Roona O, a
Norwegian scientist in Birds of Prey, and I work on Osprey satellite tracking
Ospreys. Roona has spent the last ten years researching the migration routes of
his local Ospreys. He's attached satellite trackers to 11 of them, but they've
suffered a pretty traumatic rate of attrition. The most problem is shooting,
illegal shooting. So we have lost one in France, we have lost one in Nigeria,
one in Burkina Faso, and probably one in Ivory Coast. Two of the trackers just
stopped working. Two of the Ospreys, they navigated wrong, so they ended up in a
desert without any food, any water, and one ended up somewhere in Burkina Faso.
We don't know what happened to it, and one in Mali. And that tracker is still
working, but we can see it's laying behind two bushes. The problem is that
that's a jihadist area, so we cannot obtain that tracker. So that's ten
Norwegian Ospreys down and just one left. A female Osprey by the name of Mrs.
Rauer. Roona's been tracking her for four complete migrations, and he's become
rather attached. She's an Osprey with a lot of spirit. She's one of the birds
that's been recorded actually rejecting a mate a couple of years into being a
partner, which everybody thought was a bit unusual, and then found actually that
the mate then became obviously quite ill. So clearly she rejected a mate that
was ill, and then it eventually was killed by an owl of some kind. I guess she's
an old Osprey because she is kind of narrow when she's flying up and down to
western Sahara. If you see on the younger Ospreys, they kind of have a broad
migration route, but this one is really, really narrow. So we think she's really
experienced. According to the data from her satellite tag, Mrs. Rauer flew
straight from the wetlands of France to one of the most inhospitable spots on
Earth. When Roona saw the land route that Sasha and the team would be taking, he
asked them to track her down. First of all, what we were given was basically a
few points on a map. She spends her time on a section of the Sahara right near
the coast. She seems to be fishing on a bay, and then going in to feed and
potentially to roost at night. So we basically sent the team an aerial image
from Google Earth of the region and asked them to go out and find a series of
bushes at this particular point and try and see if they could find Mrs. Rauer,
what she's doing, where she's going, any threats in the area, etc. So that was
the mission. First of all, what did the area look like? It was just solid
desert, very few features. It was all just sand and rocks and very little
greenery, no water in sight. It was quite a desolate place. It was really off-
road, like Matt said. It was like all the desert, but there were some pissed,
what they call off-road tracks. So we decided to convoy two vehicles and head
into the piss and with the GPS and not really knowing where we're going, except
for the compass, like, oh, it's a bit this way, a bit that way. And in the
middle of the flat plain was this mound of sand that we could see that roughly
correlated with where the GPS point would be. We got out the cars and as we were
walking across to the mound, we saw a bird fly off the mound that resembled an
osprey. And I think Charlotte actually managed to get some footage of it. We
went to climb the mound to see what else we could find as a true detective, bird
detective. So we see, we went up there. We ended up finding quite a lot of
different bones, like mammal bones. Then we also found a lot of fish skeletons,
like quite a few of them, actually. The predominant fish bones look to be
monkfish. And in lots of sites, monkfish are a fish associated with deeper
waters. But actually, they can be found in very shallow water. If they're not
fished out, it's likely that there is so little fishing pressure that there are
actually monkfish in shallow water. Mrs. Rauer, wise old bird that she is, seems
to have settled on the perfect wintering ground. It's dry and it's desolate, but
she's got the pick of the finest monkfish to feast on. So whilst the team was
celebrating the fact that they had gone there, they had found this bird. A
couple of people had been left on the main road with the main vehicle. And
whilst they were waiting, a police vehicle turned up and said that it was
actually still, whilst it was not marked along the roads, there are still live
landmines they fear around the area. This stretch of the Sahara is what the
United Nations call a non-self-governing territory. For decades, it's been
tussled over by Morocco and the Polisario movement. That makes it a peaceful
spot for Mrs. Rauer, but a dangerous one for off-road conservationists. The
Zolio message just said, make sure you follow your tracks back. There are a lot
of landmines in the area. And then that's when, like, we were so hyped up that,
you know, we'd been running all up and down that mound and, like, excited to
found the bird and then, now, like, oh, oh, danger. Mel, Matt and Charlotte made
it back safely with their footage, and Runa in Norway was very pleased to hear
that the last of his tagged ospreys was enjoying desert life. I'm really excited
that at least somebody has seen her area, because on Google Maps, it's only
sand, just sand everywhere. And it's kind of amazing that she can survive in
such areas. She appears to be really, really strong, so hopefully we can have
her for many, many years. Hugging the coast road, just like most of the young
ospreys, Sasha and her team cross Mauritania and into Senegal and the beautiful
colonial-era capital of San Luis. The city is built on prime osprey country,
where the Senegal River meets the Atlantic, a dynamic and fertile network of
sandbanks and lagoons. The team spot 140 ospreys in just two hours, with the
help of local ornithologist Jean-Marie Duper. Jean-Marie is a French expat who's
lived in Senegal for well over 30 years, very passionate about birds, started in
particular to be interested in the osprey when he realised the importance of the
Senegal and the Gambia regions for the osprey. I explained to Europeans that we
started this. We lost three-quarters of our bird species long before there was a
decline in Africa. We don't want the same mistakes here. We don't want to lose
wetlands like we've done in France. We shouldn't turn everything into large-
scale farmland, where we've removed all the areas for birds and biodiversity.
I'm not saying the Africans are doing it badly. I'm just saying that for the
last 30, 40 years, the Europeans have provided a bad example. All through the
African section of this journey, fishermen have been a vital part of the story.
In Morocco, they followed the osprey to find the best catch. In Mauritania, only
locals are permitted to fish along great stretches of the migration route,
leaving enough food for the ospreys. But Senegalese fishermen and the ospreys
face a threat that's common to the rest of West Africa. Foreign boats taking the
fish. One of my friends took me to sea for the first time because one of the
fishermen didn't turn up and he asked me to come with them. I was just 14 or 15
years old. And when I became a fisherman, for years I noticed what I called
injustice, because I saw collisions between industrial fishing and small-scale
fishing. No one ever reacted. Even if we complained to the state, they didn't
take action. I was asked to go and speak to a man called Karim. We sat down and
I said, so yeah, I've come to ask questions about fishing, local fishing, and he
said, well, I started a fishing revolution, the first fishing revolution back in
the 80s, to which I responded, well, revolution is a pretty big word. I'm
talking about industrial boats, huge fishing boats from Europe and Asia, Spanish
boats, Korean boats, Chinese boats, there were so many in Senegal. These boats
depleted the Senegalese resources. That didn't seem to bother them. They
destroyed equipment, and there were so many fatalities each year because of
these boats. There were regular collisions between the big boats and the smaller
boats, and he said that each year, between 70 and 80 or sometimes more,
Senegalese fishermen were killed. I just thought, you can't colonize me here.
You can't come to my country, steal my resources, kill me, destroy my equipment
and take my fish to Europe. So I called the fishermen and said, listen guys, the
state's not going to solve this. We must do it ourselves in our own way, an eye
for an eye. One night, sat around, managed to get together about 100 different
fishermen who all agreed that they had to do something about this, and the only
thing they could think of was to go out to sea, completely surround one of the
big fishing boats, and then climbed on board. The captain thought that they were
going to start a conversation, but in fact they kidnapped him, and he's
explaining. This was kind of an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. If they
were going to kill our fishermen, we had to demonstrate that we might be
prepared to do the same. He just said, look, did you really have a plan to kill
him? And they said, no, but we needed people to think we would, and we needed to
make sure that we were able to do the same. We had to do it myself. We had to
make a very strong effort, and we had to make sure that we were able to do the
same. We had to think in a way that we could live up to the truth. We had to
learn how to live up to the truth. We had to learn how to live up to the truth,
but we needed people to think we would, and we needed to make an international
incident, and that was the only thing we did, we had no power. Nobody would
listen to us. Even in Senegalese law, the lives of Senegalese fishermen the
osprey could be connected to issues that are as complicated as competition
between nations for their rights to fish in far-flung places like Senegal and
where it's small-time fishermen that are at the front line of conservation. The
waters of West Africa are plagued by foreign fishing vessels. Around 200 boats,
subsidised by the European Union, buy licenses to fish, while other boats from
China, Turkey and Morocco dodge the inadequate patrols and fish illegally. But
legal or illegal, they're doing the same thing, extracting high-value fish for
foreign tables and low-value catches for fish meal production. Both massively
reduce the catch available for local subsistence fishermen and migrating birds
like the osprey. But it's linked. It's directly linked. Birds can't live without
fish. The fish disappear, we all disappear because we won't have anything to
eat. The Senegalese are dependent on fish, but it's even worse for the birds.
Birds can't eat vegetables. If the fish disappear, soon are the birds. Floating
on thermals high above West Africa, Britain's ospreys have crossed the Sahara
and the arid Sahel. Catching the light beneath them is a broad strip of
freshwater and tropical forest. They've reached the Gambia River. The bird life
is incredible. The sounds are spectacular. All the way along, you'll find osprey
populations amongst against mangroves. It's early November, and the biologist
and adventurer Sasha Dench has spent the last three months following Britain's
ospreys on their annual migration. She's been investigating the threats they
face, and meeting local people working against the odds to protect them. Our
crossing into Gambia, we actually thought, as an ex-British colony, it was going
to be a really fast one, but actually getting across the border was one thing.
It only took about an hour, which was great. But once you get across the
official country border, you then have to cross a river. And the traffic jam
trying to get the single ferry that was working across the river was extreme. So
we watched ferry after ferry come and go without us being put on it, various
VIPs, a VIP lane. One of the presidential candidates had come through. He did
come and say hello and apologize for the fact that he was getting in front of
us. But we were met by two fabulous conservationists from Gambia, a lady called
Awa and Fa. Awa is one of the few female conservationists in Gambia, and spoke
to us about how challenging that was. Even something as simple as walking around
wearing birding clothes, so trousers and a photography jacket with a few pockets
for various things and binoculars around your neck, was a challenging thing for
even her parents to come to terms with the fact that she wasn't wearing typical
Muslim attire, but in order to go out birding and to be a conservationist often
needed to dress like that. As being a young female in conservation, I do live
with a lot of challenges. And I can say like culture is one of them, religion is
one of them, parental control is also one of them, and society also tend to join
you. Challenges can be there, but if we are very strong women in conservation,
that can be a big goal. And also being a young person, what I always say is even
if I have to be a children in future, they are going to be conservationists. She
was a bit of a force for nature. So as we were spending those many hours waiting
for our ferry crossing, we were surrounded constantly by kids asking for either
for a football or trying to sell us something. And she turned it into an
opportunity for education. So the whole side of our vehicles are decorated with
pictures of the osprey, osprey tagging, the migration route, etc. So she managed
to get them thinking and talking about everything from climate change to
migration to what they wanted to do with their life. And I was wondering how
that was going to go down and eventually a couple of kids turned up having found
a piece of paper from someone asking for a pen so they could take notes and then
go back to tell their parents or their other friends or to tell their school.
We're trying to create a frame to educate you all that this is how conservation
is and how vulnerable it is in Africa and more specifically, I can say, in the
Gambia. And people tend to bring culture to conservation. We are very strong
women in conservation and fight against that. Having the belief that you have to
be in the house, bearing children, doing housework, you don't raise your voice
on issues that are affecting people and conservation. That one is also another
problem. Awa isn't the only conservationist raising her voice in the Gambia.
There's a fight on to save some prime bird habitat. It's pretty stunning. You
look out on an area that's mixed tree species growing some open areas, some
areas where you can see what looks like rice paddies, but they are still
absolutely full of wildlife. This area, I was not asked, the Koto Creek is the
only green belt in the KMC region. Yaya Bari is a local guide and president of
the Gambia Bird Watchers Association. Okay. And why is it so important to you to
keep it? This area, you could tick nearly 100 different species just around this
area. You can tick nearly four to five different kimfishers here, whereby in the
whole South America, you only have four kimfishers. Right. So this is better
than all of South America. And other areas like this have been lost along the
coast, haven't they? Because people want to develop in beautiful natural areas
with beachfront. Yes, we have a problem by the encroaching of land at the
moment, we can decompose around here because of the development, the housing
development, and there's a big demand coming up with the tourist development. So
these are the areas left around the coast here. If we don't act quickly, we will
lose this area. And these sorts of sites are also important for migratory birds,
aren't they? Absolutely. Like the other part of the creek, it's a wetland. You
have a lot of migratory wedas coming in. And in fact, a few years ago, we have
some wedas like the Terexan Piper, we have the American whistling ducks being
around here, the golden plover has been seen here. So if this area is lost, we
will not have this migratory birds we are to be. As we walked up towards it, we
met a woman called Fatou. So she and others use this greenbelt area for basic
food production, but it's done on such a small scale and organically. So it's
still a haven for wildlife. I'm making rice here. One day I'm walking here, one,
two man farm. They're greeting me, they say, how are you? I say, fine. We are
coming here to fence the place because the government they sell the place for
the Chinese people. The tractor is coming. The tractor? The tractor is coming to
us to destroy anything here. I say, but that is not right. And there was no
warning whatsoever. Yeah, actually, there was no warning according to Fatou and
according to some of the conservationists. So how did you feel? I'm crying, I'm
crying, I'm still I'm crying. She turned up one day and suddenly found someone
was not only digging a ditch, but also building a wall to start the construction
of a hotel right in the middle of it. A woman like her basically got together
with others and the local birding association and they began to protest. And
this was the first time that the local community and the birders had got
together to really try and fight the rapid development that's happening on the
green spaces along this area. I remember the day when we were told that they are
building a hotel on our famous Koutou Creek. I cried because this is where we
make our living. And the ones we see here include the monkeys and other things.
If they build all these areas, which will come, our future generation will not
know even what a monkey is or will not know even what the kimfisher is because
if we lost all the nature, we will not have what we are looking at here today.
And then without the green belt, you have no fresh area, you have no life. If
there's no nature, there's no life. The protests worked. The building works
stopped. And Fata and Yaya are working together to get legal protection for
Koutou Creek. These places are under threat, but what's inspiring is that when
people take a stand, when it's not just conservationists, you often have a
pretty small voice in these issues when you're coming up against a developer.
But if you've got conservationists and you've got the local community getting
together to protest, then it really can work. Good luck. Thank you. Gambia is
basically a long, thin country, a tiny strip of land really on either side of
the Gambia River. So we can follow the river all the way upstream and all the
way along you'll find Osprey populations amongst the dense mangroves. So we took
a long pierog journey in through the mangroves where there were Ospreys every
50, 100 meters. It was really beautiful. Mangrove habitat is critical for
migrating birds. The roots around the mangroves in the tidal zone are critical
areas for juvenile fish. So if you lose that mangrove network, you lose the
juvenile fish. Dreadful for the people, it's dreadful for the Ospreys. So we
went into a tiny village built on the edge of the mangroves and the chief who is
young, is he 20, 27? I think he thinks he might be the youngest village chief.
He has big plans for it. So here what people do here is only fishing. Fishing is
their main occupation. Women will go for oyster fishing, crab, all sea foods.
And that grows on the roots and around the roots of the mangroves? Yeah, you
have oysters attached to the roots of the mangroves. So that's what they do and
it's like a seasonal thing. Augustus Sanyang is the head of his village, which
relies on the mangroves growing at the riverside for food, wood and protection
from floods. But the ports here are expanding and concrete is gradually closing
in on the community. All around this area, mangroves have been damaged a lot and
most of the banyule land has been used by many, many, many businessmen for their
own purpose. And we have seen that mangroves have been damaged. The villagers
don't intend to see their environment degrade any further. So they've come up
with a solution. They're planting their own mangroves. It's a big project. I
like that project because when we were working one day with my brother, my
brother told me, don't you think this place can be grow mangroves? I said, yeah,
you're right. I believe growing mangroves around this area will protect the land
because these mangroves are not only here for oyster fishing or other stuff, but
we know what importance is plants. So having this in abundance will help.
Britain's Ospreys are coming to the end of their yearly migration south. They've
crossed land and sea, tackled high mountains and baking deserts. They've battled
storms, navigated oil slicks and skirted electrocution, predation and the
hunters bullet. Not all of them have made it, but the ones who have are
approaching their final destination, their winter hunting grounds of West
Africa. An adult osprey, once it's done a few migrations, will remain faithful
to the same wintering site every winter, which I just think is amazing.
Biologist and adventurer Sasha Dench and the intrepid flight of the osprey crew
have been with them every wing beat of the way. They've been following the
fortunes of one bird in particular, a satellite tagged nine year old male osprey
called 4K. This year was the first year that he's raised young, so we're
particularly interested to see how this might have impacted his journey. It's
mid November and after nearly four months on the road, they're closing in on
4K's winter hunting grounds on the Pongo River in Guinea. But the challenge
isn't over yet. To get there, they must first find their way through the tangled
waterways and thick forests of Guinea-Bissau. The whole country is basically a
vast estuary of complex little islands with a complex backstory which includes
coups and it's been called a pirate state for a long time. But amongst all that
chaos, they have got a pretty vast network of nature reserves. Some of the
community protection around some of the critical sites is incredible, so that
bit was impressive. But where you can really tell that at a national level
there's a bit more chaos is trying to get anywhere in Guinea-Bissau. The
exhausted team, including team leader Melanie, found the roads in Guinea-Bissau
one of the toughest challenges yet. I've fired with me not knowing enough about
the quality of the roads in Guinea-Bissau. So I looked at the map and decided to
head for a border crossing that was closer to the coast and then that's where we
realized that the border crossing we were headed for was absolutely not passable
for vehicles. And on the other side of the border there is a river to cross and
there's no ferry. It's only small pierog, small boats. So there was no way we
were going to go there by vehicles. So the next day we had to backtrack about
two hours I want to say, to an incredibly horrible bad bumpy ruddy dirt road to
the border. And the bad road just got worse and worse as we went. The drivers
were getting pretty tired and all I could do really sitting in the back of the
vehicle was like tighten my core muscle to keep my organs in because it was very
bumpy. That was interesting. While the rest of the team battled the open road,
Sasha took on another common foe in this adventure, bureaucracy. I had to fly
ahead to sort out various things with officials in Guinea. I eventually made it
back to Bofa with my various documents and stamps and went back to the prefe of
the region to meet with him. And then he decided that he didn't want to meet
just me. It had to be the entire team as well. And they were coming to the end
of five days of constant driving on these horrendous dirt roads where camp had
just had to be on the side of the road wherever they'd happened to get to. So
the vehicles turned up and what walked out of the cars were seven people that
were brown from dirt that looked like bad fake tan because it was also dripping
off them with sweat. They all had slightly hunched shoulders. They just looked
so broken, but unfortunately also very funny. So after a load of serious
discussions with the government representatives, we all had an incredibly hearty
laugh at their expense, which felt awful. But at least they sparked the sympathy
of everybody and we had everything stamped. And at that point, all of the
bureaucracy turned into action, which was great. So as soon as there was
approval from various levels of government, we could set off. We didn't know if
we might be gone for two days or three days or more. We weren't planning on
coming back until we'd found 4K at this point. Sasha and the team aren't the
only ones who've been following 4K. He's something of a celebrity bird, nine
years old, a migration veteran, and this year, a father for the very first time.
Tim McCrill from the Roy Dennis Foundation has been following him for years. 4K
is a really interesting bird because we actually satellite tagged him as an
adult Osprey in August 2018. So he was at that stage. He was already five years
old. He fledged from a nest in Rutland in 2013 and then returned two years
later, which is typical for most Ospreys. And then he established a territory
for himself on the Beaver Estate in Leicestershire, so north of Rutland water,
north of his natal site. And for a few years, he was just a lonesome male on
this nest and he was trying his best to attract a mate. And although a few
females visited him, none of them stayed to breed. And it was only this year in
2022 that finally he persuaded one of these visiting females to stay. She's not
ringed, so we don't know where she's from, but she's likely one from Scotland to
4K intercepted as she flew north this spring. So it's been a long old wait for
4K, but finally he produced Two Young for the first time this year. 4K is
actually a really significant bird within the Rutland Osprey population because
the population in central England was established by a translocation project
that was undertaken in the late 90s to restore the Osprey to central England.
He's actually the fourth generation of Rutland Ospreys and he was the first one
of those birds to actually breed successfully. So he's a bit of a trailblazer in
that sense. 4K last year left at the end of August, whereas this year he had to
stay right through to the 9th of September. And that was because that was the
day his last juvenile male from the nest left. So he waited for him to depart,
then he set off and he always stops over at an estuary in Normandy. He spent 10
days there. Then he crossed Spain in two days, just a really, really fast
migration across the Mediterranean to Morocco. And then he basically just kept
going. So he crossed the Atlas Mountains and then he took five days to cross the
Sahara and then eventually reaching the Pongo River estuary on the 4th of
October. And that's the thing, just like that nest site on the Beaver Estate is
the place he'll go back to every year. He literally goes back to the same
mangroves on the Pongo River every winter, which I just think is amazing. You
know, the navigational capacity of a bird like 4K, I think never really ceases
to amaze me. Of course, 4K isn't the only satellite tagged bird along the
flyway. Three juvenile Ospreys hatched in the Tweed Valley this summer were
tagged so we can follow their progress on their first ever migration. Three
brothers, Kirk, Tweed and Glenn. The three brothers at the nest all migrated on
the same day. Diane Bennett of Forestry and Land Scotland has been plotting the
progress of Kirk, Tweed and Glenn. Two of the brothers haven't made it, but
Glenn seems to have a stronger instinct for survival. Exhausted on his sea
crossing from the UK, he spent the night on board a freighter before taking off
and heading for the rich fishing grounds of northern Spain. But then he just
suddenly took off right the way down to Portugal and the last tracked parts was
just north of Lisbon at a fruit farm. It's just quite a worry because the
tracker is not sending back any information and the tracking device has been
very strong up until this point. Immediately prior to that area, there's a big
train line, lots and lots of electric fences, cables and pylons. Just worry has
he been predated or has he injured himself? It's a bit of a nail biting weight.
And the next thing is the tracker on the Monday morning fired back to life and
revealed that he'd actually made another amazing seaward crossing. He left the
fruit factory very soon after he'd landed there and then he'd flown an
incredible 36 hours all the way down to Morocco. When he first made a landing at
Superb area, the Cunifis Biological Reserve, which is a beautiful oasis in a
very dry desert landscape, lovely lagoons, absolutely teeming with wildlife and
fish. So we're thinking, well, good choice, Glenn. He had a bit of a rest and
then he's moved further south to an electricity station. There are power lines
and wind turbines and all manner of hazards that you can think of in a very,
very open, hostile desert landscape. So it did beg the question, why leave a
fantastic reserve and go to somewhere that was much more difficult. Finding out
more and more about the reserve, it is teeming with wildlife and there's lots of
other birds, herons, egrets, gulls and so on. He's a young bird and he's fishing
and it is likely that he could have been getting quite a bit of hassle if he's
making a catch, getting mobbed by other birds. So perhaps that's kind of put him
off and he's gone further south where he can be a bit more solitary. He's
clearly negotiating the wind turbines and all the power lines and the pylons and
he's gaining knowledge. He's very exposed though. There's no shelter, there's no
cover for him. Ideally, it would be nice if he moved further south and went to
more sort of traditional overwintering grounds down Senegal, Gambia, just
because we know Ospreys have thrived there for overwintering for such a long
time. So yeah, it would be nice if he went further south I think. Back in
Guinea, the team are closing in. Following the GPS coordinates to 4K's favourite
purchase, hoping that after four months following him through computer screens
and flashing dots on a map to finally catch a glimpse of him in the wild. First,
they head for the small fishing village of Dobire, the closest human settlement
to 4K's patch. We sat down with the villagers and we showed them the map we had
for which we'd taken all the GPS points and basically pulled out three points
which seemed to be the most popular points he was using, so potentially the most
popular purchase, along a bend in the river. And then yeah, we set off, cruising
up the river. By that time, I think we'd counted four or five Ospreys en route,
none of them were 4K, and we got to the first point in the river, he wasn't
there. We've just turned the motor off to see if there's anything we can hear.
Did the first kind of bend towards point number two, still no Osprey there at
all. 4K must be out and that's about a brekkie. We were back then moving towards
the main channel again and as we turned a bend in the corner, the point which
was marked as point three looked across and somebody just yelled, Osprey, that's
him. That's him. And there he was. Well, we weren't sure at that point where he
was, so there was cameras out, long lenses out, clicking mad from as far away as
possible to get good pictures. And yet then I remember very well the first
person to yell out, 4K, blue ring. Oh, it's blue leg ring. Yeah. You know, wait
a minute. Yeah, there were tears of, well, of joy of excitement. This was a kind
of pinnacle of a very long journey for us. That's it. He's flying. He's flying
up. He's turning around. We thought he might by that time have gone right. I
don't want you around anymore. Instead, he flew in circles over our head again
and again and again. He's right over the top of the boat at the moment, just
thermaling, calling even. That's pretty incredible. Oh my God, that is really
quite special. It was a pretty magical moment with a bird whose fortunes we'd
been following for four months now. Actually quite an emotional moment. After
four months, 5,000 kilometres, two broken trucks and 12 countries, the flight of
the Osprey journey is at an end. But the project is very far from over. It's the
end of the journey bit, yes. It's not the end of the project, which is now
thinking about all the conversations we've had with people and what parts of the
system could be shifted to give the Ospreys and other migratory birds a better
chance. It's December and adventurer and conservationist Sasha Dench is back on
British soil. After months of chatting to her through dodgy phone lines and
patchy Zoom calls, I finally caught up with her face to face. You are back in
Devon. How does it feel to be home? To be honest, it's a bit of a shock to the
system having been living with a crew for four months and suddenly being at home
alone. Partly lovely, partly also a huge shock to the system. And now you've
been back for a bit and you've had a chance to sort of think about the journey
from a distance. How are you feeling about the mission? I'm feeling great about
it. The expedition was a huge success and a key part for us is getting a chance
to live amongst people along the flyway for them to share with us the honest
truth of what it's like trying to do conservation there, but also the realities
of their lives. So to hear from the villagers in Dobie Ray, for example, to have
a guy stand up and say, actually, when it comes to wild birds on Sainte-Ful,
which means we really couldn't care less if we can't eat them, our lives are
focused on feeding our families tomorrow and the day after. For him to be honest
enough in saying that, to know that that's the reality of conservation in that
area gives us a much better chance of collaborating with them in the future. And
of the stories that you've seen, are there any that give you real hope? I mean,
the Osprey in general is an inspiring story. The fact that within the space of a
few decades across Europe, we've turned the situation around for the Ospreys
have brought them back in the numbers they are now. And the fact that that has
been done, not just by conservation is taking action, but people from all
different walks of life. That for me has been one of the most inspiring stories.
For example, eco guards in different countries across Africa who do their
environmental job for nothing, but they carry on doing it because it's their
local wildlife. That for me has also been really impressive. As the team have
been following the Ospreys, so people at home have been following the story.
Checking the team's updates on social media, monitoring 4K's progress on a map,
or indeed listening in to this programme. All along the flyway, people are
getting hooked on Ospreys. I got into them in 2014. Winnie, just outside of
Edinburgh, follows various UK nest cams, set up to give us a peek into their
world. I had been in hospital, came home, wasn't very fit, so started watching
Ospreys on his webcams and the stuff I learned was absolutely unbelievable. You
know, they showed you when they tracked and when the trick came out. It was just
wonderful. I'm absolutely crazy at Ospreys. So how much time would you say you
spend watching the cams then? In a day, all day, many, many hours of Spain
watching Ospreys. I just absolutely love them. Have you been following the
expedition? Oh yes, aha. When they said they were following one, I thought,
goodness me, I never thought for a minute they were going to find 4K. I got all
the chances of that happening. They've done so well. I didn't have anything to
go naturally with Sasha. Meanwhile, in Spain, a keen amateur photographer called
Eugenio Garcia heard that Glenn, that adventurous satellite-tagged juvenile
whose maiden migration has kept us all on the edge of our seats, was passing
through his home of Galicia. Eugenio did a 400km round trip to see if he could
photograph him. I decided to go there to take a look if I could find him. I was,
during two hours, going through the river trying to find him, but I couldn't.
It's not easy to find him. A large forest crossed by the river. Pure water,
plenty of droughts, almost a paradise. But I couldn't find him. And if Glenn
comes back to Galicia on his way back to the UK in spring, will you try and
photograph him again? That's absolutely for sure. I'll do it. And some Osprey
fans have been inspired to do even more. The Tor Torridge estuary flows out to
the sea from the North Devon coast. Ospreys pass through here on their migration
routes and sometimes fish, but they don't nest. Retired builder John has been
inspired to do something about it. Yeah, it's just something I always wanted to
do anyway, to see the Ospreys actually nest here. I understand there used to be
indigenous species 200 years ago here. So it happens. It'll be the first time
for the southwest. So how did you get from builder to Osprey nest builder?
Always interested in bird life, British bird life. And recently I went up to
Scotland to see the eagles, always like birds of prey. And on my return, I
thought, let's go across to Rutland, where the Ospreys are. And I said, I'd like
to build one of them poles. And I collected all the branches and that and tried
to build a nest like an Osprey would. Ospreys need a wide open platform atop a
very high pole for their nests. On the website of the Roy Dennis Foundation,
there are instructions on how to build one. It takes you through it step by
step. It couldn't have been better. It just showed me exactly what to do. It's
eight inch by two inches around. It's three foot square. Then I put some mesh on
it. Then I put a side on it. And then I just screwed together all these oak
branches. So I put a thing on Facebook and said, anybody know where I can get
electricity pole? A friend of mine come on and he said, well, so and so has got
a load of them in his yard. I have a word with him. But that guy donated one to
me. And then we just fitted it on the actual pole and lifted it all up in one
go. And it all went well. It could have been a disaster, which is a big thing.
It's 40 foot high, you know. So it's up there now and it's lined with a bit of
softer material. And just hoping for the best. Yeah. It might never happen. I
don't know. But unless I put it up, I won't know. You're hoping if you build it,
then they will come. And it's been on there. The osprey went up on the nest.
Already? This autumn. OK. It stayed here for three weeks. There was two ospreys
here. Yeah, I didn't see it. But one of the guys down there, the burwatches, he
said, look, it's been on. It's visited your pole. It was on top. Fingers
crossed. Like you said, they're already using the nest, though. So it's a good
sign. Yes. It'd be great if we can pull it off. If I can see an osprey actually
nest in there, that would bake it for me. Yeah. Because they're fantastic birds.
In many places, we think the limiting factor for ospreys returning is the lack
of suitable nest platforms. So if people can build them, that can make all the
difference. Yeah. Any tips for anybody else who is deciding to build an osprey
nest? Come and see me. Sasha has been front and centre of this conservation
adventure. But she's had a huge team behind her the whole way. Sharing the
driving, fixing up the vehicles, cooking, camping and working together for four
and a half long months on the road. And along the way, they've encountered a lot
more wildlife than just the ospreys. Animals everywhere. Birds, mammals,
insects, everything, crocodile. Friendhood people. Definitely, I think, the
northern bold ibis, because they just came right so close that it was just so
cool to see. The tiramisu. I learned about the tiramisu eagles. Short-toed snake
eagles, also called tiramisu because they've got like a tiramisu pattern. And
it's just that. And I was like, tiramisu, tiramisu. For me, it was just a big
change in colour. Everything had gone from being like yellow and brown. And then
we suddenly entered this national park and everything was just green and blue
and brown. Very lovely. Some call it Nairobi Fly. Some call it the blister
beetle. It releases this really powerful acid. Some say it's stronger than the
cobra's venom. I have a big one on my neck, but I'm kind of grateful I didn't
get it in my eye like both of you. We were right down by the water, but there
were all these burrows of these fiddler crabs. They were absolutely massive. And
at night, they'd just suddenly come out. And there were just like hundreds just
wandering around the camp. And if I opened my tent door, suddenly all these
crabs would just start piling in. Into the tent. Yeah, into the tent. If you
went down by the shore, it was difficult to walk and not step on them because
there was just so many of them as a big blanket of crabs. One tried to fight
Tim. Tim tried to fight the crab. People met on the way, just like gorgeous,
fabulous people, but all enthusiastic, like devoted people. Definitely one of my
favourites. The Great Migration South, both for the Ospreys and for you and your
expedition buddies, is now over. But this isn't the end of the project, is it?
What's next for the Fly to the Osprey project? No, this isn't the end of the
project. So we now have a film to put together to bring to life the journey of
the birds, but also the lives and the situations of people doing conservation
all along the flyway. The plan is next year, once we have the film done, to do
the return migration with film showings in all the different countries. We will
have a different aim in each country. But that might include wanting to meet
with ministers. It might include trying to gather communities together to back
the one person that's doing something. It might include trying to raise the
funds to build a research station that is really needed. We can see where are
the really critical areas where a little bit of change could have a massive
impact. So that's what we'll be focusing from now. And one of the key outcomes
from showing the films will hopefully be that will inspire a load more people.
That could be people in power, but it could be an individual who has an idea and
goes, yes, like John says, well, if the problem is lack of big trees here, I
think I can make a big tree. That's what we hope the film will do, inspire a
load more people to step up, because we can't leave it just to a few
conservationists along the flyway. We need a load more people inspired to step
up. The mission has one final legacy. A new name for one of the birds we've been
following the whole way. 4K. 4K is a very beloved bird, but most people agree.
He has a very boring name. 4K is a terrible name for a bird. I think scientists
go through phases, don't they, of deciding, you know, can we or can we not give
animals human type names? The people in Dobere, the small fishing village in
Guinea, which is closest to his territory, decided he needed a new one. One
which honours his presence there with them through the long winter months. They
named him after the village, Dobere. The mayor of the area stood up and he said,
I think we should name this bird Dobere. This is our bird as much as your bird.
Can you deal with that? There's something lovely about him saying that, isn't
it? Because we think of them as a Rutland water bird or maybe a bird from
Scottish islands, but they're not. They are Dobere birds. They are Guinea birds.
At every point along this journey, they belong there just as much as anywhere
else. Yeah, and that's exactly it. Some of them said, if this bird was born in
the UK, then it's a UK bird. Do we have birds here in Guinea? And I said, no,
no, no, these are like the birds. They wouldn't survive if they wasn't here.
They belong as much to the people of Dobere in the village as they do to us. It
is crazy, the connections. And I think it was kind of as mind blowing to us as
it was to them. Flight of the Ospreys was produced and presented by Emily
Knight. A quick look at the weather forecast tonight. The western half of the UK
will be dry, clear and chilly. Eastern areas and the far north of Scotland will
continue to see. We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are
distributed via third party services and platforms. And the BBC stream you are
currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an
internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the
manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to
stream on BBC Sounds. Doing the best of the sunny spells and eastern areas, some
isolated light showers, more likely on Monday.