TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-06-23H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Northern areas have a risk of significant and potentially disruptive snowfall
for the south, being wet and windy. It's 10 o'clock. Good evening. Welcome to
The World Tonight with James Kimarasamy. President Zelensky says he'll
strengthen Ukraine's defence of Bahmut, despite reports that the city is about
to fall to Russian troops. We hear about the reality on the front line and from
a journalist who used to call Bahmut home. I remember going to nightclubs and
cafes and sushi restaurants and walking through the park with a cold beer and
smelling the roses as we'd walk up to the Ferris wheel. An Iranian Christian who
fled her country tells us why the current protest movement cuts across faiths. I
have been deprived of my freedom as a Christian in Iran for the past 44 years of
this regime. Today, many other Iranians are being deprived of their basic right,
of their freedom. We'll hear how the NHS will use AI to diagnose breast cancer
and why some other organisations are hanging on to an older form of tech. This
is a floppy disk. Contained on here, there are very, very neat files all under
their own file headings and instantly retrievable. That's all after the BBC
News, read tonight by Neil Nunes. The Metropolitan Police has apologised and
admitted it didn't do enough to investigate Wayne Cousins for indecent exposure
before he killed Sarah Evrard. The former police officer has been sentenced to a
further 19 months for flashing at women in the months before he abducted and
murdered the 33-year-old. He's already serving a life sentence. Our
correspondent Helena Wilkinson sent this report from the Old Bailey. The
50-year-old indecently exposed himself on three occasions, once to a cyclist in
Woodland in Kent in November 2020. In a victim personal statement, she told the
court the horror of what happened would remain with her for the rest of her
life. Cousins also admitted indecently exposing himself twice at a drive-thru
McDonald's in Swanley. The number plate was reported to the police the second
time it happened. Days later, Cousins murdered Sarah Evrard. Mrs Justice May
said the fact that no police came to find Cousins after the incidents could only
have served to confirm and strengthen in the defendant's mind a dangerous belief
in his invincibility. If the car he was driving had been checked, police would
have found out it was registered to Wayne Cousins, who was a serving police
officer. Ukraine's President Zelensky says he has told his forces to bolster the
defences of the besieged eastern city of Bakhmut, which has been virtually
flattened after six months of Russian attacks. There had been reports suggesting
Ukrainian troops had started to withdraw from the area. From Kiev, here's our
correspondent James Landhill. President Zelensky said the fighting in eastern
Ukraine was painful and challenging. That's because Ukrainian soldiers are dying
to protect a city that largely lies in ruins. Independent analysts have
suggested Ukraine might be considering a limited withdrawal from eastern
Bakhmut. But Mr Zelensky met senior commanders and his office said they spoke in
favour of continuing the defensive operation and strengthening their positions
in the city. He and they know this battle is costing the lives of thousands of
Russian soldiers and they hope their enemy will emerge substantially weaker,
regardless of who ends up controlling the city. Police have revealed that the
three people found dead in a crashed car in Cardiff after being reported missing
were all in their early 20s. Two other people have been taken to hospital with
serious injuries. The group failed to return from a night out on Friday and
their vehicle was only discovered today near a busy roundabout on the A48. Our
Wales correspondent Howell Griffith has spent the day at the scene. Flowers and
balloons mark the spot near where the city is being attacked. The car was found
in a thicket of trees in the early hours of this morning, around 48 hours after
the group were last seen. They started their night out in Newport on Friday
night, driving for more than 70 miles around South Wales before reaching Cardiff
in the early hours of Saturday. Over the weekend, their families had appealed on
social media for help in finding them, but it wasn't until yesterday that the
police search was launched. Eve Smith, Darcy Ross and Raphael Jeanne, all in
their 20s, were found dead. Sophie Russon and Shane Loughlin are in hospital
with serious injuries. The crashed car has been removed and the police cordon
taken down. The case has been referred to the Independent Office for Police
Conduct in line with normal procedure. The British Medical Association says that
consultants in England are to be balloted for strikes in their dispute about pay
and pensions. Meanwhile, firefighters across the UK have voted overwhelmingly to
accept a new pay offer, ending the threat of industrial action. Tomorrow,
ministers will introduce legislation to ban migrants who cross the English
Channel in small boats from ever returning to the UK. Labour and some campaign
groups say the proposals are unworkable. Here's our political correspondent,
David Wallace-Lockhart. Proposals will include detaining anyone who makes a
cross-channel journey before deporting them to their home country or a third
country. They'll be banned from ever returning to the UK. Ministers have
defended the plans as common sense and Number 10 has said that once borders are
under control, more official routes for asylum seekers can be opened. But some
have questioned how the plans will work, pointing out that one of the
government's key tools for deporting asylum seekers, a deal with Rwanda, is
still caught up in legal challenges. Labour have accused ministers of simply
chasing headlines. Iran's Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei has condemned a
series of poisonings targeting schoolgirls and women at university as an
unforgivable crime. Hundreds of incidents involving toxic gas have been reported
across the country since the end of November. In his first public comments on
the attacks, Ayatollah Khamenei said there would be no amnesty for anyone
involved. The Director-General of the Confederation of British Industry, Tony
Danker, has stepped aside while an investigation takes place into his conduct at
work. The CBI says it had looked into an allegation about his behaviour in
January but that it didn't warrant a disciplinary process. But it's now revealed
that it's been made aware of fresh reports after being approached by The
Guardian newspaper. Mr Danker said he apologised for any offence or anxiety
caused to his colleagues. The last original member of the US rock band, Leonard
Skinnerd, Gary Rossington, has died aged 71. The group began in 1964 and was
still playing their signature song, Free Bird, in concert only a few weeks ago.
It's not known how he died. Our arts correspondent, David Silito, reports. The
sound of Gary Rossington's slide guitar on Free Bird was the beginning of a
guitar epic that defined Leonard Skinnerd. He was one of the original members of
the band which had been named after a PE teacher who'd objected to his long
hair. And while it's his riff on the hit Sweet Home Alabama, he was actually
born in Florida. And despite a near-fatal car crash, serious injury in a planax,
and the kill of three members of the band, drug addiction and a series of heart
attacks, he continued to perform. His last concert was in February, entering, of
course, with Free Bird. That report from David Silito. Thanks, Neil. You're
listening to The World Tonight with James Kimarasami. The Kremlin's plan was for
a three-day capture of an entire country. The reality, just over a week ago, was
that the Kremlin was going to capture an entire country. The reality, just over
one year on, is a months-long grinding battle for one small city. Bakhmut in
eastern Ukraine has become the focus of the fight between Russian forces and
Ukraine's defenders. Rumours of its imminent fall have been growing louder by
the day, as the Russian paramilitary group Wagner has sent waves of men into the
fight. Today, though, President Zelensky confirmed that his forces would be
digging in, not rolling over. His generals had told him they want to strengthen
positions around the city and not withdraw from them. Yaroslav Trofimov is The
Wall Street Journal's chief international affairs correspondent. He's just been
to Bakhmut and he told me about its significance. The city of Bakhmut, which is
a small city of only 70,000 people before the war began, has really been the
focal point of fighting in eastern Ukraine for the last several months. And
that's where Wagner, the Russian paramilitary organisation, has been really
trying to push through Ukrainian defences. And it is the only place along the
entire front line where Russia has managed to advance since last summer. So
Wagner has been able to seize about 40% of the area of Bakhmut as of now. They
are now in control of the entire eastern bank of the Bakhmutivka river that runs
through the city. And the Ukrainian forces there are in a very difficult
position because the remaining two paved roads into Bakhmut are under artillery
control by Wagner, which means that any movement there is extremely dangerous.
And so all the resupply and evacuations have to go through dirt roads. And this
time of the year, obviously, the soil is wet and nearly impassable for wheeled
vehicles. So it has to be done by tracked vehicles. But what of the people
fighting for Wagner? I mean, it all sounds from your reporting as though they
don't have that much training and everything is pretty basic. It's a complicated
organisation because you have sort of the professional commanders that have been
there all along. And the other people who are directing these masses of
disposable soldiers recruited in the Russian prisons. So these are being sent on
the nearest admissions. So they send a first wave and, you know, even a few of
them survive. They dig in and then the next wave comes in. And this way they
advance into Ukrainian positions and overwhelm them. But obviously directing all
these are people who have a lot of training and they don't get killed in such
large numbers. And some of those who are being sent to the front line, some of
them don't even have body armour on. Is that right? Well, I spoke to a couple of
Wagner soldiers, former prisoners, you know, recruited in prison camps who were
captured in the last few days. One of them told me they had one weapon for the
three of them sometimes. You know, they're not giving rations. But they are sent
forward with infringing tools. And what they do is they dig in. They dig the
trenches for the next wave to come in, even if everybody in the first wave is
killed. And the small groups of, you know, five, six people advance, then they
put in machine gun positions, and then the next wave can come in and move ahead.
And from the Ukrainian side, what are they able to do against this? The
Ukrainians don't have as much ammunition as Russians do. In trying to regain
land, the Ukrainians cannot afford the same tactic because the Ukrainians do
care about the lives of the soldiers and they just cannot send them to certain
death the way Wagner does, with his penal battalions recruited among the worst
of the Russian criminals in prisons. And that's what happens, doesn't it? I
mean, a lot of them are just, are cannon fodder, the Wagner, the less armed
ones. They're not even cannon fodder. It's worse than that. So basically, you
know, Wagner has carved out its own stable in the state. When Wagner's owner,
Evgeny Prigozhin, goes to these prison camps, he tells very straight that we
have our own separate laws from the Russian Federation. Russian Federation
doesn't have a death penalty. But we, Wagner, if you step back, you will be
shot. If you drink, you will be shot. If you take drugs, you will be shot. So
the soldiers of Wagner don't really have an option of retreating, of fleeing out
of the fire, because they know they will be killed by their own. And so it's
actually safer for them to go ahead under the hell and cram bullets. And what of
Bakhmut itself? Just paint a picture, if you will, of what the place looks like
now. It's a landscape of destruction. Russian artillery has been pounding
Bakhmut since July. So there is hardly any buildings left in the centre of the
city, or pretty much anywhere else in the city, that are intact. Most of the
population has long fled, and it's really a hellscape. Yaroslav Trofimov from
the Wall Street Journal, and we'll have more on Yevgeny Prigozhin, the man who
runs that paramilitary organisation, Wagner, in just a moment. But now,
Christopher Miller reports from Ukraine for the Financial Times. And he used to
live in Bakhmut. He told me it's unrecognisable from the city that he moved to
to teach English in 2010. It is unfortunately a hellscape. I've visited several
times over the past year and seen the situation deteriorate. And what I saw the
last time I was there in December looked nothing like the city that I knew 13
years ago and got to know better over the years between then and now. You know,
it was a beautiful little city, a sort of diamond in the rougher area of the
Donbass, which is known for coal mines and salt mines and hard working. But
Bakhmut was a city with treeline streets, paved roads, very patriotic people who
did not see a future in Russia and since 2014 had really become much more pro-
Ukrainian than I think a lot of people would believe people in eastern Ukraine
in such close proximity to Russia would be. And I remember going to nightclubs
and cafes and sushi restaurants and walking through the park with a cold beer
and smelling the roses as we walk up to the Ferris wheel at the top of the park
in the city. It was a great place that was filled with people who were minding
their own business. And then war came to the Donbass back in 2014 and of course
has deteriorated significantly in the last year. And there's very little left,
unfortunately, in Bakhmut now. You say patriotic people, people who felt very
much part of Ukraine and were there back in the day, though, those who had
sympathies with Russia, even if they didn't want to be part of Russia? Yes,
absolutely. There was, you know, Russian television was beamed into eastern
Ukraine and a lot of people did consume Russian state media and therefore a lot
of propaganda. And certainly in 2014, when Russia first invaded, there were a
lot of sympathizers. And over the years, that number greatly deteriorated as
they became aware of what Russia really had in store. It's quote unquote
liberation being the bombardment of city after city and the destruction of
several cities, including Bakhmut now. What's your sense about why it's become
such a totemic city during this war? Why this battle has continued for so long?
When the Battle of Bakhmut began in earnest in May of last summer, I don't think
that it really was on the leaders of Russia's or Ukraine's radar. It was just
one more city that was being attacked, that Russia wanted to bring under its
control and that Ukraine wanted to stop doing so and hold on to. But over the
past several months, what's happened is Ukraine has made significant gains and
had big battlefield victories where Russia has had these major defeats and not
taken any new ground or had a significant battlefield victory since early last
summer. So now, Bakhmut, while not necessarily of great strategic military
importance, has become this great symbol to both sides. Russia would like to
capture Bakhmut so that it can hoist up this military victory and to say that
it's continuing its quote unquote liberation of the regions in Eastern Ukraine
that Putin has claimed to have annexed. And Ukraine would like to hold on to it
because it's of great symbolic importance. And the city's name has become a
battle cry for Ukrainians to rally around. So they're throwing everything, both
sides, into this fight for Bakhmut. And neither is really showing they are
willing to back down, even at great, great costs. In regards to human life and
ammunition and military material. And let's end with the human aspect of this
and all the people that you knew when you lived there. What has become of them?
Have people stayed and fought? Have they left? What kinds of fates have befallen
them? It's a bit mixed. Most of my friends have left. They've managed to find
safe in Kiev or Western Ukraine. Some of the older people who I knew, who I
worked with, when I was teaching at a school there, have gone even further and
ended up with extended family in Germany. Some of my former students that I
taught while I was a teacher there have joined the military. One is a military
medic. He's currently fighting in Kharkiv region. Another is part of the
territorial defense forces, which have been fighting on the front line there in
Bakhmut. And I know that it's been absolute hell for him there. So they're
either in safer places or doing their part to assist Ukraine's war effort.
Former English teacher in Bakhmut, now the FT's man in Ukraine, Christopher
Miller. Well, let's return to that paramilitary organization, Wagner, and its
leader, Yevgeny Prigozhin, who's emerged from the self-imposed shadows of
deniability during this war to recruit prisoners and to grab ever greater
prominence. Today, he was filmed signing a box of what purported to be Bakhmut
wine for the women of Ukraine, he said, as a present for International Women's
Day on March the 8th. But his messaging hasn't been consistent, boasting about
wine production one day, complaining about the lack of ammunition on another. In
a video uploaded on Saturday but seemingly filmed in February, Mr Prigozhin said
his men feared that they were being set up as scapegoats in case Russia lost.
What if they want to set us up, calling us scoundrels, and that's why they don't
give us ammunition, they don't give us weapons, and they don't let us recruit
more people from amongst prisoners? If Wagner retreats from Bakhmut now, the
whole front will collapse. This front will collapse. Well, joining us now,
Katrina Doxey, Associate Director and Associate Fellow for the Transnational
Threats Project at the Centre for Strategic and International Studies. She's in
Washington, DC. Welcome to the programme. Thank you so much for having me.
What's your reading of these comments from Yevgeny Prigozhin? And they're not
isolated, are they? He's been moaning about senior figures in the Russian
military for a long time now. Rhetoric or is there a genuine split there? Yeah,
so I think it's a little bit of each of them. So as you mentioned, this isn't
the first time we've seen this. Actually, over the past few months, there's been
this increasingly public spat going on between Prigozhin, Valery Gerasimov, and
other military leaders. And Gerasimov is the Chief of Staff, he's leading the
operations in Ukraine now. Yes, I think that, you know, it's certainly a lot of
rhetoric as he kind of tries to, he being Prigozhin, tries to position himself
as a reliable ally to Putin, really pushing the Wagner Group and claiming
accomplishments, including in Vakhmut, trying to place himself in a better
political position coming out of all of this. But I think that there is also
this grain of truth to it. We've seen, as Russia continues to face various
setbacks over the past year, that both the official Russian military and the
Wagner Group are struggling to distribute enough equipment and ammunition,
they're struggling to get enough recruits. And really, I think what we've seen
most recently is that the Russian army is not going to, is not going to let
itself go without so that Wagner can have that extra ammunition, that extra
equipment. And so I think he's pointing to a real strain on Wagner, but coming
at it from a position where at the end of the day, the bigger concern is his
political standing rather than, you know, the well-being of soldiers who are
ultimately just going to be led into these infantry charge attacks as cannon
fodder. Yes, well-being isn't the phrase that comes to mind when you think of
how these Wagner recruits from prison are certainly being treated. But the
question I pose to the guys who've been reporting from there, and how long can
they keep throwing troops at Mahmoud in the short term? And what kind of numbers
do they have? So they certainly have been coming across these recruitment
challenges, which is always going to happen when you're just feeding people in
as cannon fodder. This way of war really just requires an ongoing stream of
recruits. And we've seen most recently that Wagner's been cut off from
recruiting in prisons as the Russian army starts to look to that supply. So
we've seen in both Wagner and across the Russian military, just historically
high numbers of fatalities and casualties. So across all of the Russian forces,
according to recent CSIS analysis by my colleagues, we've seen that Russia has
suffered more fatalities than in all of its other wars since World War II over
the past year in Ukraine. And in terms of what this means for Ukraine, these
very public splits, no matter how genuine they are, does it only benefit them? I
think that it certainly shows that there are fault lines within the Russian
forces between the military and these more informal units like Wagner, where if
Ukraine can continue to keep the pressure on in locations like Bakhmut, the more
that they can have this internal fighting within Russia, the more that's
ultimately going to benefit them if the Russian forces can splinter from the
inside. Katrina Doxey, Associate Director and Associate Fellow for the
Transnational Threats Project at the Centre for Strategic and International
Studies. Thanks very much. Now, in the piece he wrote in The Times today about
making Britain a scientific superpower, Rishi Sunak wrote that we should expect
artificial intelligence to change virtually every part of our lives. The first
example he gave relates to medicine. AI, the Prime Minister noted, has already
discovered a new antibiotic. Well, later this year, the NHS will begin trialling
the use of AI in checking breast cancer scans. An AI programme called MIA, that
stands for mammography intelligent assessment, will check the scans of nearly
7,000 women at Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust. Well, for more on that, we're
joined now by Dr Nisha Sharma, who's Director of the Breast Screening Programme
at the Trust. Good evening. Good evening. So, how will this work? Well, what
we're doing is we're doing the first trial in the UK, looking to see whether MIA
can replace a human reader when we read the mammogram for the first time,
because the standard of care at the moment is that we have two human readers
reading every screening mammogram. And where we disagree, we would then have a
third or a group of readers reading the same mammogram. So, we're looking to see
if we can use artificial intelligence to replace one of the human readers.
Right, so it's an opinion, one of the opinions rather than the definitive one.
Is that fair to say? Yes, absolutely. Because I think people might be concerned
about only relying on AI, but for the time at least, it's something that's going
to work alongside humans. Absolutely, because as you said, it's an opinion. And
when we read a mammogram, we have two opinions. And so, you can never replace
the human reader, because ultimately, if you disagree with the artificial
intelligence algorithm, you will always need a human reader or a group of
readers to make the final decision. And what follows from that, I suppose, is
the question, is this just replacing people because there aren't enough people?
Well, that's one way of looking at it. We certainly have a workforce crisis
within breast imaging in terms of not only taking the mammograms, but also
reading the mammograms. And currently, as you're aware with the statistics, a
third of doctors will be retiring by 2025. And we don't have enough trainees to
replace those doctors currently. So we need to look at innovative ways of
working. And that's where artificial intelligence can play a role within
medicine. So it's not replacing the doctor, but assisting the doctor. And I
suppose the other question people have is about the data that the artificial
intelligence program is using for its assessment and how accurate it is and how
widespread it is, whether it differs between different sections of society, for
example, whether that kind of information is just not going to be available to
AI. Well, it's important before you deploy an artificial algorithm within your
system that you've tested it. And we've certainly done that in Leeds because we
performed a large retrospective study where we used the algorithm and checked
its performance on our population. And it showed that it was non-inferior. So
we're quite happy going forward with a prospective study. And this is something
that we do have to bear in mind, that you cannot just deploy an algorithm within
your system. You've got to test it and make sure that the results are compatible
with the results that you're having without AI before deploying it going
forward. So we do need evidence. We need peer-reviewed evidence to show that
it's safe before we can deploy it. Dr Nisha Sharma, consultant, breast
radiologist, director of the breast screening program for the Leeds Teaching
Hospital NHS Trust. Thanks very much. Now, tomorrow, the Home Secretary, Suella
Braverman, will unveil the details of the government's new legislation that's
designed to reduce the numbers of refugees and migrants arriving on small boats
across the Channel. Under a bill that will be outlined tomorrow, Channel
migrants would be removed from the UK, banned from future re-entry and barred
from applying for British citizenship. Downing Street has said the government
will eventually open up more safe routes for asylum claims, but only once we
have control over our borders. That's been criticised by some groups, but the
SUNAC plan bears a resemblance to a new Biden strategy for controlling
immigration on America's southern border. That strategy will see special
humanitarian routes created for a limited number of people fleeing certain
countries, such as Nicaragua and Haiti, but people from other countries will
face immediate expulsion to Mexico if they try to cross the border and claim
asylum within the United States using an irregular route. Well, both President
Biden and Prime Minister Sunak have been making similar noises about immigration
recently. Today, my administration is taking several steps to stiffen
enforcement for those who try to come without a legal right to stay. Do not, do
not just show up at the border. Stay where you are and apply legally from there.
It is unfair on those who migrate here legally when others come here by cheating
the system. And above all, and above all, it is unfair on the British people who
play by the rules when others come here illegally and benefit from breaking
those rules. Well, that's the rhetoric, but just how similar are the policies on
either side of the Atlantic? Susan Fratzke is a senior policy analyst at the
Migration Policy Institute in Washington, D.C. For both governments, I think
there's a keen interest in trying to make the manner in which people are
arriving more orderly and more regular. There's a lot of concern about people
arriving in ways that are seen as chaotic and unsafe and dangerous, and there's
an interest in putting in place incentives to try to change that. I think there
are some notable differences, however. The policies that are being put into
place in the U.K. don't have some of the same measures that have been put in
place in the U.S. around creating more larger lawful routes for some of the main
groups of people who are coming to come legally or to facilitate entry at
official border crossing points. What about the politics of it? People might be
surprised to hear that the Biden administration, which set itself up very much
in opposition to the Trump administration, is taking a pretty tough line at the
border. Is that because of political considerations? You know, certainly I think
the administration has politics in mind. They've been very concerned about the
optics of what's happening at the southern border. I do think that there are
some notable differences in terms of what's being done. The administration has
also tried to create some new procedures under an asylum rule that they put
forward about a year or so ago now to try to also improve the functioning of the
asylum system. So there's these deterrence measures, but also they've been
active in trying to adjust some of the procedures to make things a little bit
more efficient inside the asylum system as well, which is something the previous
administration hadn't really sought to do. So what about the deterrence-based
policies? What about the policies which say if you come into a country in an
irregular way, it's going to be very difficult for you to either stay or to come
back again and try to get back in again? Is there evidence that these types of
strategies actually work, actually reduce numbers of people trying to enter
illegally? The short answer to that is no, not really. I think you could argue
that in some specific cases, maybe there's evidence that the deterrence has
changed the incentives that shape the way that people move. But often what we
see happen is that it then creates new incentives that cause people to adapt in
other ways that sometimes are equally as unsafe or unpredictable for governments
as well. So, for example, putting up a border barrier or a fence, people
continue to try to find ways to go around that. That just creates new risks. And
the big question, I suppose, is in the world that we live in now where refugee
flows, migration flows have become ever bigger and more complex, have
governments yet got a grip of how to deal with this? I think, again, the short
answer is very much no. I think we are in an environment that is in some ways
more challenging than the one that was at play when the 1951 Refugee Convention
was created. We no longer have a clear-cut Cold War situation that makes it
clear on what grounds people might be fleeing and makes it easier for publics to
see and understand the grounds in which people are fleeing. And at the same
time, mobility is more open and available to people in search of protection than
it was at any time in the past. And that makes a very complex operating
environment for governments. You have to try to maintain public support for the
principles of refugee protection and at the same time deal with these more and
more sort of complex needs and complex situations whereby people are presenting
at borders. Susan Fransky from the Migration Policy Institute in Washington, DC.
The Seychelles is known as a tropical paradise, a collection of islands in the
Indian Ocean with a multi-million dollar tourist industry. But based on
population, the country has the biggest heroin problem in the world. The
Seychelles government is taking a hard-line stance, but the problems persist.
Joseph Fadi Banan is a former drug user who's lived on the islands all his life
and he's given BBC Africa Eye rare access to his community. That's my friend
Mimi. We are at the cemetery visiting her son's grave for the first time. She
tells me she tries not to show her pain, but today it overwhelms her. Rashid was
a heroin user and at just 20 years old, he died of liver and kidney failure,
most likely caused by contaminated needles. She says the doctor did everything
he could, but Rashid died in front of her. Mimi is a heroin user too, and she's
now smoking crack cocaine as well. Seychelles may have a reputation for fancy
hotels and luxury living, but 25% of islanders live below the poverty line. For
many, drugs are an escape. According to the Agency for the Prevention of Drug
Abuse and Rehabilitation, 10% of the Seychelles population is dependent on
heroin. It's estimated that two tons of heroin is trafficked into the country
every year. Most of it comes from Afghanistan via Iran. Smugglers bring it in on
small boats. It's difficult to police. Seychelles has more than a million square
kilometers of territorial waters. This is Seychelles President Waver Rumkalagun.
The drug situation is very bad. At this point in time, per capita, as far as
consumption of heroin is concerned, Seychelles is number one in the world. And
this is not a statistic that gives me personally great pleasure. Communities,
villages cannot be controlled by the drug lords, by drug addicts. We have to
protect our children. This is why we have taken the approach that we need to
disrupt those activities. It's an all-out war on drugs in order for me to save
our people. Rehabilitation is a key part of the Seychelles' drug policy.
Rehabilitation is a key part of the fight against substance abuse. But in recent
years, all residential rehab centers here have closed. Centers like the one that
helped me recover have come back to visit. The place is now deserted. There are
rows of empty beds. And I find the one which used to be mine. This year is
exactly nine years since I left the place, man. The memories come flirting back.
I remember how tough it was when I first walk in. So today I'm sitting here, I'm
off heroin. Trust me, it's a feeling that I can't even express. It's too much.
It's too much. It's too much. Back then, these rehab centers were helping
hundreds of people. But with these programs now closed, there's very little
support for those still battling dependency. The President has promised to build
a new rehab center. But with around one in ten Seychelles people trapped in this
cycle of dependency, it's a problem that's not easily fixed. That was Fadi
Banan. And if you want to hear more on that story, you can find the full film on
the BBC News Africa YouTube page. Just search for Seychelles Heroin and Me. Last
week on the program, we reported on the mysterious spate of poisonings affecting
schoolgirls across Iran in recent months. More than a thousand girls are thought
to experience symptoms and hundreds have been taken to hospital. In a rare
statement, a member of the Iranian Parliament's National Security Commission has
described it as an organized movement. And today there was also an uncommon
intervention from the country's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. I get a
call from the president. He said, I'm going to kill you. I get a call from the
president. If there are individuals behind this, which there must no doubt be
people involved, some are surely involved in some way. The relevant governing
bodies, enforcement and information bodies must pursue this and find the leads
on this crime. The culprits must face the toughest of punishments. One theory
that's been circulating is that the poisonings are a form of retribution for the
role that was being played by schoolgirls in the recent anti-government protests
in Iran, which followed the death in custody of a young woman accused of not
wearing her headscarf in a suitably Islamic way. Well, tomorrow MPs at
Westminster will hear the testimony of an Iranian woman who says she's a victim
of a different form of religious persecution. 35-year-old Dabrina Bet Tamraz is
a Christian pastor, a member of Iran's estimated 1.2 million strong Christian
minority. Officially, the Islamic Republic recognizes a number of Christian
denominations, but Dabrina, who now lives in Switzerland, says she had to leave
the country 12 years ago because of threats from the authorities. My background,
I'm from an Assyrian Christian background. Assyrians are Christian minorities in
Iran. So despite the fact that we are recognized Christians in Iran, I have
faced persecution. I've been surveillanced, monitored, controlled, threatened.
How did these threats manifest themselves? They would interrogate my father on a
regular basis. They would question him. When I became a teenager, the
surveillance and monitoring grow. They would follow us with their cars, take our
pictures, send it to my parents, just to show that they have their eyes on us.
They were who? The Minister of Intelligence. We knew. We would talk to them. We
would see them. They would come to the church. We had spies in our church. They
wanted information from my father, from our ministry, from our church ministry,
from other pastors, other church leaders. Who's attending the church? How many
baptisms do we have? What we do in the church, basically. So they wanted more
control, more information. In 2009, they closed down our church. And we had an
evangelical church in Tehran. In 2014, they closed down all other evangelical
churches. So what was the goal? The evangelical Christians in Iran are
considered terrorists, Zionists, and a threat to national security. If you don't
comply to the regime and to the Islamic rule, as it is defined by them, if you
do not comply to their rules and you do not obey them, then you are acting
against national security. My father was arrested in 2014-15, and he was
sentenced to 10 years in prison. My mother was sentenced to five years in
prison. My brother did his time. He was one year in prison. And based on this
accusation, based on these charges. But what did they actually say? What was the
pretext that they used? Acting against national security, conducting meetings,
evangelism, teaching and training spies. Tell us about your visit here to the UK
and your appearance in Parliament tomorrow. What are you hoping for? What will
you be telling MPs? Specifically, I'll be speaking on the freedom of religion
and belief. Freedom for women, freedom for children, freedom for education.
Something that Iranians have been shouting on the streets for the past six
months. Women, life, freedom. I'm going to say you feel solidarity with the
women from other faiths. Absolutely. Absolutely. I'm an Iranian. I'm a
Christian, but I'm also Iranian. I have been deprived of my freedom as a
Christian in Iran for the past four years. Today, many other Iranians are being
deprived of their basic right, of their freedom. So my voice tomorrow will be to
keep Iran, this regime, accountable to their action. What do you think the UK
can do? The first thing is that they can keep Iran accountable with the
agreements that they have. Iran has ratified the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. And yet has not been able to uphold those rights, those freedoms for its
people. One thing that they can do is to support investigation on this serial
poisoning, to send a UN reporter or send an external reporter to investigate, to
give a report on who has committed this crime. So far, we have not heard
anything from Iran. And even if you do, Iran has proved itself untrustworthy.
And that was Iranian Christian Tabrina Bet Tamraz. Now, in a world of wireless
transfer, SD cards, USB sticks, what possible role can there still be for the
humble floppy disk, that oldest of old school ways of saving and transferring
data from your computer? Well, let's listen to the BBC back in 1979 examining
the use of microprocessors and looking at how it's been used to save and
transfer data. And let's listen to the BBC back in 1979 examining the use of
microprocessors and looking at how a word processor document could be saved. The
computer will file it for you. Not on paper, but on a magnetic disk. Now, this
is a floppy disk. Contained on here, there are very, very neat files, all under
their own file headings and instantly retrievable. The equivalent of many, many
shelves full of cumbersome paper files. According to a new article in the
magazine Wired called Why the Floppy Disk Just Won't Die, you might be surprised
at what they're still used for. Try not to be alarmed. Apparently, there are
some airlines which still rely on them. Well, Tom Persky runs floppydisk.com out
of California, and he sells thousands of floppy disks per week. He's on the line
now. Tom, who's buying them? Well, there are all kinds of people that are still
buying them. There are three real tranches of people. One, the hardcore
hobbyists who still want to play floppy disk computer games, who want to restore
old computers. There's an industrial base, including airplanes, embroidery
machines, tool and die machines, some medical equipment, where people have
equipment that was built to last 20, 30 years. It's lasting 20 or 30 years. And
the way to get information in and out is with a floppy disk. Right. But are they
safer? Well, it's a very stable, well-understood, not really hackable
environment. We get floppy disks in our office from people who want the
information off them. The disks can be 20, 30, 40 years old, and we successfully
pull the information off that. Now, I think I cut you off. You're going to tell
me there was a third category of people who use them. Yeah, the third category
are people who use floppy disks for promotional or art purposes. There's some
wonderful artists, including some speaking artists like Nick Gentry, who have
done really astonishing work using floppy disks as the medium. So apart from
art, when people are using them in anger, if you like, I mean, are there
downsides? I mean, there must be some downsides. Well, the biggest downside is
the smallness of the amount of information that you can transfer. If you only
have one megabyte of information to transfer, it's a terrific, well-understood,
stable, kind of elegant way to do it. But that's a small amount of information
nowadays. Right. And these airlines that are using them, I think that will
surprise and perhaps perturb some people listening. Why have they stuck with
them? Well, for those of us in the first world, we mostly fly on brand new
aircraft. But if you look at the world generally, probably half the airplanes
that are currently flying are more than 20 or 25 years old. It's not so much
happening in the first world, but throughout the rest of the world, that's
happening. And the way you get information in and out of those older airplanes
can be via a floppy disk. Right. I think we will have to leave it there, Tom.
But many thanks for joining us. Tom Persky, owner of floppydisks.com. I think
we're going to go for a safe landing on this edition of The World Tonight. That
is The World Tonight. I'm James Kemar Asami. I'll be back tomorrow at 10. But
for now, from me and from everyone here on the programme, have a very good
night. Studio Direction was by Alison Purcell-Davies and the editor was Emily
Craig. Sardinia is the setting for our new book at bedtime that's coming up
shortly. And then at 11 o'clock, James Nocte examines the possible outcomes of
Russia's invasion of Ukraine. On strange and hopefully entertaining tangents.
And it came back with the pig. Is that it? Keep listening to find out. The new
series of Rewinder. Oddly captivating. Hmm, perhaps you're right. Saturday
mornings at 10.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. I mean, get the message. Now on BBC
Radio 4, we begin our new book at bedtime. The Advocate by Marcello Foyce is set
in Sardinia towards the end of the 19th century. Italy has only been a modern,
unified country for a couple of decades. And the old ways of life remain strong.
The readers are Briege Brennan and Stephen Hogan. This is the way my father told
me the story. It seems that Bustiano was taking his after-lunch stalk up the
hill to stretch his legs and enjoy the cool air up there on the mountain, gazing
out at the view and the grazing flocks. My father told me that people said
Bustiano seemed lost in thought, as always when he had a difficult case to deal
with. In the court of Assizes, he was tireless. And anyone who entrusted their
case to him knew that all that could possibly be done would indeed be done, but
not for the money. He pretty often defended for nothing. But all the same, he
had his reward, earning the respect of the whole community. Fact is, he wasn't
on the breadline. There were some worse off than he was, as it is with everyone.
So his case wasn't going well, and his defendant had taken to the hills. He was
defending a youngster whose mother, Zia Rosina, made bread and pastries which he
sold from home. Anyway, this woman's son, Zenobi, a fair-haired, blue-eyed
wonder of young manhood, had got into trouble at the very end of December. Out
of the blue, he was accused of stealing some lambs. So his mother goes to see
Bustiano. All got up in her embroidered headscarf and lace-trimmed apron.
Affocato, this is none of my son's doing. I know him inside out. You must defend
him, because they listen to you. You're an important person. Just tell me how
much it'll cost. He must give himself up, if he remains a fugitive for life. He
must give himself up, if he remains a fugitive from justice, the whole thing
becomes more difficult. Do you think I haven't told him so myself? I've told him
it would be better to put himself in the hands of the law, because he hasn't
done anything wicked. But you know as well as I do, if you don't have friends at
court... And what did he say? That he had nothing to do with it. That they've
played a dirty trick on him. Sit down, the lawyer responded. Make yourself
comfortable. And then tell me everything, down to the last detail. There she
was, sitting in front of me, a tiny little person. All got up in her Sunday
best. She told me that that late December evening, when Sergeant Arturo Pauly,
temporarily in command of the local Carabinieri station, presented himself at
the door of her cottage, her whole life came to a complete stop. This son of
hers was incapable of wrongdoing, that he had always worked in service, and no
one had ever had any complaint. Indeed, his employers loved him like a son. And
in fact, the testimony of Cosma Casula Paz and his unmarried brother Bartolomeo
turned out to be a peon of praise with regard to Zenobi. But they were upset
that such a breach of faith, nine lambs stolen, had been wrought by the very
farmhand they trusted the most. And then there was the matter of Cizinia,
because it was common knowledge that the two young people were attracted to one
another. He's a handsome lad, but she's a dainty little Madonna, delicate as a
piece of porcelain. And moreover, it seems that Cosma Casula Paz, her father,
was not at all that unhappy about this attachment, even though Cizinia was only
seventeen and Zenobi was already twenty-four. Nothing official, far from it. So
closely was she chaperoned every moment of the day. She had these green eyes,
Cizinia had, and raven black hair. Nor had she any lack of suitors or
advantageous offers of marriage. It was at this point that the troubles started.
They wanted to get Zenobi out of the way, declared Zia Rosina. Who knows who?
Maybe someone else who had set eyes on the beauty of Cizinia. Maybe it was even
her mother, Dolores Casula Paz, who turned her nose up at the mere idea of such
a marriage. Not that Donna Dolores herself had been anything much before her own
marriage. Her mother was in service, a mere hired hand. Zia Rosina said that
Zenobi was constantly edgy and upset in the days after the business of these
lambs came up. It hurt his feelings that no one had come forward to express
doubts about his guilt. In fact, I found it hard to understand. In fact, I found
it hard to understand how things had turned out the way they had. Zenobi had
been constantly employed by the Casula Paz family for six years, during which
time his conduct seemed to have been exemplary. So much so that only a couple of
years before the robbery he was entrusted to bargain on his employer's behalf at
the sheep market. He made a good deal, with the result that Zenobi could
thereafter number ten of his own sheep grazing along with those of his
employers. At the end of September he escorted his boss's wife and daughter to
Lula, for the novena of San Francesco, having prepared all the provisions for
the parish hospice, and seemed to replenishing the stores every other day, five
or six hours on horseback to get there and the same back. That may have been the
turning point of the whole business. I can almost see Cisania and Zenobi casting
each other covert glances all the way, he on horseback with his blue jacket open
on his shirt front, she dressed all in white like a bride, her head lowered but
jolted by the movement of the oxcart. It seemed to be all arranged, Avocado,
Tzio Rosina told Bustiano. At first they said the whole thing could be settled
by paying a fine, but who's to convince Zenobi of that? I must think it over.
Come back this afternoon and we'll see, Bustiano told her. What about after
you've had your lunch, Avocado? No, later, about five o'clock. After lunch I
take a walk to help me think more clearly. May the Lord enlighten you, replied
Tzio Rosina. So, after lunch, he set off for Biscolai. Hot it was, my father
told me, hot enough to roast any man alive who set foot on the road. I was glad
that under that blazing sun, when even the dogs in the yard were curled up in
the shade, there was not a soul stirring abroad. As if three in the afternoon
had been three at night, except for the light. Fierce it was, etching my shadow
on the flagstones in the blackest Indian ink. I don't know exactly why that
afternoon I decided to change my route. I only know that I yearned to flee the
overwhelming heat, the broiling plateau of granite slabs and the rust-colored
dust that fouled the air. Maybe that afternoon I was feeling strong enough and
mad enough to pick up a piece of wood, strong enough and mad enough to plan not
so much a stroll as a real hike. So I said to myself, let's have a change today
and go to Biscolai. I was led by my sense of smell, almost entirely by that,
while my pupils strove to find a gap through the slits of my eyelids, half shut
to protect my eyes from the glare. As I walked, leaning on the stick that I
planted at least a step ahead of me, my brain stopped asking itself too many
questions. In short, Bustiano agreed to defend him, but the case was not easy.
All the worse, because Zenobi had gone into hiding, he had guilt written all
over him. They had been on the point of reaching an agreement, that Zenobi
should pay the price of the vanished lambs plus a fine amounting to the tidy sum
of a hundred lire, which in those days was a lot of money, considering that the
entire value of the lambs was more or less twenty lire. The agreement seemed
reached. Everything looked settled. If Zenobi paid up, he wouldn't have to go to
prison. It wasn't the money, Avocato, because thank the Lord we have a little
put by. It wasn't because of the hundred lire, Sia Rosina explained to me. You
know why as well as I do. If he paid up, it'd mean he'd committed the crime. And
so instead he'll be committed to prison, trying to improve the situation.
Committed to prison? Trying to improve matters? You've made them worse, do you
realize that? Perhaps prison was better, because even if he paid, he would be
punished. They'd no longer go on employing him, and besides—you mean Cisenier?
Yes, Cisenier. That was what they were out to do, to break the bond between
those two, because they didn't think my son worthy of a cassoula pes, you see.
He was too good for them. That's why they destroyed him. Why didn't you speak
out at once, then? He wouldn't have it. He didn't want Cisenier to be so much as
mentioned. In any case, on the night of the theft, Zenobi wasn't even in Nuro.
He stole no lambs. Well, if he wasn't in Nuro, where was he? Who knows? We won't
get anywhere like this. You've got to trust me. On the soul of my husband,
wherever he may be in heaven, I swear I do not know. So how do you come to be so
sure? He is my son. I know him like the back of my hand. Anyway, I found this in
his haversack, while I was putting in some fresh bread. What is it? Don't ask
me. I can't read. It was a printed piece of paper. A receipt. From Barchisio
Lecci's, travelling photographer. Lifelike portraits at bargain prices. Studio,
Via della Pieta, 36, Osieri. On the back, written in pencil, were the letters
AQB and the number 29. Perhaps irrelevant, but worth looking into. I applied to
Sergeant Poli of the Carabinieri. He told me there was no mention of the
photograph anywhere in the file, but that in his opinion, it had no bearing on
the case. I was not so sure. Maybe it could help me prove that Zanobi was not in
Nuro on the night of the theft. I asked for a check-up on the trading licenses
for the month of December, to see if the photographer had also come to our parts
around Nuro. The sergeant gave me a wry smile. Trading licenses? Trading
licenses? He found this hilarious. Everyone does what they like here. They don't
apply for a permit even to build a house. So do you expect them to when they
want to take a couple of photographs? The sergeant was fairly certain that no
travelling photographers had come to Nuro at that time. But Bustiano was not the
man to give up. If there was a photograph, he wanted to see it. He wanted a firm
debt. The fact was that he believed Zia Rosina. Nothing seemed to hang together.
Zanobi had no need to steal those lambs. Given a little patience, he might even
have been able to marry Sisi Nia. He was a decent young man and well-regarded.
Unexpectedly, one evening, he leaves Nuro for God knows where. And the night
following his departure, nine lambs are stolen from the Casula Pezes sheepfold.
Lambs worth only 19 or 20 lira. With the Casula Pezes attempt to reach a
settlement with him, that put them in the right. We are making changes to the
way BBC live streams are distributed via third-party services and platforms. And
the BBC stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If
you are using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message,
please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this
service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.