TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-06-07H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Radio 4. It's six o'clock on Monday, the 6th of March. Good morning. This is
Today with Justin Webb and Michelle Hussain. The headlines this morning.
Ministers will bring forward a new law tomorrow to ban migrants who cross the
English Channel on small boats from returning to Britain or ever claiming
citizenship. Messages leaked to the Daily Telegraph suggest that the former
Health Secretary, Matt Hancock, was worried that relaxing Covid self-isolation
rules would imply that government policy had been wrong. Also in today's
programme, one month on from the earthquake in Turkey and Syria. Anna Foster
reports on the one and a half million people who are still waiting to return to
their homes, including a family living in an abandoned train. At night, they
sleep curled up on the seats. The luggage racks are filled with the few
possessions they managed to retrieve from their damaged home. We connect to Ruth
Wilson on the new production that will see her perform on stage for 24 hours
straight. And we return to Ernest Shackleton's Antarctic shipwreck discovered a
year ago. She's upright on the seabed. She's there. She's bold. She's beautiful.
It's everything I'd ever dreamed of. We'll speak to the head of the mission to
find the endurance ship who's been investigating further. The BBC News read this
morning by Alan Smith. The government's planning a major crackdown on migrants
who cross the English Channel in small boats by banning them for life from
returning to the UK. The measure will be part of new laws introduced to
Parliament tomorrow. Refugees groups have warned the scheme is unworkable and
will leave thousands of people permanently in limbo. Here's our political
correspondent Helen Catt. The Home Secretary Suella Braverman has previously
said that anyone who comes to the UK illegally will be detained and removed
under the provisions of the new bill, which will also prevent them from claiming
asylum in the UK, with only some narrow exemptions expected. The government will
announce tomorrow that people removed from the UK will also face a lifetime ban
on returning and will be barred from ever applying for British citizenship.
Labour has accused ministers of rehashing promises made around last year's
Nationality and Borders Act. The BBC has learned the cost per seat of removing
illegal immigrants from the UK on Home Office charter flights last year was more
than for a typical first-class return to New York. The government spent Â£12.7
million on the flights, removing 1,500 people. Charities have described this as
a total waste of public money, but the Home Office insists the spending is
justified and says many attempts to return people are blocked by last-minute
legal claims. WhatsApp messages leaked to the Daily Telegraph suggest the former
Health Secretary Matt Hancock expressed concern during the pandemic that
relaxing rules on self-isolation would imply the government had been getting it
wrong. The paper prints what it says is an exchange from late 2020 with
England's chief medical officer Professor Sir Chris Whitty about reducing the
quarantine time for contacts of Covid cases. Mr Hancock says the leaked messages
give a partial biased account to suit an anti-lockdown agenda. Our correspondent
Louisa Pilbeam has more details. In November 2020, people who had been in close
contact with a confirmed Covid case were being asked to isolate for a fortnight.
According to the Telegraph, the former Health Secretary was sent a WhatsApp by
Professor Sir Chris Whitty saying it would be pretty well as good for people to
test for five days instead. During a further exchange of messages, Mr Hancock
asked whether the 14-day quarantine period has always been too long, later
adding I think moving to seven-day daily testing for contacts would be huge for
adherence, but going below that would seriously worry people and imply we've
been getting it wrong. Mr Hancock said there was no public interest in releasing
the messages, saying all the information had been made available to the Covid-19
inquiry. One of Britain's most notorious prisoners, Charles Bronson, will argue
he should be released from custody at a public parole hearing which begins this
morning. Bronson, who has carried out nine sieges and been convicted of armed
robbery and wounding, has spent much of the past 50 years behind bars. Elected
mayors in the north of England say rail users face losing more than 20,000
services this year if cancellations continue at their current rate. One
operator, TransPennine Express, has failed to run a quarter of scheduled trains
in recent months. The mayors are meeting in Newcastle today to discuss the
issue. Our correspondent Danny Savage reports. Every evening TransPennine
Express publish a long list of services it won't be operating the next day. Many
of their customers wake up early to see if their train is running and have to
make hasty plans to work round cancellations. Now the mayor of West Yorkshire,
Tracey Brabin, says based on the latest monthly performance figures, more than
23,000 services could be axed this year. She is calling on the government to get
a grip on the matter. Avanti, West Coast and Northern are underperforming too.
TransPennine Express management say they have a plan to improve. The government
says it's made it clear things need to. Police looking for five missing people
who'd last been seen early on Saturday after a night out in Cardiff have found
three of the group dead. It's thought they were involved in a road accident. Tom
Harrigan has the latest. Officers had been searching for the three women and two
men over the weekend. They'd travelled from Porthcawl to Cardiff in a Volkswagen
Tiguan and the women were last spotted at two o'clock on Saturday morning in the
Clannadain area of the city. Late last night, Gwent police were still appealing
for information on the group's whereabouts. Then this morning the force
confirmed it had recovered the Tiguan, which it's thought came off the A48.
Three of the five people were found dead. Two others were taken to hospital with
serious injuries. Specialist officers are supporting their families. The police
watchdog has also been informed. Prince Harry and Meghan are believed to be
considering an invitation to the coronation after a statement from the couple
suggested they'd been contacted about May's ceremony. Some of the 2,000 guests
are being sent emails asking them to save the date ahead of official invitations
being dispatched. You'd think everyone knows the date already of the coronation,
but anyway, so be it. Thank you very much. Alan, Chris Fawkes has the weather
for us. Morning, Chris. Hi, Michelle. And today's the day that we see a return
of wintry weather really across the north of the country. What's going on is
we've got an area of low pressure moving into the North Sea and as that
continues to push over towards Norway, we're going to get cold northerly winds
diving southwards, bringing a big drop in temperatures and also bringing some of
us some snow. Now we'll start off with the weather stories today in Scotland
because here we've got a band of rain that's weather front I was talking about
pushing southwards, bringing rain across many areas this morning. But already
we're starting to see colder air follow to the far north of Scotland, with
showers starting to turn to sleet and to snow here already. And the air just
continues to get colder really through the rest of the day. So temperatures
barely getting above freezing for northern Scotland, with some significant
accumulations of snow. Indeed, over the next couple of days, we could see around
10 to 20 centimetres over the hills, maybe 5 to 10 centimetres at low elevation.
So there is more than potential for seeing some disruption to transport and
power here over the next couple of days. Now away from that area for Northern
Ireland, we're looking at a cloudy and damp start to the day. I think the cold
air will start to arrive through the afternoon. The weather should brighten up.
You might see one or two wintry showers late in the day. For England and Wales,
most areas will start the day on a rather cloudy note. There are a few cloud
breaks across eastern and southern England, so a little bit of early sunshine,
but predominantly it's cloudy. And we'll see some outbreaks of light rain or
drizzle pushing its way southwards. Eventually, colder air gets into northern
England, with sunny spells and a few showers starting to turn wintry. And across
the northeast, there is also the risk of seeing some disruption here through the
night time and into tomorrow, with some accumulating snow causing a few problems
as well. That's the latest. Chris, thanks. Let us at eight minutes past six have
a look at the papers, many of them taking an in-depth look at the government's
plans to clamp down on migrant crossings. The Daily Mail makes it clear it wants
them to work so that people will stop putting their lives in the hands of
smugglers. But it says significant questions remain, asking where the migrants
will be held, whether legal wrangles risk making the proposals a damp squib. The
Express believes the measures could even help the Conservatives win the next
election by putting clear distance between the government and the Labour Party.
But unnamed senior Tories tell the independent website that Rishi Sunak will
likely have to backtrack on his promise to stop the boats because any new laws
won't hit the statute book in time to take effect before polling day. According
to The Times, the Prime Minister is likely to face renewed pressure from some of
his backbenchers to pull the UK out of the European Convention on Human Rights,
which provides the legal authority for most deportation challenges. The paper
says he is resisting that and believes his plans are legally watertight. The
Guardian questions that, though, and says it's not yet clear how the new bill
will get around the UK's obligations under the convention. The Daily Telegraph
continues its series of lockdown files reports based on those leaked WhatsApp
messages from the former Health Secretary Matt Hancock. In the latest text to be
released from October 2020, he calls the government's then-Covid vaccine czar
Dame Kate Bingham wacky and totally unreliable after she gave an interview
claiming that the immunisation of the entire population was not going to happen.
It's understood Dame Kate was following agreed policy. At the time, Mr Hancock
repeatedly described the leaks as a partial, biased account to suit an anti-
lockdown agenda. The Daily Mirror leads on what it says is a crisis in NHS
dentistry, claims 11 million people in England are unable to access care and
that some desperate patients have resorted to yanking out their own teeth. The
Times reports that Boris Johnson has put his father forward for a knighthood in
his resignation honours list. The paper says Stanley Johnson's nomination is
going to be the subject of scrutiny after allegations from two women that he
touched them inappropriately, which he denies. Its editorial suggests that
slipping a gong to a family member is an unwise move for Johnson the younger and
is unlikely to convince his critics that he's developed much moral integrity
since leaving office. Most of the front page of the Financial Times has given
over to China's announcement that it's looking for economic growth of around 5%
this year, which is its lowest target for more than three decades. The FT says
it signals the end of the era of rip-roaring growth for the country. And The Sun
reports that some of music's biggest names are going to be appearing in a
benefit concert at Wembley in the summer for Ukraine. U2, The Killers, Pink and
The Rolling Stones all apparently invited to the event in June. The gig's being
modelled on Live Aid, which raised money for victims of the Ethiopian famine
almost 40 years ago. The paper calls the Ukraine version Live Aid. The time is
now ten past six and with that we can turn to Ukraine because President Zelensky
has paid tribute to its soldiers in the eastern Donbass region, calling it one
of the hardest battles. Bakhmut is in that part of Ukraine. It's a battle we've
been following regularly for the last few weeks. And James Landale, our
correspondent, joins us now from Kiev. How much of a sense do you have of where
that battle has got to, James, and whether the Ukrainians can hang on to it?
Well, essentially, what you've got to imagine is a city, at least the ruins of a
city in eastern Ukraine, with Russian forces holding the north, the south and
the east, Ukrainians holding the centre, with their supply lines to the west
increasingly under pressure from Russian forces. There are just one or two roads
open to the west now for the Ukrainians to resupply. It is incredibly bitter,
the fighting, incredibly intense, house to house, door to door, trench by
trench. The independent analysts, such as the Institute for the Study of War,
say that the Ukrainians may be conducting certain limited fighting tactical
withdrawals in eastern Bakhmut, but they say it's far too early to contemplate
any kind of, you know, assess whether the Ukrainians are thinking of any kind of
complete withdrawal. So many, many hundreds, if not thousands of soldiers are
dying there. And that's why President Zelensky is saying overnight, look, you
know, it is one of the toughest battles. But the key point to grasp here is this
is a war, a battle of attrition. This is about Ukraine trying to kill as many
Russian soldiers as possible to degrade its fighting capability, but at the same
time calculate when is the time for it to withdraw to protect its own troops for
any future spring offensive. And that's why at the moment, for now, we think
that Ukrainians are defending what is essentially a pile of rubble. So it's not
that it's necessarily strategically important as a location? Correct. If you
talk to all the analysts, Western officials and Ukrainians, they say, look, this
is not a it's not a garrison town. There are no resources within the town that
could be used by an occupying Russian force. It's not some sort of transport
hub. It's not as massively geographically symbolic and important. I mean, the
Russians claim that if they did seize it, then they could use it as a stepping
stone to seize further territory. But that's the key point is that a lot of
analysts say that simply by seizing a town that sort of old school tactics, what
the Russians are failing to understand here by their attempt to achieve a
victory, a rare victory, because they haven't had very many, is that they are
potentially it's coming at such a great cost in Russian lives that potentially
that could weaken its capacity to make further ground in future offensives later
on this year. James, for now, thanks very much. 30 minutes past six, China is
predicting an economic bounce back and warning its people at the same time that
external efforts to suppress and contain China are escalating. Those warnings
coming at the annual National People's Congress. China correspondent Stephen
McDonnell is on the line. Yes, a bounce back, Stephen, but a pretty muted one.
Yeah, well, I mean, the economy is taking off here, but it was coming off a very
low base. You would expect that after years of Covid lockdowns, that once shops
start opening again, people start travelling again, there'll be economic
activity. Now, the danger, though, is that it'll take off this year and
potentially in the future plateau. And one of the reasons people are talking
about this is that by Chinese standards, this goal of 5% growth is pretty modest
and it shows that the government is still worried about real estate debt, still
worried about the crackdown on tech companies overseas, youth unemployment, a
lot of problems here economically. And President Xi himself, meanwhile,
consolidating his grip on power and doing so with some reorganisation of those
under him. I mean, what's the sense among people looking at what he is doing
about the strength of it and the strength of him? Well depends how they view
him, because some might say, well, Xi Jinping, we think he's a good leader and
now he's got his people in. You know, the new head of the Reserve Bank, the new
propaganda chief, you name it, all the ducks in a row and confirmed Xi loyalists
are running the place so things can get done. But of course, the danger is, and
this is what others would say, you have this echo chamber where he's not getting
the fearless and frank advice he needs and people are afraid to tell their
patron what is really going on because of his power. And this could have been
what happened with zero COVID and why it took so long to be abandoned here.
That, you know, the scientists were issuing their warnings, even businesses
complaining, saying it's not working, you're tanking the economy. But it became
so much about politics that people were afraid to say to him, look, you know,
Chairman, it's not working, we've got to stop this. And this is the danger going
into the future. Steve Macdonald, DemPaging, thank you. It's a quarter past six.
There's been a lot of discussion about stock market listings and their locations
in recent days. And that continues this morning with Sean. Hello, Sean. Hi,
Michelle. Yes, it does. So last week, we had of course, the British chip
designer Arm, many considering it the crown jewel of UK technology, rejecting a
listing on the London Stock Exchange and instead deciding its future lay as a US
listed company. Today, today it looks like we're going to get confirmation that
the network and cloud computing specialist One Disco based in Sheffield and
Silicon Valley is looking to add a listing in the US to the one it already has
here on the alternative investment market. So where's it going to go next for
our tech industry? I've got Jamie Urquhart with me, who's co founder of Arm. He
was also previously chief operating officer and chief strategy officer there.
After leaving the company in 2002, Jamie then spent 10 years as a venture
capitalist. Morning, Jamie. Good morning. Good morning. So what's your, you
know, having followed on for so long, what's your reaction to this very latest
decision? Well, I think businesses need to do what they need to do. And they
need to take decisions that make sense for them. I think if you look at Arm,
it's owned by SoftBank. SoftBank are probably very familiar with the US stock
exchanges. They are comfortable with them. I think that the perception is that
it'll be easier to raise money quickly. So I can see why it makes sense for
them. And if you look at their board composition, that's been slowly gravitating
over to the US as well. If we assume that many in the UK would like Arm to
actually have chosen London as its listing base, is there anything that could
have been done differently over the decades to have stopped us getting to this
point? Because you know, many people are saying, look, SoftBank who own it now,
this is quite obviously the best decision for them and what they're trying to
achieve. But if we wanted Arm to be here, what should have been done
differently? Yeah, I mean, the question you ask, you have to go back decades in
terms of what was happening. And I think one of the problems was that Arm being
bought by SoftBank in the first place. I'm not blaming SoftBank, but a set of
circumstances meant that they were able to go in and take over the company. And
there wasn't the appetite, if you like, in London to resist. And who in London?
When you say in London, who would that be? The investors in the company. So when
they were made an offer, they couldn't refuse. It was not long after Brexit that
caused some reduction in the valuations of their portfolios. So Arm being sold
was probably a way of just compensating for that. So would you have had any
rules, regulatory changes over that period? Do you think the government should
have done any more? Or is Arm just an exception to the overriding strategy that
we have here in London? Well, I think we don't have an overriding strategy. We
don't know what we're going to do until suddenly it becomes an immediate
problem. That, I suppose, is an even more fundamental issue that there's got to
be a long term, and when I say long term, I mean 40, 50 years long term view of
what we're trying to do and how we do it, rather than oh, oh my goodness, Arm is
being sold, what can we do about it? And in fact, some of the conditions that
were put on Arm about hiring people probably backfired. Not long ago, we saw
quite a significant reduction in force. When we asked the government about this,
they said they're reforming capital markets to stay attractive. They point out
the UK remains the second largest investment hub in the world. It says, is there
anything to be worried about here? I think there is something to be worried
about. And some of it is because we are being rather isolationist. If I talk to
universities, universities now find it difficult to recruit good postdocs from
around Europe. They want to go to places where there's much more collaboration.
The semiconductor industry and the electronics industry are global, and you have
to operate on a global scale. And it's very difficult. Why come to the UK when
it doesn't seem to want to be global? If you were starting out now, if you're
one of these businesses that may be smaller than Arm but still have a decent
size, looking at where to list your company, is it a very straightforward
decision to make right now? It's not totally straightforward because you base
your company where there are either customers or people to work for the company
or capital markets to have access to capital. And the UK still has some good
places to base yourself. But obviously, most companies have to go externally to
increase their revenues. Customers are all over the place. Silicon Valley is a
significant area for semiconductors. It's got a critical mass over there. And so
most small companies, as they get to a certain size, inevitably have to either
at least put an office there. And as they grow, the influence of what their
customers are doing is quite important. And so you're always going to consider
where you go next. I've been in startups where the startup has basically
relocated where it's registered into the US in preparation for what might come
in the future. Jamie, thank you. Jamie Urquhart there, who co-founded Arm, the
chip design company that has gained so many headlines in recent days. Kathleen
Brooks with me this morning as well, economist, director at Minerva Analysis.
Kathleen, morning to you. Good morning, Shaun. Morning. Just hearing before from
a correspondent in China, Stephen, saying about how China is reducing its
economic growth target to about 5% for this year. What ripple effect is that
going to have on economies around the world if China starts saying, we're not
going to be growing how we used to? Well, I think that it's for a while now,
certainly for a good few years. There's been long-term challenges ahead. We also
have this inflation that's around the world, global inflation. So actually,
European stocks have risen this morning, partly because there's not expected to
be as much stimulation coming from China, which could reduce inflation, so make
things easier for central banks, which is actually good news for financial
markets. So, 5% growth rate in the current environment is not bad. Yes, it's one
of the lowest growth targets in decades for China, but equally in the current
environment, it's better than if they were growing at 10% because that could
really just spread inflation around the world. But they are setting a low bar
for themselves, and I wouldn't be surprised if they know themselves that they
can exceed that 5%. Right. Okay. So, it might not be exactly what comes in when
we get the data. What about for businesses here in the UK? You talked a lot
about the relationship with China, whether it's us reliant on imports from China
or trying to expand our exports to Chinese citizens. Does this change the
prospects for those companies who have close links? Well, I think it makes it
harder, but I think we have to face it that it has become harder in recent
years, not just with COVID pandemics and supply constraints, but also because of
the way that China is approaching its economy. It's targeting more sectors. It
looks like it's going to be more â it's going to have more political involvement
in private sector run firms, not just public sector firms like we used to in the
past. So, I think that it's certainly become harder. There's also the strategic
rivalry between China and the US. So, it's much harder for UK firms now to be
friends with the US and to have maintained close relationships with China. But
it still is the world's second largest economy and it's still incredibly
important to the UK. Kathleen, thank you. Kathleen Brooks, Economist and
Director at Minerva Analysis. Now, we've got a confirmation over the weekend
that pub opening hours will be extended for the King's Coronation. There's been
a few different events for pub staff to handle in recent months. A Winter World
Cup. How's this all going to affect what customers end up doing? Chris Jousey is
the Chief Executive of Admiral Taverns, who operates 1600 leased and tenanted
community operated pubs across the UK, mostly wet lead. Chris, morning to you.
Morning, Sean. What do you think customers are going to be doing on the weekend
of May 6th when you've got extended opening hours? Well, I very much hope
they're going to be in their local pub raising a glass to the royal family.
There's some recent research that says that 70% say that pubs play a really
important role in bringing communities together, which is fantastic news. And
this is another opportunity to get together and celebrate as a community. But if
the tax man takes a pound from every Â£3 spent in a pub, and the remaining
profitability is wiped out by onerous energy contracts, then unfortunately, many
community pubs are at risk of closure going forward. How has February been,
Chris, both on the balance sheet for your pubs, managing that money and the
energy costs, versus what customers have been spending? I think there's no doubt
that people have rediscovered their love for the pub, especially the local pub.
So they are going out, especially at weekends. Visits are less frequent, but
people do like to go out and spend some money at the weekend. The big challenge
really, Sean, is making sure that they can convert that spend into
profitability. I think the rising in costs from an energy perspective have made
a real dent in that profitability, as have all the other rising costs that
you've talked about several times over recent weeks. Has everything sort of
played out as expected through the winter? Do you feel like pubs are over the
worst energy cost rise when we see these predictions of wholesale gas prices
falling and that playing into bills eventually in the future? Well, you would
really hope so. But unfortunately, we're still seeing some very, very high
prices being quoted. One of our licensees this weekend, for example, received a
standing charge increase of over 1000% on their energy bill. And that's just not
sustainable. Not sustainable, but do you see it as being sort of a fair quote,
given the cost of energy? No, I think now that energy costs are now down at the
wholesale level and now below where they were pre-Ukraine war, we would expect
to see costs falling very rapidly. And unfortunately, we're not seeing the fall
that was as rapid as the climb back in September last year. So we're asking the
government to hold the energy wholesalers to account, please. We need them to
look at the behaviors that are going on in that sector and make sure they're not
profiteering at the expense of pubs and other small businesses. Chris, thank you
very much. Chris Jousey, the Chief Executive of Admiral Taverns. I'm going to be
talking a bit more after seven o'clock about the cost of energy and an
investment in energy infrastructure here in the UK. Several businesses this
morning coming out and calling for more action from the government to keep up
with what's going on in America and across the European Union right now. Sean,
thank you. 27 minutes past six to the Sport and Jonathan Ledger. Where's Nick
Robinson when you need him, hey? Liverpool 7, Manchester United 0. Now, man, any
times you say it or read it, it's a scoreline which defies belief. Liverpool
edged the first half 1-0 and then took flight in the second with six goals.
Manager Jurgen Klopp was almost lost for words. It sounds like a day from
another season. It doesn't fit really in this season so far. So even better it
feels in a moment because it's so incredibly important for us. We need results,
we need results, we need performances and we got both. Super performance from
the start. From the start, a super performance. And what a contrast to last week
for United. From Wembley winners in the EFL Cup final to a record-equalling
heaviest defeat. Manager Eric ten Haag was fuming. We didn't stick to the plan,
we lose our heads and we didn't do our jobs. And defence transition, you know
how good they are in transition. But we just not running with our opponents, we
didn't track back and that's really unprofessional. Ouch. Liverpool up to fifth
with the game in hand on Tottenham in fourth. Elsewhere, Everton's 2-0 draw at
Nottingham Forest left them in the bottom three. In the Scottish Premiership,
Celtic have gone nine points clear after thrashing St Mirren 5-1. Arsenal won
the Women's League Cup final, their first trophy in four years, beating Chelsea
3-1. And in the Women's Super League, England striker Alessia Russo scored a
hat-trick as Manchester United overwhelmed Leicester 5-1. Three points clear at
the top now. Let's get some live cricket now. England playing their third and
final one-day international against Bangladesh, looking to wrap up the series
3-0. Early news from Kevin Howells. Another poor start. Good morning, by the
way. Another poor start by Bangladesh with a bat. Here 21 for 2 after six overs.
They chose to bat first as well. A couple of wickets for Sam Curran already. But
the big news is team news for England because 18-year-old leg spinner Rian Ahmed
makes his ODI debut. England's youngest male player ever to do so, as he was in
Test cricket back in December. And only the second teenager to do so. The first
was Ben Holyoake back in 1997. So a big day for him, an exciting talent. 21 for
2 at Bangladesh after six overs. Thank you, Kevin. Britain's Keely Hodgson
retained her 800 metres title at the European Indoor Athletics Championships in
Istanbul. And the GB team captain Jasmine Sawyers came to her first major title
in the long jump. In Rugby Union's premiership, lead leader Saracens were beaten
by Sails Sharks 35-24. And Formula One's world champion Max Verstappen picked up
where he left off last season, winning the Bahrain Grand Prix with 41-year-old
Fernando Alonso third in his first try for Aston Martin. We had a winner on
Saturday, so we're confident with these two. Weatherby 350 number seven, Jet
Legs, and Southwell 410 number five, Charging Point. Nick, I think lying in a
darkened room for more than one reason. Thank you, Jonathan. We will look ahead
now to Wednesday morning. The Patch on BBC Radio 4. One producer. What was
amazing to me as an outsider was how normal all this was. One random generated
postcode. So I've got to press that? Press that button and a story unfolding
there you wouldn't otherwise know about. What do you sell then? Everything and
anything. Unheard stories from across the UK. What do you do after being a
prison officer? The Patch on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds on Wednesday mornings at
nine. Time now is 29 minutes to seven. You're listening to Today on Radio 4,
Michelle Hussain and Justin Webb and Alan Smith with the news. The government is
planning to introduce a new law to ban migrants who cross the English Channel in
small boats from returning to the UK for life. The measure will be part of new
laws introduced to Parliament tomorrow. Refugee groups have criticised the
proposals as unworkable and say they will leave thousands of people in limbo.
The BBC has learned that the government spent Â£12.7 million on flights removing
illegal immigrants from the UK last year, involving 1,500 people. The Home
Office insists the costs are justified. A public parole hearing begins this
morning to decide whether the notorious prisoner Charles Bronson should be
released from custody after spending much of the last 50 years behind bars. The
70-year-old admits using extreme violence in the past but says he's reformed his
behaviour. Elected mayors in the north of England say rail users face losing
more than 20,000 services this year if cancellations continue at their current
rate. They're meeting in Newcastle today to discuss the issue. In recent months,
one operator, TransPennine Express, has failed to run a quarter of scheduled
trains. Police searching for five people who were reported missing after
travelling to Cardiff for a night out at the weekend say that three of the group
are dead. Their car was discovered shortly after midnight. It's believed it had
been involved in an accident. Two of the group have been taken to hospital with
serious injuries. Current and former staff at Twitter have told the BBC's
Panorama that the company is no longer able to protect users from online abuse,
state-coordinated disinformation and child exploitation. They blame mass
sackings and changes under the company's new owner, the billionaire Elon Musk.
Twitter and Elon Musk haven't responded to the investigation. Panorama is on BBC
One tonight at 8 o'clock. And the Duke and Duchess of Sussex are said to be
mulling over an invitation to the King's coronation in May. A statement on
behalf of the couple confirmed they'd been emailed about the event but it's not
yet clear if they'll accept. Some of the 2,000 guests are being sent emails
asking them to save the date ahead of official invitations being dispatched.
Thank you 27, Mr Seven is the time. The small boats plan is bold for sure. It
will certainly be contested and hotly so. Dominic Cassiani is the BBC's home and
legal correspondent. Just outline what we know Dominic about the plans and
whether there's anything in them that we were not expecting. Well we know the
headlines, we don't know the detail and this is a bit of a problem this morning
in terms of trying to explain to the audience what this really amounts to. In
some respects we could effectively summarise this as a plan to apparently
detain, deny and deport English Channel crossers from claiming asylum in the UK.
Now we had 45,000 last year. Anyone coming across will be barred from seeking
asylum and getting refugee status in the UK. There are some suggestions in some
of the newspapers that these people would be detained. So if you're trying to
detain 45,000 people including children that's a phenomenal logistical task
which the government's never tried to do before. We're told that they'd be
removed from the country, there'd be a duty on future Home Secretaries or the
current one included to remove them to Rwanda or another safe country. The
problem is that nobody so far has been removed to Rwanda because of the legal
row over that and also we have no return agreements in place with the EU more
broadly. And then they'd be barred from returning which again is quite an
unusual move because you can typically bar serious criminals from returning to
the UK. That happens day in, day out. But to bar someone, say critics including
refugee charities, so simply the act of fleeing war in an unorthodox and fairly
desperate fashion seems a little bit extreme. So this is going to be really
fought over if this indeed comes to pass tomorrow with the legislation before
Parliament. Legislation before Parliament tomorrow and then a meeting between
Rishi Sunak and President Macron of France later on in the week where presumably
all these matters will also be discussed. Yeah, and our understanding is that
seems to be part of the timing that the government wants to get this out there
before this meeting next week. I mean one of the interesting things also with
this is that there are real questions over the Home Office's logistical ability
to pull off this kind of act. It seems incredibly ambitious, say a lot of
critics, compared to its performance. There is an enormous backlog of about
160,000 cases. The BBC had some FOI data in the last couple of weeks which shows
that of the charter flights which the Home Office booked last year, they only
removed about 1,500 people to other destinations, predominantly foreign
prisoners but a few migrants within that. And the cost of that was about Â£8,000
a seat. So there's a lot there. And the real question actually for the Prime
Minister when he does meet President Macron is what kind of reception he is
going to get from the French President effectively as a proxy for the rest of
the EU if they go ahead with a plan which many EU members will regard as
actually making life harder for them when they're trying to find some way of
working together to manage these incredibly complex migration flows across the
whole of the continent. Mike Castagnari, thank you. And also on the line is Nick
Erdely, our Chief Political Correspondent. In the background everything that
Dominic was talking about, Nick, is the Prime Minister's promise to stop the
boats. With all those logistical and delivery questions, how will the government
convince people that this new plan would do that, stop the boats? It's an
excellent question, Michelle. And you know, the devil will be in the detail with
this. And it's what a lot of those Tory MPs who think that this is a defining
issue for the government will be watching out for tomorrow. I mean, look, there
is no doubt that Rishi Sunak is going to be judged on this. His pledge to stop
the small boats, it was those words, stop the small boats, is a pretty big one.
I think the idea that we're going to hear from the government tomorrow is that
by introducing things like lifetime bans on re-entry and a guarantee of
deportation, that that will discourage people from taking the perilous journey
over the Channel in the first place. But there's a lot of pressure to get this
right. There are some Conservative MPs who I've spoken to who say, look, this is
a huge issue on the doorstep, but they're not convinced the government is so far
prepared to go far enough. There are many, for example, who want to leave the
European Convention on Human Rights. There are those on the opposite side of the
political spectrum, charities, for example, saying that this is all inhumane and
it's going to really undermine the UK's role on the world scene. There are
likely to be legal challenges. And the ultimate question that Rishi Sunak will
be judged by, which we don't know the answer to this morning, we won't, I
suspect, for a few weeks, is has he come up with something that's going to work
in a way that the previous plans didn't? Because some of the measures that are
being discussed sound quite similar. Meanwhile, in The Telegraph, more of Matt
Hancock's WhatsApp messages, which seem to again question the idea of whether we
were always following the science during the pandemic. They keep coming. And one
thing they keep doing is showing us that there was a bit of a conflict sometimes
between the politics and the political messaging and the science we were all
told was being followed. So if you cast your mind quickly back to the pingdemic
when tens of thousands of people were being told to isolate as close contacts,
this morning we get an exchange between Mr Hancock and Chris Whitty, the chief
medical officer, where Sir Chris says that the CMOs favoured a pilot to test
five days of isolation as long as people tested negative every day. They wanted
to see if that would work. And there's a bit of a discussion where Matt Hancock
says, are we saying that the 14 days we've been telling people to isolate for is
too long? Chris Whitty suggests that 10 is probably fine. But ultimately, Mr
Hancock says that if we go too low with the isolation changes, then it would
imply we'd been getting it wrong so far. Why this is really interesting. Well, a
month after these exchanges, the length of time contacts had to isolate for was
reduced to 10 days, but it was several months. It was about nine months before
people who had been fully vaccinated were told they didn't have to isolate at
all as close contacts. And I think it's going to just lead to more of that
debate about whether some of the politics was getting in the way there. Some
people will say, look, there was a debate happening in government that's
completely normal. People who were always sceptical of these plans will say,
well, look, there was clearly a suggestion that self-isolation could have been
cut a lot sooner and that would have been good for the economy. Nick, thank you.
It is 20 to seven. You may have seen on the 10 o'clock news last night, our
disinformation correspondents revelations about Twitter since Elon Musk took
over. One of the issues she's been talking about and she will be talking about
on Panorama this evening is the reduction in the ability of the platform to stop
abuse of its own users. Marianna Spring, our disinformation correspondent, is
right here in the studio. Good morning to you. Do we know for a fact that there
is a reduction in the ability to monitor what is going on? And do we know for a
fact that there is more abuse of people using Twitter? Thanks, Justin. And I'll
start with the second bit first, which actually triggered this whole
investigation. So I had lots of people reaching out to me on Twitter and
elsewhere telling me that the hate that they were receiving and seeing, as well
as disinformation and other harmful content, appeared to be on the rise. And so
I set out to figure out whether that was true. I heard from rape survivors
who've been targeted by accounts that were inactive before or less active before
the takeover, Elon Musk's takeover, and that since appear to have been
reinstated or newly created. Exclusive data for Panorama shows that there's been
an uptick in new accounts following misogynistic and abusive channels, 69% more
than before Musk took over. And we looked at the online abuse I received for
doing the reporting that I do on disinformation and conspiracies. And that's
more than tripled since the takeover, according to the University of Sheffield.
And so I set out to meet current and former employees who told me about the work
they were doing to protect against online harassment and trolling and
specifically features that were designed and according to Twitter's research and
suggested, you know, had some effect and that they just either weren't there
working on anymore or weren't able, aren't able to maintain because of the
reduction in staff and because of the chaos there. And a lot of people spoke
about this chaotic work environment describing Elon Musk walking around the
office with bodyguards at all times and even trying to sell back the office
plants to Twitter employees. There's one senior engineer I've spoken to, he's
still at Twitter, so he's agreed to speak with us anonymously. And this is an
actor's voice. But this is what he had to say about what's happening on the
inside. Now a totally new person without the expertise is doing what used to be
done by more than 20 people. Well, that leaves room for much more risk, many
more possibilities of things that can go wrong. And those things that can go
wrong, of course, felt right around the world. It's not just in the US and here,
but the impact. And we've seen this on Facebook in the past, haven't we? When
people aren't monitoring this stuff, it can very quickly get out of control.
Yes. And it's not just about trolling and harassment. It's also about other
issues like child sexual exploitation. For Panorama, I've spoken to someone who
previously was working on a team dedicated to that. That team has gone from 20
people down to six or seven. They're really worried about the ability to
escalate this kind of content to law enforcement, which they say is more
important than suspending accounts, even though Twitter says it's removed
400,000 accounts in just a month to protect against that. And another employee I
spoke to who worked in threat disruption told me how his team, who were daily
identifying these kinds of networks, no longer are doing that. And he fears the
implication of that. He says that that means these networks go undetected. Is
this just sour grapes though from people he's got rid of? Because the fact is
he's got rid of a lot of people, hasn't he? And yet Twitter still exists and it
still exists for a lot of people in a perfectly satisfactory form. Everyone I
spoke to admitted that Twitter wasn't perfect before, but they showed me the
tangible work that they were doing to better protect users. They were going on
the record for the first time and they'd been really reluctant to speak out
because they don't want to seem like they're sour grapes, but they care about
the users. And I wanted to put these questions to Elon Musk and Twitter. I tried
every way possible of contacting him, including a vote on Twitter, which he
likes to use, not a real vote, not a real poll. And the majority of users said
they'd like me to do an interview, but he didn't do one. And Twitter and Musk
are yet to respond to the points raised in Panorama's investigation. But Twitter
online says that defending and respecting the user's voice remains one of its
core values. That investigation at eight o'clock Monday night, tonight, Monday
night, eight o'clock tonight. And of course on BBC iPlayer, any time of the
night or day. Marianne, thanks. Now let's have a look at the newspapers and on
the front page of The Times alongside its main story, which is about the new
migrant legislation, is a story that The Times has got about Boris Johnson
putting his father's name forward for a knighthood in his resignation honours
list. The list is going through Cabinet Office vetting. It's got 100 names on
it. The Times says said to be considerably longer than the resignation honours
of his predecessors. Theresa May's had 60 people on it. David Cameron nominated
62. But this nomination of Stanley Johnson will raise questions about Boris
Johnson's use of the honour system to reward family members with titles. He
nominated his brother, Joe, a former minister for a peerage in 2020. It's all
passing through the Cabinet Office Honours Committee for approval. The Times
says the other complication in it is that no less than four sitting MPs are set
to become peers under it, including Nadine Doris. But they've all four agreed to
defer taking their place in the Lords until the next election. Leviv Aid is the
world exclusive headline in The Sun. World exclusive according to them. And it
does indeed appear to be not in any other paper a spectacular live aid style
benefit gig to be held to help victims of Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Greats
including U2, The Rolling Stones, Pink have been asked to perform at Wembley.
It'll be on June the 24th, The Sun says, in support of President Zelensky. A
source saying it will be huge and as well as those groups also on the wanted
list, The Sun says, is Florence and the Machine, Neil Gallagher, Adele, Sir Paul
McCartney and others too. And it's all going to follow the template, they say,
of Leviv Aid held, of course, to help raise cash for Ethiopian famine victims
back in 1985. The main news this morning, measures are expected to permanently
ban migrants who reach the UK in small boats from returning to the country and
measures due to be laid before Parliament tomorrow. The Prime Minister writes in
The Times today about Britain becoming a science superpower. What he doesn't say
is whether or not we're rejoining the European Horizon research collaboration,
which does now seem to be open to us if the Northern Ireland trade issues are
resolved. Let us talk to Professor Sir Adrian Smith, who is president of the
Royal Society, which represents, of course, Britain's leading scientists.
Professor, good morning to you. Good morning. How important is it that we get
back into Horizon in your view? It's absolutely vital. The academic and research
community and business leaders are all agreed on this. We've had four decades of
basically building our research frameworks, our collaborations, the use of
shared facilities, the flow of the brightest and best people. And I think across
the board, everybody sees this as really the key to the future. And it rings a
bit hollow to talk about us becoming a superpower or a leading science nation
unless and until we reassert our association. And it's very odd. I have spent a
lot of time over the last two years talking to ministers about this. I've been
reassured on all occasions that the government's prime desire is to reassociate.
And what was getting in the way were other things like, you know, unsticking the
Northern Ireland protocol. Now that that looks like being unpicked, the
president of the EU Commission herself immediately said that opens the way to
reassociating with the Horizon programmes. So the silence from the Prime
Minister is very odd, because I've had those assurances from Science Minister,
I've had it from the Secretary of State in the newly created Department of
Science. Oh have you? From what? From Michelle Donnellan herself? So she's
signed up. Soon after she started, I had a one to one Zoom in which she
reiterated that that was the desire of the government. Right. Because what we
understand from Mr. Sunak's thinking is that there's some other plan, a plan B.
I mean, it's actually called plan B, isn't it? Which they have, in which you go
for collaboration, not just with Europe, but more widely as well. So clearly,
while the reassociation, as it were, with the Horizon programmes was stuck, it
was prudent, you know, to say, well, what would happen if eventually we couldn't
join? So developing a so-called plan B was a prudent thing to do. But as I say,
I was constantly reassured that that really meant plan B and that plan A was to
associate. Is Horizon value for money? So it's not just about money, but if you
if you wind the clock back to when we were in things called the Framework
Programme, the Horizon Programme, the UK did extremely well. We are an
incredibly strong scientific nation. And if we get into competition for
fellowships, for grants, for use of facilities, we will do well. To be locked
out of that, the ease of association with the fastest growing scientific
collaborators is just crazy, to be honest. And you can't boil it down to just
counting pounds. But in any case, there's a fee to join. But then you get a lot
of success in getting grants and fellowships back. Professor Adrian Smith, thank
you. And we'll be hearing from the Science Minister, George Freeman at Harper 7.
It's now 10 to 7 and mayors in the north of England are meeting today in
Newcastle to try and address the ongoing problems with rail services across the
region, into Scotland and down to London. Avanti, Northern Rail and TransPennine
users have all suffered services being cancelled. Currently, on average, only
about three quarters of TransPennine's timetabled services actually run. There
was a week in January when it cancelled 40 percent of trains. Tracey Brabin is
the Labour Mayor of West Yorkshire and she'll be at today's meeting. What do you
think is the way to solve this, Tracey? Good morning, Michelle. Well, I'll be at
the meeting if I can get a train there, because ironically, a number of trains
to Newcastle have been cancelled. I think the solution is that government have
to get involved. They have to understand that we need to invest in transport
across the north. I don't think people in the south and across the country
really understand the service that we're being forced to endure from
TransPennine. As you say, the first four weeks of this year, over 1,700
scheduled services during that four week period were cancelled. And we've done a
calculation that if things don't improve, by the end of the year, 23,000
services will have been cancelled. This is totally unacceptable and ministers
must get a grip and end the suffering. The TransPennine are saying, and I think
everyone agrees, that drivers not doing overtime is one of the problems in all
of this. They say they're now offering almost Â£500 a shift and that's been
rejected by Aslef. I wonder if you, when you say ministers need to get involved,
do you want TransPennine to lose the contract? Well, I've said publicly, I don't
think it's fit for purpose, because what's going to happen, Michelle, in May is
if they continue to keep the contract, we're going to have another eight years
of this mayhem. Let's not forget that in 2020, we had Transport for the North
insisting there needs to be a package of recovery and we're now in 2023. We
can't stagger on like this. It's affecting our economy, it's affecting
passengers, it's affecting growth. Government must get the unions and get the
operators round the table and do a deal. But if you want the contract taken away
from them, do you think that will sort the service? Well, we've seen that with
other operators. Northern went into operator of last resort. We can't, there has
to be a solution. We can't just continue suffering like this for the next eight
years. As the mayor of West Yorkshire, I want West Yorkshire to flourish. I want
connectivity between Manchester and Leeds and a new stop in Bradford. I want to
be ambitious for our region and not be stuck in the doldrums in the slow lane,
how we are now. But the fact that they're offering Â£500 a shift and drivers
aren't willing to do it, I don't see how that changes under another operator.
Well, Michelle, I'm not in those rooms in those negotiations, but it is true
that industrial relations with TransPennine Express are absolutely rock bottom.
And there is the question that if the deal was done, would drivers even want to
do it when they don't trust the company, they don't believe in the company. Only
the other day I was on a train where the guard over the tannoy was saying, this
is unacceptable. I've taken pictures. I will make sure that TransPennine Express
know what you have to suffer. There are trains that arrive that are half the
length they should be. There's overcrowding. There's health and safety issues.
The actual staff are also incredibly concerned about how they're taking
passengers east to west across the country. So this is not just about the trade
unions and so on. It's also about the management and how they're going to
resolve this problem because they have higher sickness than any other company.
And there is obviously a reason for that. Good luck getting to Newcastle. Tracey
Brabin, thank you. Thank you, Michelle. Thank you, love. Minister Seven is the
time. Members of the Fire Brigades Union are expected today to vote to accept a
pay deal. A strike last month was called off. Let us talk to Matt Wrack, who is
the General Secretary of the Fire Brigades Union and is on the line. Good
morning to you. Good morning, Justin. And you were offered 2%, weren't you? And
what, you've got it up to 7%, is that right? We were offered 2% back in June
last year. Our pay settlement date is the 1st of July. We began a campaign and
we've now got a revised offer, which is 7% for 2022 and 5% for 2023. So a two-
year offer. So quite a significant change from where we started last June. And
what are you saying to your members about that offer? We've not tried to
sugarcoat it. The year one proposal is still a below inflation pay rise. The
year two one from predictions is likely to be slightly above inflation for the
relevant 12 months. So we have recommended it should be accepted. It's out for a
ballot and we won't know the final details until 2pm this afternoon. But all the
feedback we've had is that that's likely to be accepted. I think for us it's a
stage, it's a step forward, but it would not be the end of our campaign on pay.
Our service is significant underinvestment in the fire service and that needs to
be addressed. How relevant is it that you did this deal face to face with the
employer? So there wasn't a pay review body or anything, was there? You just had
that collective bargaining arrangement. Was that relevant, do you think, in
being able to reach a settlement? I think that's highly relevant. We haven't got
a pay review body and we're very clear we don't want one. The government is
trying to impose a pay review body on us. Let's be clear, if firefighters had a
pay review body, I think we would have been on strike last September. So
actually, interesting, collective bargaining, which is much maligned by
government and is under attack by Westminster government, unfortunately, may end
up resulting in no strike in the fire service, whereas many sectors where there
are pay review bodies, obviously we do have strikes and I think those pay review
bodies are very, many workers in those sectors are highly dubious and sceptical
about their role, the role of the pay review bodies. What is the position now
with regard to just more general industrial relations within the fire service? I
mean, has this settled more than simply this pay dispute, do you think, or are
there still a lot of things still to be resolved? There are a lot of things to
be resolved, but I think that the point, your first question about the ability
to sit across the table with our employers, actually, if you think about it, the
people who actually pay the wage bill and the people who work for them and their
representatives, to sit directly across the table and negotiate what they think
is affordable and what we can try and get for our members ultimately, that's a
very traditional way of doing things, but actually in this case we've
demonstrated that it may, as I say, avoid strike action in the fire and rescue
service and I think there's a lot of other people could learn from that. And the
state of your relationship with the Labour Party, you were slightly critical,
weren't you, of Keir Starmer, you thought he should have stuck up more for
workers right at the beginning of this kind of round of strikes, what's your
view of him now and of the party? Well, yeah, I think many affiliated trade
unions would want to see more from Keir Starmer, there's many Labour MPs have
been on picket lines and clearly supported workers taking this action and that's
what we want to see, that's why trade unions are affiliated to the Labour Party.
Actually, what we want to see is clear commitments from Keir Starmer about
defending workers' rights if Labour comes to power, for example repealing anti-
trade union legislation such as the minimum service level bill that we're facing
now in Parliament. All right, Matt Wrack, General Secretary of the Fire Brigades
Union, thank you. The time is 2 minutes to 7. Chris Fawkes, has the weather
quite a lot for us to be braced for this week, Chris? Oh, certainly, yes,
Michelle. Cold air coming southwards, we are looking at some snowfall,
potentially disruptive snow actually for a few of us over the next few days.
Now, for Northern Ireland, England and Wales, predominantly it's a cloudy day
today with patchy outbreaks of light rain and drizzle, probably turning a bit
brighter for North England and Northern Ireland later this afternoon, sunny
spells and some wintry showers starting up. But in Scotland, this is where the
cold air really is starting to dig in, a band of rain clears southwards, the
rain itself quite light and patchy. But as the skies brighten, we are going to
see lots of snow showers pile into northern areas of Scotland with some
significant accumulations drifting around in the strong northerly winds that
we'll have here and temperatures barely getting above freezing. Now, there is a
risk of some disruption in Scotland over the next couple of days with around 10
to 20 centimetres of snow expected at higher elevations, but even low down 5 to
10 centimetres possible. Similar amounts of snow on the way to parts of north-
east England. I have to say, the colder air does reach the south of England and
Wales through Tuesday. Then we could be looking at a risk of snow across the
south of England as we head through Tuesday night and into Wednesday. So stay
tuned to the forecast as they say. Chris, thank you. On BBC iPlayer. From the
wilds of County Kerry to the Caledonian Pine Forest, from the Yorkshire moors to
the reed beds of Suffolk, from an ant's nest in Gloucestershire to beneath the
waves in Shetland, our magical wildlife revealed close to home. Wild Isles with
David Attenborough starts next Sunday night on BBC iPlayer. And in the next hour
of the programme, Anna Foster will be reporting for us one month on from the
Turkey-Syria earthquake. We'll also be hearing from the union that represents
Border Force with its views on what is likely to be in that new legislation on
asylum seekers. And there are yet more revelations about Sir Ernest Shackleton's
ship, Endurance. It's your listening.