TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-09H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 We'll be hearing from a curator at the V&A Museum in London. They've just
acquired some of David Bowie. You're listening to Today. Good morning. It's
eight o'clock on Thursday, the 23rd of February. You're listening to Today with
Amal Rajan in London and me, Nick Robinson, in Berlin. The headlines this
morning. Labour is setting out five national missions that will shape the
party's election manifesto and guide its policy if it wins power. Political
leaders have condemned a gun attack in Omer that left a police officer with
critical injuries. Ministers have announced a major shake-up of the governance
of English football, including the establishment of its first independent
regulator. And a treasure trove of David Bowie memorabilia, covering his whole
career, has been gifted to the nation. The BBC News is read this morning by
Chris Aldridge. Sir Keir Starmer is launching what he calls five national
missions outlining his plans for the UK if Labour wins the next general
election. The commitments will be formally announced during a speech in
Manchester this morning, where the Labour leader will say that new thinking is
needed to tackle the root causes of the UK's problems. Our political
correspondent Helen Katz reports. Labour says its five missions will be
unashamedly long-term, an alternative to what it calls the sticking-claster
solutions of Rishi Sunak's five priorities for government. The first two
missions will be to secure the highest sustained economic growth in the G7 and
to make Britain a clean energy superpower. The party has already announced a
target of making electricity zero carbon by 2030. Sir Keir will say that his
missions are not just another word for priorities or promises, but would form a
different way of governing, bringing together government departments,
businesses, trade unions and civil society. Labour will unveil goals for its
final three missions, building an NHS fit for the future, making Britain's
streets safe and breaking down barriers to opportunity in the coming months. Sir
Keir will describe it as a long-term plan to unlock Britain's pride and purpose.
Rishi Sunak has joined politicians in Northern Ireland in condemning the
shooting of an off-duty police officer at a sports complex in Omer in County
Tyrone last night. He's in a critical but stable condition in hospital. The
Prime Minister said he was appalled by the disgraceful attack. Our Ireland
correspondent Chris Page is at the scene this morning. A police car is guarding
the entrance to the complex called Youth Sport. The main building and a number
of pitches are cordoned off. Several other police vehicles are in the car park
where forensic officers have been carrying out searches. Local people say the
centre was busy when the shooting happened. Children, parents and coaches were
at the site. It's believed two gunmen were involved in the attack. The victim
was a detective of Senior Rank. He's led investigations into organised crime and
dissident Republicans who are opposed to the peace process. This work means he
has a public profile in Northern Ireland. Police haven't said anything
officially yet about a motive. The last time an officer was murdered in this
part of the UK was in Omer in 2011 when Constable Ronan Kerr was killed by a
booby trap bomb. A former police ombudsman for Northern Ireland, Lady Alone,
told us it would take some time for people in Omer to get over what happened. We
saw these things in the past. We had hoped they would never happen again. And we
know that the children, the young people, they'll carry the scar of this with
them. It's not something they'll ever forget. The government has confirmed plans
to establish the first independent regulator of men's football in England, the
regulator which was recommended in a fan review last year will aim to make clubs
financially resilient. It'll also have backstop powers to impose financial
settlements, meaning it could force the Premier League to share more money with
the lower divisions if an agreement can't be reached between the leagues. The
chair of the English Football League, Rick Parry, told us he welcomed the
government's plan but called for greater clarity on wealth distribution. We
don't think that backstop powers on redistribution are sufficient because if we
don't solve redistribution what is the regulator going to do? Is he going to put
two thirds of our clubs out of business, refuse to give them a licence when the
objective is to keep them alive? So there is an imbalance there. The sports
minister, Stuart Andrew, told us he disagreed with the idea that the regulator
should force a financial settlement from the beginning. We still believe that
the best solution would be a football-led solution but, if they do not come to a
deal, the regulator will have powers at their disposal to first of all try and
bring about arbitration but if that doesn't work either they will come up with
the solution that is in the best interest of the whole of the football pyramid.
The cases of 12,000 asylum seekers are to be fast-tracked by the home office to
try to fulfil Rishi Sunak's pledge to reduce the backlog of applications by the
end of the year. Migrants from Afghanistan, Eritrea, Libya, Syria and Yemen will
have their claims decided on the basis of a ten-page questionnaire which must be
completed in English within 20 days. Here's our home editor, Mark Easton. The
home office insists this is not an asylum amnesty but a way to streamline the
processing system for five nationalities which have an asylum acceptance rate of
more than 95 percent. All the usual security and criminal checks will be
conducted and biometrics taken but for the first time a cohort of 12,000 asylum
seekers will not be required to attend a face-to-face interview. Instead, if
they applied for asylum before last July they must fill out a form. The home
office is likely to face criticism that the fast-tracking has more to do with
the Prime Minister's promise to eradicate the asylum backlog than having
rigorous checks for identifying individuals with no right to be in the UK.
However, the British Red Cross is among organisations concerned that insisting
asylum seekers complete a questionnaire in English and return it within 20 days
could increase the suffering of already traumatised individuals. The United
Nations looks likely to approve a resolution calling for Russia to withdraw
immediately from Ukraine. The vote, which isn't legally binding, is due to be
held in New York later on the eve of the first anniversary of the conflict.
Israel has carried out airstrikes on targets in the Gaza Strip after rockets
were fired from the territory. The attacks are the latest escalation in the
conflict after 11 Palestinians were killed in an Israeli raid on Nablus in the
occupied West Bank yesterday. Our Middle East correspondent Yoland Nell reports
from Jerusalem. At dawn, rockets fired from Gaza left trails of smoke across the
sky of southern Israel. There were small explosions as most were intercepted by
Israel's iron-dome defence system. Shortly afterwards, Israeli warplanes hit
what the military said were Hamas militant sites. Both Hamas and Islamic Jihad
had issued threats of retaliation after the earlier deadly raid in Nablus.
Israeli forces had entered the busy old city in the morning in what they said
was an operation to arrest a number of wanted Palestinians and were quickly
caught up in a gun battle with armed fighters. Several Palestinian gunmen and
civilians were among those killed. Local hospitals have been struggling to treat
dozens of people who were injured, many with bullet wounds. Washington, which
has been trying to ease spiralling tensions, has said it's extremely concerned
by the levels of violence. A report is warning that staff shortages, rising
costs and lengthening waiting lists are jeopardising the Scottish Government's
plan to help the NHS recover from the pandemic. The public's spending watchdog,
Audit Scotland, says ministers need to be more transparent with the public about
the unprecedented challenges. Scotland's Health Secretary Hamze Yusuf said the
government had never hidden the scale of the task and the recovery would take
years, not months. New draft rules clamping down on relationships between
university staff and students have been published by the regulator in England.
The Office for Students is consulting on the plans as part of efforts to tackle
sexual harassment and misconduct on campuses. Here's our education editor,
Branwyn Jefferies. Under these plans, any university lecturer supervising a
student would have to declare if they started a relationship. The information
would be recorded on a register. A failure to report could lead to dismissal for
the academic. Some universities, including University College London and
Nottingham, already enforce a total ban on such relationships. It's a step the
Office for Students says it would prefer not to take, but progress on these
issues has been slow and inconsistent. The National Union of Students said there
was a reluctance to report misconduct because of a fear of grades being
affected. David Bowie's personal archive has been purchased for the nation by
the Victoria and Albert Museum. The collection, which comprises more than 80,000
items, including photographs, notebooks, costumes and instruments, will be
housed in a purpose-built venue in East London. Our music correspondent, Mark
Savage, has the details. From the famous Ziggy Stardust costumes to the
stylophone he played on Space Oddity, David Bowie's archive takes you on a
journey through the creative life of one of Rock's biggest innovators. Kate
Bailey, a senior curator at the V&A, is one of the few who's already seen it. I
found it fascinating, the personal insights, the handwritten lyrics, the
notebooks, the dialogue with other creative practitioners in terms of how a song
is recorded. All of these things are incredibly rich and powerful. The archive
will be opened to the public in two years' time. Mark Savage reporting. Good
morning. You've met your five priority areas and you say this is about a whole
new way of governing. We've heard that before many times. Why is this time
different? Well, what I'm setting out today, as you said, is what we're going to
do in government. So that is the mission, the five missions, to give us focus,
to give us purpose and to give us drive. But alongside the what is also the how
are you going to do this? What does a mission-driven government look like? Why
is that different? And in terms of the thinking behind it, I think the best way
I can express it is this, that I think for many people there's a general sense
that things are just not working, people aren't better off, and that we go round
and round in circles. And two quick examples of that. We have had now for the
last 13 years a NHS winter crisis. And every year it gets worse. Every year we
just about get through with the sticking plaster that gets us into the summer,
we just about survive, and we breathe for a bit in the summer and then we go
back into another winter crisis. And we never fix the fundamentals. And we will
go round and round like this forever if we don't fix the fundamentals. Another
example just to go somewhere else is, obviously with energy prices, we've
suggested there should be an energy price freeze, paid for by a windfall tax.
But we can't go round and round doing that over and over again. We need a longer
term solution. So the missions are about saying, yes, we recognise that a
government has to answer the question, what are you going to do now this winter
for the NHS, this spring for energy prices? But what's the long term fixing the
fundamentals that gives a country that sense of purpose? I feel we've been in
sort of a crouched position as a country for many years. And on the windfall
tax, that is a specific policy. But the thing about this document is that it is
extraordinarily reticent about detail. I mean, talk is cheap. It's very easy to
say as you do, you want the highest sustained growth in the G7. I mean, who
doesn't? But you don't actually say how you're going to do it. You said a moment
ago that you get into how you're going to do it. You don't at all in the
document. There's nothing whatsoever about how you're going to achieve that.
Well, just on that, firstly, the mission needs to be ambitious. It needs to
obviously everyone who wants to be prime minister is going to say you've got to
be ambitious in the country. And that's literally verbiage. Just just just no,
no, it absolutely isn't. If you take missions, let's take that first one, the
highest sustained growth in the G7, that is going to be tough. There's nobody's
going to say that's vague. That's, you know, something that's easily achievable.
Just let me finish on the missions and I'll come straight to your point. And NHS
actually fit for the future. So not just to get through this winter, but for the
next 75 years, safe streets, removing the barriers to opportunity for every
child everywhere, and then a clean energy superpower, which means, you know,
clean electricity by 2030. Again, that's a sharp intake of breath. That's when I
talk to CEOs and others about this, they say, that's going to be going some
gear. So the missions are not vague, they are very clear that ambitious to take
on your challenge. What sits underneath these missions are the specifics, what
then are you going to do to get this to happen? And so we have the specific, I
don't know, the columns, if you like, that hold the missions up. And then what
I'm going to set out this morning in my speech is then what are the first steps
along the journey so you can see the tangible steps. So there's a, there is,
these reflect a lot of, you know, hard thinking, as I've talked to various
people across the country about what the real problems are, a sense of the, you
know, how we fix it, but then a program of action, including those first
specific steps. But just to take your challenge head on, I mean, all I ever have
had in the last three years as Labour leader is what are you going to do about
here and now? I'm not interested in the long term. If we don't train more
doctors for the NHS, we will be in the same cycle for a very, very long time.
And it's time somebody rolled their sleeves up and said, we're going to fix the
final. I understood. I was trying to avoid a situation where you had to list
your five priorities, because I did say at the beginning, we've already got them
in the news bulletin. That's okay. You've successfully used up a bit all the
time. So I'm going to get slightly more interrupty henceforth. As a decorated
lawyer, I do wonder if you should be a bit worried about crimes against the
English language, because we spent the witching hours reading this work and
Hemingway it ain't. At the bottom of page four under the heading, organizing
government around a shared vision, you say you write, this could mean new
structures and ways of working to facilitate collaboration, including replacing
some of the cabinet committees with new delivery focused cross cutting mission
boards. Who's going to vote for that? I'll tell you what people will vote for.
They'll vote for someone who's going to vote for that. Someone who wants the
problem fixed. Let me give it to you. And I know you don't like the language,
but look, I ran the prosecution service for five years. I know that amongst the
problems I had was that it was in a silo. If you want to reduce crime, you have
to get to grips with your education system. You have to recognize the mental
health element up to it. You have to recognize the health element to it. You
have to recognize that the single biggest indicator of whether someone's going
to end up in prison is whether they had difficulties at primary school and
whether they were excluded at secondary school. To get to the bottom of that
problem, you've got to have cross cutting. You may not like the word cross
cutting, but I tell you what, everybody I've spoken to in the streets where they
are, they say, here, if you've got a way of actually reducing crime where I
live, then I'm up for a discussion about that. And me pretending that, oh, well,
because of the language, we better not do it. It's a bit difficult to explain.
It's a bit complicated. Just want to understand what you mean. I sat in the back
of my strokes court watching the same process go around year after year after
year. I want to break that. Okay. Let's move on. If somebody wants to change the
language, albeit, but the determination, the drive and passion I have to
actually change and fix the fundamentals is huge. I'm not going to get knocked
off course by people saying, well, I don't like a particular word. It's the idea
that matters. It's not the word I read the whole document, but let's move on to
your leadership more broadly. If I may, you said you want to restore trust in
politics. Why should people trust you when you've abandoned so many of the
pledges that you made in your leadership campaign? These missions. No, no, no,
no. The pledges you made when you ran to be Labour leader 2019. Why should
anyone trust these missions? These missions come out of a discussion that we've
had over the last two or three years across the country. You just answered the
question by asking a new question. Forgive me. I'm so sorry. The question I
asked was about why people should trust you given you've abandoned so many of
the pledges that you made when you ran to be Labour leader in 2019. It's not
about these missions. We talked a bit about that. You abandoned many of the
pledges you made when you ran for leader. So why should people trust you? Well,
look, so far as the pledges when I ran for a leader are concerned, they are
important statements of value and principle, and they haven't all been abandoned
by any stretch of the imagination. But what I've had to do is obviously adapt
some of them to the circumstances we find ourselves in. Since I ran for leader,
we've had Covid. Since I ran for leader, we've had the conflict in Ukraine.
Since I ran for leader, we've had a government that's done huge damage to our
economy. Everybody recognises that. What these missions are, and are the
bringing together of the fundamental problems we face as a country, some hard
thinking about how we have the long time solutions to those problems. And not
many people disagree with these missions. What they want to know is how are you
going to achieve it? How are you going to bring about real change in my life?
Because people are desperate for change. Go around the country. People
desperately want change. They know things could be better. They know we've got
huge talent and ambition in this country that is not being realised. There's
that desperate yearning for change. And what we're putting forward with the
missions is a programme to put that change into effect with a purpose driven,
mission driven Labour government. Can we just clarify a few points? You said
that those pledges were statements of value. It's not really what a pledge is. A
pledge is a solemn promise that's meant to be resilient to changes, right? So
you made a bunch of pledges. And I just want to know these really are yes or no
questions because it'd be useful to know whether or not those pledges have
indeed survived. You were asked by the BBC in March 2020 if you could guarantee
that under your leadership Labour commits or commitments to nationalise water,
rail, energy and the mail will be the next Labour manifesto. And you said yes.
Let me tell you a head on. Last year when energy prices were going through the
roof, we had to think what the response was because people were really worried
about their bills for the autumn. And I asked my team to mock up different
proposed answers to that specific question in the reality of 2022. I said
include in your analysis, taking energy into public ownership. How much would it
cost? What would we get for it? And will it lower bills for this autumn? And so
they did that for me. And that showed that we would have to spend a lot of
public money on public ownership, that because the energy companies were still
buying on the international market, it wouldn't lower the price. And we wouldn't
be able to lower the bills for people into the autumn. And having done that
analysis, I took the political choice that it would be better to have an energy
price freeze paid full by a windfall tax on the oil and gas companies that made
profits they didn't expect to make. And we led the way in the early parts of
August. The government then followed in part during the course of the autumn.
But having worked it through, I had to answer the question, where do I spend the
money available in compensation for shareholders last summer? And I think if I'd
done that and come on your programme, you'd have said, are you mad? Well, sure,
but maybe you should have made the pledge in the first place. The fact is you
broke a pledge which you stood for the Labour Leadership. Let's talk about
another pledge. You said in the same interview, you said how many? You said in
the same interview. Pretending we're in the same economic position now. You
shouldn't have made a pledge that you were prepared to break. That's the point.
You make pledges as promises that are meant to be resistant to, resilient to
changes in the situation. What about tuition fees? This is the point of
principle. Are you telling me that you foresaw COVID? Are you telling me that
you foresaw conflict in the Ukraine? Are you telling me you foresaw the Kamikaze
mini budget of last year? Because you've got incredible foresight if you're
telling me that. I certainly wouldn't pretend to have any such foresight
whatsoever. But I'm talking about the nature of pledges. And these are points of
principle about nationalisation of utilities. In the same interview, you were
asked, what about tuition fees? University tuition fees being scrapped will be
in a Starmell Manifesto. And you said the answer is yes. What's your answer
today? Well, I do think the tuition fee, the way we do tuition fees at the
moment, doesn't work. And therefore, it's going to have to be changed. We need
to look at what the options are available. And we have to look at what's
affordable in the economy that we've got at the moment. Huge damage was done to
our economy in the autumn of last year with that Kamikaze budget. And I think
that many members of the public looking at an incoming Labour government want to
know and be reassured, which they can be, that we would be a government of sound
money that would make sure that any commitments we made when it came to funding
or costing were fully, fully accounted in terms of what we're going to pay for,
how we're going to get it. It's perfectly reasonable to change your mind. The
point is, there's a pattern here of a bunch of pledges made which no longer
stand. Let's talk about something else that you changed your mind on, which is
Jeremy Corbyn, the independent inquiry that you commissioned by Martin Ford QC.
Didn't really teach us anything new about Jeremy Corbyn himself. We talked quite
a lot about the Labour Party and anti-Semitism, but Corbyn himself is in many
ways the same man elected to parliament in 1983. For years, you worked for him.
You supported it. You campaigned across the country for him to lead this
country. Yet you've now suspended him from the parliamentary Labour Party. He
hasn't changed. So why have you? Well, I think it's absolutely clear. The first
thing I said as Labour Party leader was that I would tear anti-Semitism out of
our party by its roots, that I would change our Labour Party. And I've done
that. Our Labour Party now is unrecognizable from 2019. Jeremy was suspended
from the whip because of his response to the Equality and Human Rights
Commission. And I'll just remind you, if I may, that that's the commission that
found just over two years ago that the Labour Party had acted unlawfully in
breach of equality legislation. That is a serious position for any party to find
themselves in. Because of the changes that I've brought about in the Labour
Party, I'm pleased, but not congratulating myself, that last week the commission
took us out of special measures, said that they were satisfied that we had done
sustainable change in relation to anti-Semitism in our party. That's not a
moment for celebration. It's a moment for reflection. But in order to get there,
I've had to take tough decisions and I have taken tough decisions because I'm
determined that we will change and continue to change our party. I'm determined
that we will tackle anti-Semitism wherever it raises its poisonous face. And I
will continue in the same vein. So in relation to Jeremy Corbyn, the reason he
won't stand as a Labour candidate in the next election is because of the hard
work that I've done in our party in relation to anti-Semitism, having been found
to be in breach of the law by the commission and having now got ourselves into a
position where we have made enough progress for the commission to say that
they're satisfied, we have a sufficient plan and that we're not in special
measures anymore. But, Sakeer, if he's not fit to represent Labour in Islington
North, what does it say about you and your judgment that you spent years
advocating for him to be Prime Minister? Well, look, every single member of the
Labour Party campaigned for a Labour government at the next election, just as
every member of the Conservative Party campaigned for a Conservative Party
election victory. That's what happens at every election. But I'm focused on the
future. I reckon when in 2019 the electorate gave their verdict and my strong
response to that was to say if the electorate have rejected you that badly, you
don't look at them and say, what were you up to? Weren't you listening? You look
at your party and say we must change and that's why my first priority as
incoming Labour leader was to change our party. The second priority was to
expose the government as not fit to govern and I think the evidence of that is
becoming clearer every day. And the third bit, which is what today is all about,
is to then say, well, if not the government, why you, an incoming Labour
government? And today we're continuing to answer that question, which is because
we will have these strong missions, what we're going to achieve and we will also
set out how we're going to achieve them, what a mission driven government looks
like. Can I ask one other question? Sadiq Khan has told us that he wants a
policy of free school meals for all primary school children. Do you? Well, we'll
look at that and Sadiq Khan has obviously made his position absolutely clear.
But I have to make sure that everything that we put before the electorate at the
next election, probably next year, is fully costed. So of course, the fact that
we're even having a discussion about the hunger of children at school tells you
something about the state of the nation. But look, we'll look at that. We'll
talk to Sadiq about how his scheme is running, but nothing will be put forward
in the next election unless it's fully funded. Sir Keir Starwood, thank you very
much indeed for joining us. Thank you. It's 26 minutes past eight now. How many
refugees are you taking? That was the question the German Economy Minister Niels
Annan posed to us just a few minutes ago. He was reflecting the frustration many
here in Germany feel when they're criticized for not doing enough to support the
war in Ukraine. This country has offered homes to almost a million refugees and
still they come with one leading politician declaring that the problem of
housing them is now greater than it was in 2016 when so many arrived here from
Syria. When the war began, I watched people pour off trains at Berlin's Central
train station. Now, as I discovered yesterday, they come to the disused Tegel
Airport. This might look like any departure hall in any airport in the world
with its check-in desk, but the people checking in here are not flying on
holiday. They're checking in for a new life in Germany and they are Ukrainian
refugees. The hope originally was that they would use this disused airport for a
day or two while they found their new lives. The sheer pressure of numbers
coming to this country though means many have to stay not just for a week or
two, but a month or two. I'm Sebastian. I've been working here in Tegel since
March last year. This originally would have been what a departure hall for
president. It would have been a waiting hall, yeah, actually. Now we're going
into the hub. This is the place where we send the people basically to the
government authority that is responsible for the distribution process. So
there's a row of desks here, people behind computers. This is the place where
the processing begins. Exactly. And we, Märteza, also do have an internet cafe
here where we assist people with opening a bank account, handling almost all
government authority things the people have to do. My name is Klaas, Klaas
Morgenstern, and I'm working in the managerial team here with the Maltese Relief
Organization in the Arrival Center Tegel Airport. How much pressure are you
under here at Tegel, given the numbers that are still coming into Germany a year
after the invasion of Ukraine? Yes. So now at the moment we have numbers of
around, what would you say, 100 people coming here a day, 140? Yesterday there
were 140 people coming, 50 leaving. Yeah. So less are leaving than we have new
arrivals that are coming here. And now a year on, more people are coming than
are leaving to find new homes. So we will have to see where it goes. We don't
know that. I mean the anniversary is today, tomorrow, in the next two days. So
if there might be a new refugee movement towards Western Europe, towards
Germany. Even though you're not involved in sending people to new homes around
Germany, do you notice, is it getting harder to do? Yes, it is. I know for a
fact I'm coming from Lower Saxony that we are at capacity over there and also
other states report that they are at capacity. So they are trying to find new
ways of allocating people within the system. Zegne. Zegne and your little one?
Zefir. And where are you from? From Odessa. Just you and your daughter? No, I'm
with two children. My daughter is almost three years old. My son is 13 years
old. I think she is one, two and three are our beds. Three bunk beds. My son has
made individuals. Your son is on the top bunk bed here. He's using a duvet in
order to get a little bit of privacy when he studies. And here you are, your
family, three of you on three bunk beds, but you're in a room with one, two,
three, four, five, six, seven. Ten. Ten beds. And what do they tell you? Do they
tell you it may be one week, two weeks, two months before you have a house?
Nobody tell me when it will be, but it's not bad. They are working, they are
trying to help us. This is Claudia, our hairdresser. It's important work that
you do, Claudia. She wants to give the people something back and she wants to
give them a moment to feel good, to look good, to have a haircut because people
are here and not having for months a beauty treatment. So, yeah, it's a small
container here, but it's a lot of heart within. My name is Anna and I'm from
Ukraine. Whereabouts? Dnipro. You're here, you're warm, you're comfortable,
you're cared for, but back in home at Dnipro it's not like that. Yeah, it's
hard, it's difficult for me, but my friends, they saw everything. It was so sad.
So quite a lot of your friends are still in Ukraine? Yeah. When I was in Berlin
in the immediate aftermath of the invasion of Ukraine, watching people pour off
the trains, no one would have believed there would be so many still needing to
live here in Germany. Here at this disused airport they get all the care they
could want for food and clothes, education and entertainment. There is of course
one thing they haven't got. It is what they left behind in Ukraine. A safe home.
It's an extraordinary sight at that airport. If you want to get a little glimpse
of it, I put a video up on our Instagram feed. BBC Today programme is the
hashtag at BBC Today programme on Instagram. We're posting videos there most
days of some of our reporting. So do take a look please. 28 minutes to 9 and
Gary's here with the sport. Hey Gary. Morning. 4.45 Saturday Wales against
England in the Six Nations. It's on. There was a doubt because Welsh players had
threatened to strike in a row over contracts. Nigel Walker is acting Chief
Executive at the Welsh Rugby Union. Nigel, good morning to you. Good morning
Gary. In a nutshell, have you given the players everything they wanted to stop
them striking? Because it just wasn't about international players. Have you
given them everything they wanted? Not everything they wanted. There's been a
fair deal of compromise. There have been some robust conversations over the last
week or so with me. We've reached an amical resolution. So compromise was the
key thing and 100% that's the end of the matter now. It is. And I've got the
agreement of Captain Ken Owens that they are now satisfied. We've got some
things to deliver over the next week or two. We've been in the PRB, the
Professional Rugby Board, which governs the professional game in Wales and we're
going to get to that straight away. And there's absolutely no danger that in a
few months they can come back and say, well the World Cup's coming up. You
haven't delivered on this so we could strike for the World Cup and not play. I
sincerely hope not, Gary. Ken and I had another conversation yesterday evening
and now I am taking personal responsibility for liaising with the squad as far
as the Welsh Rugby Union is concerned. And I will be meeting with Ken on a
regular basis and two or three of his senior players to make sure we don't
arrive at the stage we arrived at a week ago where there are demands placed on
the table and the possibility of a game being cancelled. Yes, key words there.
You said you sincerely hope not. Are you edgy or slightly nervous? Not at all. I
think it's been an edifying experience over the last week. Wales Rugby fans,
England Rugby fans, Six Nations Rugby fans generally look forward to this
fixture every year, every other year in Wales and the fact that it was in doubt
brings no credit to us. And I'll take responsibility for that and I'll ensure it
doesn't happen again. Well it's good to hear that. Nigel, you've only been in
the job three weeks so nothing to do with you. What's your understanding? Why
wasn't this sorted out last year? It seems longer than three weeks to be
perfectly honest Gary. There have been a few things which have come up over the
last three or four weeks. There's no point playing the blame game. I have not
met with the players, was not aware of their grout. The main concern that they
had was around professional contracts. As you probably know, the Welsh Rugby
Union through the PRB has been negotiating with the four regions on a long-term
framework which would allow us then to present players with contracts. That has
gone on much, much longer than it should have. There's been too much uncertainty
for players and I understand why they were edgy, why they felt they needed to
take this action. We have now told them that those contracts will be offered
from the middle to tail end of next week and that's our obligation. If we don't
deliver on that, if the four regions don't deliver on that, we wouldn't have met
our obligations but I'm sure we will and we'll move on from this. Good to hear
that. You played international rugby for Wales. What frame of mind are the
players going to be in? Are they going to really be ready to face England at the
weekend? Well obviously I've been in contact with the players on a regular basis
over the last seven days. I've been in contact with Warren Gatlin and his
coaching staff. They have prepared well. Warren is happy with the stage they're
at. What are we, 48 hours? There were 48 hours before the game. Ken says they've
had a really good training week. We'll find out on Saturday afternoon. Nigel
Walker, thank you very much. Cheers, Nigel. Ten o'clock tonight England's
cricket has played New Zealand. In the second test, England have named an
unchanged side. Cracking match in Prospered at Old Trafford this evening.
Manchester United played Barcelona in the Europa League. The sides are level at
2-2. Five live have commentary from eight. To recap, Manchester City and Leipzig
drew 1-1 in the Champions League. Mares scored their goal. And England beat
Belgium 6-1. Leo Williamson and Chloe Kelly scored two goals each. As we've been
reporting throughout the programme, full details of an independent regulator for
football will be released later today. And Andy Murray is through to the
quarter-finals of the Qatar Open. He beat Alexander Zverev, 7-6, 2-6, 7-5. You
want the tips before I go for the train? Here they are. Sedgfield, 1-5, 1-3,
1-1. Huntington, 4-0, 2-2, William Cody. My tip, Gary, is that United are going
to slaughter Barcelona. I shall be there at Old Trafford and I'm happy to offer
you some impartial reporting on that topic tomorrow if you'd like. I look
forward to it. Cheers, Nick. Bye, Gary. Now, Melvin Bragg can tell us about in
our time in half an hour. Good morning. We'll be talking about the mathematician
Paul Erdos, 1913-1996. He's been called one of the greatest problem solvers of
all time. He was born into a Jewish-Hungarian family, and by the age of three,
he could multiply four digit numbers in his head. Forced to leave Hungary in the
1930s by the rise of fascism, he spent much of his life leading an almost
itinerant lifestyle, ceaseless as visiting other mathematicians before settling
in Israel. He was also extraordinarily prolific, producing more papers on maths
than anyone before or since. That's Paul Erdos with Timothy Gowers, Carl Veronie
Dougal and Andrew Truglone. On in our time on BBC Sounds, I'm Radio 4 This
Morning, just stepped in 9 o'clock. Now back to today. Thank you very much
indeed, Melvin. Quick look at the weather, turning dry and brighter for many
today, but cloud and rain gradually spreading into the north. You're listening
to Today on Radio 4 with Amol Rajan in the studio in London and me, Nick
Robinson in Berlin. And at 22 minutes tonight, Chris Aldrich has a summary of
the news. Sakhir Stama is launching what he calls five national missions that
will put centre stage of Labour's offer to voters at the next general election.
They include securing the highest economic growth within the G7 group of
nations, making Britain a clean energy superpower and building an NHS fit for
the future. Sakhir told us people across the UK were desperately yearning for
change. Police in Northern Ireland say dissident Republicans and the new IRA are
the focus of an attempted murder investigation after an off-duty police officer
was shot multiple times in Omer, County Diron last night. Detective Chief
Inspector John Caldwell is in a critical but stable condition in hospital. The
government has confirmed plans to establish an independent football regulator in
what it describes as a radical transformation of the way the sport is run in
England. The new body will be tasked with preventing clubs from financial
collapse. The home office is to scrap face-to-face interviews for about 12,000
asylum seekers in an attempt to cut a large backlog of cases. People from
Afghanistan, Yemen, Eritrea, Syria and Libya who applied before last July will
now be asked to fill in a 10-page questionnaire. Chris thank you very much
Adisa. There is then at 21 minutes tonight an update on that story about an off-
duty police officer who was shot last night in Omer in County Tyrone. It is
Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell as Chris says in a critical but stable
condition. And speaking to Good Morning Alster, Mark McEwen who is the Police
Service of Northern Ireland's Assistant Chief Constable gave some more details
about the attack. Last night at approximately 8 o'clock at the youth sports
centre in Kaleika, Hoora-Doma whilst John was putting footballs into the boot of
his car and accompanied by his young son, two gunmen approached and we believe
both have fired multiple shots. John has ran a short distance and he's fallen to
the ground and as he's on the ground the gunmen have continued to fire at him.
That shows the absolute callous nature of this attack in a crowded space where
there are children and parents in the vicinity and we saw many of those young
people and children running in sheer terror to get to safety. Well let's speak
to Chris Page, our Ireland correspondent. Chris, do we know anything else about
who carried out this attack and also the impact it must have on Omer, a town in
shock? Yes, just at the scene here Amal on the outskirts of Omer, local people,
local politicians too. I've just been stopping to express how shocked they are.
You heard the very chill picture painted there by assistant chief constable Mark
McEwen as he described what happens at this sports complex last night when it
was very busy with children and young people doing sports training, playing
football matches, playing Gaelic football matches. Something else that the
assistant chief constable had to say within the last half hour is that the focus
of the police investigation at this stage is the Dissident Republican
paramilitary organisation known as the new IRA. Now the new IRA is thought to be
the most dangerous, the biggest, the most active of the Dissident Republican
nations who are opposed to the peace process. They continue to target members of
the security forces. The attacks are rare these days but as we have seen in the
last 24 hours the threat of the UK still is very real and Detective Chief
Inspector John Caldwell, the victim of the shooting is quite well known here. He
has led investigations into both organised crime, drugs gangs for example and
indeed into Dissident Republican paramilitaryism. For now the police working on
the basis that they think the new IRA has been behind this attack and forensic
work still going on. 18 minutes to nine, a museum dedicated to David Bowie,
that's what the V&A are creating in East London and in a couple of years time
we'll be able to go to see his lyrics, his art, his life in London and here in
Berlin and of course the music. A song there from each of the three studio
albums known as the Berlin trilogy that were recorded in Hansa Studios in the
German capital. Well, listening to that Kate Bailey, the senior curator theatre
and performance at the V&A who is masterminding this new museum and Mary
Finnegan who knew David Bowie well was it, in fact his landlady back in the late
60s in Beckenham, she's a writer and former journalist. Morning to you both.
Good morning. Good morning. Kate, according to a museum I am assuming it will be
a little bit more than objects behind glass cabinets. Yeah, Nick, we will be
opening the David Bowie Centre for the Study of Performing Arts as part of the
V&A East Storehouse which is one of our new sites in the Olympic Park. So it
will be the archive, the David Bowie archive will be at the centre of this
incredible study centre and storehouse of treasures across our collection and
there will be display areas and opportunities for research. Now for the things
you've seen, what's really caught your eye? What's fascinated you Kate? Well
it's very interesting to hear heroes and to think about you there at the moment
and the archive obviously reflects David Bowie's whole career, his career, his
life in art, his life was art, but particular things that jump out are things
that relate to the creative process, those insights into David Bowie's ideas and
imagination from the creation of the heroes album cover to the instrument that
Brian Eno synthesised that they created the album on. So it really gives this
opportunity to contextualise these incredible legacy and creation. And Mary,
it's going to be very odd for you isn't it? There will be objects on display, a
stylophone I hear from Mark Bolan. Don't worry, in your flat that you remember
having and seeing with David Bowie. Yes, that's true. I mean he was my lodger in
1969 when he was about 22, 23 years old and he was absolutely flat broke, he had
no gigs and he was composing all the time, totally and completely dedicated to
turning out new music. And I offered him my spare bedroom, I had two children
and I was a single mum and he accepted that as sort of nominal £5 a week which
never actually materialised. And when he first arrived he carried his suitcase,
a very small one, a 12-string guitar which was given to him by Pete Townsend
from The Who and this thing called a stylophone which was a little long box.
What did he pay on that? Do you remember? Well he sat in my kitchen and said,
would you like to hear my latest song? And so me and the kid said yes please.
And he sang Space Oddity and played the stylophone part of Space Oddity for us
and that was the first time that we heard that song which of course later went
on to be a great hit. Do the hairs on the back of your neck go up every time you
hear that song? What extraordinary memory it is to have. I'm sorry could you
repeat that? It's not a very good line. Do the hairs on the back of your neck go
up when you hear that song played as it is played so often these days? Yes, I
mean it's the bit in the middle where the clapping happens because I was
actually in the studio when it was recorded and we all clapped and my hand caps
are somewhere on that recording. What is so fascinating about Bowie is the
diversity of his work really, the art as well as the music. Where did that come
from Mary do you think? I think he went to art college for a while, not for very
long. But he was always drawing and scribbling and making notes and doing little
sort of small drawings which I think a lot of that stuff's probably on display
in this show. And he also did the posters for the folk club that we ran at the
Three Tons Club in Väckenau High Street. He did those every week. If you find
one of those posters Kate I imagine you quite like to have one of those posters
in Mary Can Firewall. Absolutely I mean it's great in the archive to be able to
see these early, early moments in Bowie's career where he was really kind of
inventing the future already. But to hear you speak is incredible to give me
tingles on the back of my neck. Yeah well I'm sure you can book Mary to do talks
at the new David Bowie Centre. Kate Bailey, Mary Finnegan thanks so much for
joining us. 12 minutes to 9 with its themes of hope, friendship and how
courageous asking for help can be. Charlie Maxis, the boy, the mole, the fox and
the horse became a true lockdown phenomenon. The NHS used his pictures, the book
of illustrations became the biggest selling adult hardback of all time and last
Christmas an animated version was watched by more than 9 million people. Now
that film has been nominated in the best animated short category at the Oscars.
Meet it meaning that Charlie Maxis is heading for Hollywood. 20 years after he
last got on a plane, entertainment correspondent Colin Paterson has been to meet
him at his studio. Do you have a favourite saying? Yes. What is it? If at first
you don't succeed, have some cake. I see. Does it work? Every time. The boy, the
mole, the fox, the horse and the Oscars. This is where the story all began.
Scripting away 15,000, 20,000 drawings in this house. Great. Oh yeah and boxes
and boxes. Charlie Maxis's South London House Comes studio, which he shares with
his dog Barney. Is there a filing system? Yeah. You know when you want to find
something, you find something else, which is better. He started to WhatsApp
drawings to friends struggling with their mental health. What do you want to be
when you grow up? Kind. Then, almost by mistake, built up a huge following on
Instagram, which led to a book deal and thanks to word of mouth during lockdown,
it became the best selling adult hardback in Britain since records began,
beating Jamie Oliver. I didn't think it was our very many. It was just trying to
make something that people could hold onto, you know, that would give connection
and make them feel less alone. I'm Oprah Winfrey. Welcome to Live from the
Library. His A-list celebrity fans include Oprah Winfrey, who did an online
lockdown reading and has her own special voice for the mole. I'm so small, said
the mole. Yes, said the boy, but you make a huge difference. Then JJ Abrams, the
man who rebooted Star Wars, helped turn the book into an animation, one that is
now up for an Oscar, meaning that Charlie Macassie has had to board a plane for
the first time in almost 20 years. I had a dog that had severe separation
anxiety. And so if I ever went anywhere, I drove. So I never got on a plane.
Seriously? Yeah. Then she died. And then I replied, it was a nightmare leaving
him. He hasn't been around me for 14 years. Maybe it's me. This is the thing.
Everyone thinks it's the dog. It's me. I struggled to leave animals that I left
behind always. Imagine how we'd be if we were less afraid. Of all the Oscar
films, yours is probably the one seen by the most people in Britain, because 9
million people have watched it on the BBC since its debut on Christmas Eve.
Yeah, I didn't know that figure. That's quite overwhelming. That's a left field
wolf. I wasn't meaning to make you cry. No, no, it's fine. I didn't know. You
know, it's lovely to hear and I really hope they enjoyed it. Really? Okay. These
fall for a reason and they're your strength, not weakness. And Charlie's build
up to the big night has begun. This is the Academy Awards class of 2023. You've
already been to the nominees luncheon. Now just tell people what that experience
is like. Well, what I'd say of it was it was disarming because it was way warmer
and friendly and less competitive than I ever dreamt. You were about three rows
behind Tom Cruise. He was lovely. And Brendan Fraser, you know, I know he's had
quite a journey and I saw him and I just said, I just wanted to give him a hug.
I said, you're amazing. Did you give him a hug? Yeah. Yeah. You know, everyone
they, you know, they've been through stuff. Life is difficult, but you are
loved. So finally, which of the four characters do you think would enjoy the
Oscars? The mole, because he gets fed. The fox would hide. The boy would be
like, what? The horse would just be very gently observing. But I think the mole
would be right in there getting stuck in. Yeah, definitely the mole. Hello,
cake. And on the 12th of March, Charlie Macassie will find out if mole has his
cake and eats it by taking home an Oscar. Colin Pattinson reporting and with
apologies to Charlie. I should have got his name correct. It's Macassie.
Macassie. Charlie Macassie. There we go. That was about right, wasn't it? I
think that's just about right. It's seven minutes to nine now. All this week,
whether in Tallinn or in Warsaw or here in Berlin, we've been reflecting on the
way in which the invasion of Ukraine has changed lives all over Europe, not
least in countries that were part of the Soviet bloc until the wall that divided
the city that scarred this continent fell in 1989. Let's reflect a little bit
more now with a man who's lived in, written about, charted the life and politics
of Europe. Timothy Garnash, historian and professor of European studies at
Oxford University, whose brilliant new book, Homelands, A Personal History of
Europe is out next week. Good morning to you, Timothy. Morning. How important is
it for that idea that has dominated your adult life, Europe? How important has
the war in Ukraine been for reshaping that idea? I just come back from spending
a week in Ukraine. This year for Ukraine has been what 1940 was to Britain, the
year that defines ourselves in our fight for freedom, but also defines ourselves
in the eyes of others. On the one hand, you have the suffering, the bomb
shelters. This first time I've given the university lecture and a bomb shelter.
On the other hand, incredible courage, determination and a determination above
all to get out from under the Russian bear as they see it, finally decolonize
themselves from the Russian empire and join Europe and the West. That means
concretely EU and NATO. I think this moment, Nick, is as big as 1945 or 1989.
It's a moment in which Europe could take another big step forwards towards a
Europe whole and free if we succeed in helping Ukraine to win the war and to
become part of Europe and the West, or it could be a moment in which the Russian
empire successfully strikes back. That's why the choice that they're facing here
in Germany is so important. We've been supporting those fears on the angsting
here. Angsting, you know well. You've sat opposite Helmut Kohl, the first
chancellor of a united Germany. He talked to you about the challenges that
Germany would face after the war fell, after this country was reunited. This was
one of the more remarkable conversations I've had in my life. This was just
after Helmut Kohl had succeeded in uniting western East Germany in 1990. As you
remember, Helmut Kohl was an absolute giant of a man tarring over me in his
office in the trans story. Suddenly he said, by the way, you do realize your
sitting opposite the direct success at Adolf Hitler. A conversation stopper if
ever there was one. The point he was trying to make was, I'm aware of this
historic responsibility. Hitler tried to put a German roof over the whole of
Europe. I want to put a European roof over the whole of Germany. In the last 30
years, Germany has done pretty well in that respect, but as you've seen with the
hesitation of Olaf Scholz in supporting Ukraine, there's now an even bigger
challenge, because unless Germany, which is Europe's central power, really
commits to this new project of what I'd call the new double eastward enlargement
of the west, it's not going to happen. And as you've seen yourself. And that is
because, in part, time is on Vladimir Putin's side. He can be very patient.
There is no pressure of protest on his streets that he has to worry about. Now,
you had lunch with him as well, I saw from the book, and he in effect told you
all those years ago of his ambition to take territory that he considered still
to be Russian. So this is another unforgettable conversation. You know, Nick,
life has lived forwards, but understood backwards. And looking back over the
last 50 years, one sees that one of the great drivers of European history has
been the decline of the Russian Empire. We thought it was all over when the
Soviet Union fell apart at the end of 1991, but it wasn't. I met Vladimir Putin
in 1994 when he was a totally unknown sidekick of the mayor of St. Petersburg.
And at the end of the conversation, he suddenly piped up and said, we have to
remember that there are territories that have always, always been Russian. And
he specifically mentioned Crimea, which are now outside Russia, and 25 million
Russians outside the Russian Federation, and we have a duty to protect them. So
the imperialist, revanchist instinct was there from the very beginning. Sergei
Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, is reported as saying recently that
Vladimir Putin has only three advisers, Ivan the Terrible, Peter the Great, and
Catherine the Great. Now, your book observes that generations are shaped by
events. You talk of the 1968s, you talk of the 1989s. That's you. I think it's
me as well. Is there a danger, though, Timothy, that we're almost nostalgic for
the moral certainties of the Cold War, for the clarity of the Cold War, and try
to impose on today's events the values of then? You have to listen to the people
who are actually fighting for their freedom. It's not us telling the story of a
new Cold War. It's them telling us the story of the fight for freedom. In this
book, Homelands, there's a lot of, quote unquote, ordinary people who are
actually also pushing forward that history. So I don't think it's us imposing
that narrative on them. I think it's a great chance. And quite specifically,
what we have to do right now, in the next few weeks and months, is get more
weapons and ammunition to Ukraine. Because on the military developments of the
next six months, I think that the future of the continent will defend. And
Professor Timothy Gaughnash, we have to leave it there. It's a fascinating book,
not least because Timothy, known as such a passionate advocate of Europe,
describes how his father served in Germany as a soldier and ended up a member of
UKIP and a Brexiteer. Well worth the read. That's all from us. Remember,
tomorrow, at least you set will be presenting this programme.