TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-04H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The world's radio station. In the late 70s, a bunch of young Polish guys who
were fed up with life under communism came up with a grand plan. They would make
themselves some canoes and go whitewater kayaking in South America. Nobody could
imagine that at the moment when there were shortages of food, that we can mount
an expedition to Argentina. It was like saying today in the student club, OK,
let's go to the moon. They blagged a travel permit, borrowed a military truck
and said their goodbyes. I left behind my mother, my sister, my girlfriend, and
I was thinking, gee, a few months and I'll be back home. But while they battled
for survival on some of the toughest rivers in the world, Poland was changing
and their lives could never be the same again. The armed forces now rule in
Poland with martial law and the threat of execution for those who break it. The
Soviets' solidarity and Eskimo roles on Outlook after the international news.
BBC News, hello, I'm Gareth Barlow. The head of the United Nations has condemned
Russia's invasion of Ukraine as an affront to the world's conscience. Antoni
Guterres was speaking at a special meeting of the UN General Assembly in New
York. It's debating a motion tabled by Kiev's allies nearly a year after the
invasion began, calling for Russia to pull out of Ukraine immediately and
unconditionally. The Kremlin's ambassador accused the West of wanting to defeat
Russia at any cost. Our North America correspondent Nada Torfik was listening. I
think what diplomats will tell you is they're under no illusions that this will
change anything on the ground. In fact, if you listen to what the Russian
ambassador Vasily Nebenshiev said in the hall, he urged member states not to
support the resolution, saying it wouldn't be helpful to ease the tensions
between Russia and the West. But what diplomats say is that it's important with
the one year anniversary coming up for the nations of the world to really take a
stand in protection of the UN Charter. The Biden administration says it's
extremely concerned by levels of violence in Israel and the occupied West Bank.
The State Department spokesman Ned Price made the remark after a raid by Israeli
troops in Nablus left 11 Palestinians dead and about 100 wounded. Several
Palestinian gunmen were among those killed, as well as civilians. Mr. Price
called for calm. We had productive conversations in recent days with the parties
and U.S. regional partners in support of efforts to prevent further violence. We
are deeply concerned that the impact of today's raid could set back efforts
aimed at restoring calm for both Israelis and Palestinians. Today's events
further underscore the urgent need for both sides to work together to improve
the security situation in the West Bank. A court in California has sentenced a
man convicted of killing the American hip-hop star Nipsey Hussle to a minimum of
60 years in jail. Eric Holder was shot the rap of four years ago in Los Angeles.
He was found guilty in July of first-degree murder with additional sentences for
using a gun and wounding two other men. District Attorney John McKinney said
Nipsey Hussle was a role model to the community. Nipsey Hussle meant a lot, not
just to LA County and the nation in some sense and had fans around the world,
but to the community where he was from. He was a leader. He was an inspiring
figure. He was neighborhood Nip. The Grammys didn't mean anything. The art, the
record sales, the money didn't mean anything to the people there. He meant
something to them. A TV news journalist has been shot dead while working at the
scene of a murder in the US state of Florida. A nine-year-old girl was also
killed inside a nearby house. Police say the motive for the attacks near Orlando
is unclear. They've arrested a 19-year-old suspect. You're listening to the
latest world news from the BBC. Media reports in the United States say the
daughter and son-in-law of Donald Trump have been summoned to testify before a
federal grand jury. They say Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner have been called to
give evidence on the former president's role in the storming of the US Congress
two years ago. Hundreds of rescue workers in northern China are attempting to
reach more than 50 minors still trapped in an open-cast culpit that collapsed on
Wednesday. Few people are known to have died, six others have been rescued so
far. Brazil says it will suspend beef exports to its biggest market, China, from
Thursday after fighting a single case of mad cow disease. The agricultural
minister said a sample had been sent to the World Organization for Animal Health
for further checks. The British government has announced plans to make major
changes to the way English football is governed, including setting up an
independent regulator. With more details, Dan Rowan has this report. The
independent football regulator is designed to prevent a repeat of the failings
that led to the collapse of Bury FC in 2019, one of a host of clubs to suffer
financial crisis in recent years. The body would oversee a licensing system to
ensure clubs are run sustainably, be responsible for a strengthened owners and
directors test, and could block teams from joining breakaway competitions like
the European Super League. With the Football League wanting a greater share of
the Premier League's record wealth and the FA pushing for more funding for
grassroots football, the regulator could also intervene to decide how much money
flows down the pyramid. Researchers say a 54,000-year-old cave site in southern
France holds evidence that the first modern humans to reach Europe hunted with
bows and arrows. The use of such weapons on the continent was previously thought
to have been far more recent. Tiny fragments of flint arrowheads were discovered
during excavations. BBC News Hello, I'm Jo Fidgen. Welcome to Outlook, the place
to come for extraordinary personal stories. This one takes place in a
terrifyingly deep canyon in the Colca Valley in southern Peru. It was a US
military pilot in the 1920s who first drew attention to it, in the 30s National
Geographic sent a reconnaissance team, and in the 60s a Peruvian professor
concluded it might just be navigable by expert kayakers. But it wasn't until May
1981 that anyone was crazy enough to try. The five cheery Polish men who rocked
up with their homemade gear frankly had no idea what they were getting into.
They'd set off from communist Poland two years previously, full of bravado, but
emerged from the Colca Valley, very much the worse for wear, into a radically
altered world. The young adventurers suddenly found themselves facing an
existential choice. Theirs is a story about repression, freedom, and making a
stand, whatever the cost. Let me introduce you to two of them. Home leader
Andrzej PiÄ…tkowski, then a student at Krakow University, and captain of its
kayaking club. If you are in kayak, you know, you feel every single wave, every
single whirlpool, every current. You are very independent, you can explore. And
Jacek Bogucki, who had never been in a kayak in his life. In my early years, I
wasn't really very much sport-oriented. I was pretty much into history,
archaeology. I was bookworm. They knew each other from school days, but were
heading in different directions. Jacek was a cameraman at a local TV station,
Andrzej was studying electronics. But they had two big things in common. They
were Catholic, and they couldn't stand communism. Poland, or the Polish People's
Republic, as it was called then, was a satellite state of the Soviet Union. You
know, Polish, they are kind of like les enfants terribles of the system. They
have to live under this kind of regime sent from the Kremlin, but the majority
of Poles, they are just Catholics, and they hate this red system, which is only
good in theory. In reality, we live under another regime, you know. With my
family, we were absolutely anti-communist. My family induced incredible losses
during the Second World War, and then the Soviet occupation of Poland was never
accepted. I can say one thing that was maybe a little crime that I committed.
May 1st, it was a big, big, you know, demonstration. Everybody had to go. They
were checking lists of pupil students, and if you didn't come, they were
inquiring, and there were some, you know, consequences. And nearby, it was like
a Communist Party building. Big banner on it, red banner, and they hang on this
banner the picture of the first secretary of the Communist Party. About 6 a.m.,
I went there with a little bottle. It was full of ink, and I threw it in the
face of this first secretary. The glass fell down. I was running, probably I
beat an Olympic record. But normally, it was that we were not obeying. We're
trying to bypass whatever was coming from the top, and just trying to be
passive. Instead of active resistance, Andrzej found freedom at the kayaking
club and at church. The Communist authorities didn't approve of religion, but
they couldn't stop people from going to church and talking politics. Usually we
were meeting in some cellars under very, very old churches, and if some agents
were sent to us, we knew immediately, so we were changing topic. But when it was
like a clear air, we were talking about future of Poland, how we see it, how we
dream about free Poland, independent from the Soviet Union. In 1978, a new Pope
was elected. And joy of joys, he was Polish. Karol Wojtyla of Poland, the first
non-Italian Pope in more than four and a half centuries. The papal name he had
chosen, John Paul II. Oh, it was amazing. I remember I was in Warsaw, I hear
suddenly on the radio this news and everybody was jumping on the street from the
happiness, because it was like suddenly we got huge hope. We are on the way to
democracy. Because Polish Catholic Church was always buttheading with the
system. And the many bishops, many priests, they were in prison for mostly
political reasons. And everybody knows him in KrakÃ³w, you know, we know him
personally, because he was a priest, he was a bishop, archbishop, cardinal, and
everybody was starting hoping for with his election, changes will come. You
know, I have this recollection, I was leading a meeting of our kayak club in the
student office at the university. Suddenly the door opened and our friend Joseph
came and raised his hands up and said, Habemus Papam. So, it was silence and
then incredible joy, incredible joy. It was like a spark, we're just embracing
each other. We just closed this meeting, we left stuff and we run on the
streets. We run to the main square. It was hundreds of thousands of people. It
was a festival. Everybody was feeling that that's the end of communist for
Poland, that now Poland has voice, has diplomacy, which is independent from
Kremlin. So this was how the world looked to these young idealists in 1979.
Poland was on its knees, the shelves were empty, the politics were bankrupt.
They were desperate to experience another way of life. And in the case of
Andrzej and his fellow student kayakers, desperate too to escape what the
authorities had in mind for them. In communist Poland, every graduate were
getting a ticket to go and work somewhere. It was not your choice. They were
sending you to some factory, to some business, and you were working for four,
five years just to pay for free studies. So we were really scared to think about
it or being taken to the army. So for the last two years, we just started
thinking about big expeditions. So first we went twice to what was then
Yugoslavia, to Balkans. And one of our friends stand up and he said, Hey, why
don't we go to Argentina? You know, another shock. Nobody could imagine that at
the moment when communist Poland was crumbling, there were shortages of food,
that we can mount an expedition to Argentina. It was like saying today in the
student club, okay, let's go to the moon. But you know, we created the best
kayak club in Poland. We were winning in some competitions. So let's say regime
accepted us for the reason to use us as a good PR for the world. The problem was
with money. Polish money was worthless. My father in best time was earning a
good salary, which was equivalent of 36 American dollars a month. And now we are
going to the dollar zone without money. You know, that was our big problem. So
you'd got the authorities on board because they saw in you an opportunity to, I
suppose, be ambassadors for Poland. But Jacek, you went to kayaker. So you know,
how were you going to be part of this trip? Oh, it was kind of interesting
moment. I remember this day changed my life. I was coming back from my daily job
at the Polish TV station and I was using, I remember a trolley number 21 and
suddenly Andrzej jump into this trolley car and say, Hey Jacek, how are you
doing? Ready to go to Argentina with us to be cameraman? I say yes, immediately,
immediately, because I love this idea, even without knowing too many details.
One thing must have occurred to you on the spot, though, which is you were going
to have to spend a lot of time on really quite dangerous water and you didn't
know what you were doing. I mean, was this not something that kind of occurred
to you to maybe worry about or hesitate? Although I wasn't really big guy and
I'm not, I'm kind of short man, I was kind of fearless, you know, I wasn't
really a good swimmer, but I was never afraid of, you know, and maybe it's kind
of stupid, but I feel invincible. I was ready for this adventure. Ready for it,
but quite a lot of preparations to do. I mean, you got the visas, which was a
miracle in itself, but then you also needed transport. How were you going to get
transport? You know, I said that there were shortages of everything and to get
something like a car you had to get a special ticket from institution, from
factory. In this case, our university applied to the factory, but the response
was yes, fine. Okay, we put you on the queue in line, but you have to wait about
two years. So we send our most handsome gentleman, his name is Piotr, to the
factory. He started the investigation and he found out that the director of the
factory has a beautiful daughter. It's just a criminal story, you know, it's
like he just spent some time with her and he then, when you know, this relation
was closer, he just explained to her that we need a truck now, not in two years.
And you know, who can say no to the daughter? You know, everything what was
happening was like a little, little miracle. We made this impossible dream
possible. These guys did an amazing job. They basically got the car, special six
wheel truck named Star, and somehow they got a special voucher which allowed
this car to be used for our expedition and to be returned after six or one year
time. And also we got like a few tons of food, canned food, military food, even
bread was in cans. And also we make kayaks, they were fiberglass kayaks, not the
best ones, but they were okay, you know. The problem is when you hit the big
rock of any rock, you know, you break this thing. And after this, you have to
spend a few hours to fix this thing, putting special patches. We didn't have too
much really high class equipment. Even life jackets we were making by hand. We
were just acquiring materials, okay, materials from factories and we're doing
our equipment. I mean, these life jackets you were making, would they save your
life? Were they good? Yes, they were good because, okay, you can take plastic
water bottles and just attach to your body, just a matter of their volume. So
they were well made, but they were looking very funny. You can see us in this
white, big life jackets. When I'm looking at this, I'm laughing today. The
benefit of hindsight. There were no serious whitewater rapids in Poland. So when
Andrej and the crew were patching their equipment together, they didn't really
know what to expect on the altogether more ferocious rivers of South America.
Just as they were about to set off, Argentina reached the brink of war with
Chile, so they couldn't go there. Peru was the next choice, but then Peru
started getting politically hectic. So that was also a no go. A plan C was
quickly hatched to head to Mexico. In the summer of 1979, they said their
goodbyes. I left behind my mother, my sister, my brother and my girlfriend. And
I was, you know, I was thinking, gee, a few months and I'll be back home.
Poland, we love our country. What about you, Andrej? Were you, you know, how are
you feeling on setting off on your big adventure? Big worry for me was the army
because time was clicking, okay, and someone is getting ready. Someone was
writing my name on the ticket. So I couldn't wait for that. I knew that I'm
leaving my country, my people, but only for six months. That was how long they
had permission to leave Poland for, six months. So there were 10 men who set off
with 23 tonnes of equipment on their borrowed military truck, including 27
homemade kayaks and Jacek's old fashioned camera equipment and rolls of film.
Full of excitement, they made their debut on the Rio Pescados in Mexico. We went
to Veracruz and this day was kind of a disaster because we lost probably like
six kayaks during within a few hours. I'm still kind of laughing, but, you know,
I could do this because I was just filming from the shore. Were you laughing,
Andrej? I'm laughing too. I'm laughing too because I was in kayak and I'm going,
you know, river was so fast. We never had this, you know, experience. It was
like a channel with white water. And the problem was not with this because you
could paddle and paddle, but at some point you had to stop and both shores were
densely covered with the sugar cane. There is no beach, there is nowhere to
stop. And this water taking and taking you more and more nervous. Maybe there is
a waterfall, maybe there is some, you know, sink or some cave. So I just let my
kayak go. On one of the bends, I managed to catch those sugar canes. I just
ripped some of them off, but one of them, like on the pendulum, boom, I was
landing somewhere under the foliage. And then I had to make my way through to
the track, go back, you know, and this is a semi-jungle. So it was incredible.
It took me a long time, one hour or two hours. And then we were just counting
people. We were not counting kayaks. You know, it was a near miss, absolutely,
for many of us. Wow, did that not make you think, well, this is quite a lot more
dangerous than maybe we'd thought through? No, absolutely not. We were
invincible. I was 27 and the world was wide open in front of me and in front of
my kayak. Their stash of kayaks was rapidly being depleted and so were their
coffers. The ten needed to raise some money and drove north to Wyoming in the
United States, where a Polish friend, Chris, was living in a little town called
Casper. Local paper published big, you know, article like, Invasion of Wards of
Puck in Casper. It was kind of a joke, but we were actually kind of sensation in
this little town on the prairie and everybody enjoy us because suddenly ten
young guys end up in this town, kind of like injection of fresh blood into this
community. And everybody help us because we need some cash to finance our
expedition and everybody giving us some jobs, painting houses, building fences.
And imagine ten guys sleeping in a basement of our friend, Chris Mora, and his
wife Karen, she was ready to bring to the world first baby. And it was kind of a
little bit hectic, but everybody was staying together and happy. I mean, I've
got this picture of you as this really close bunch of friends living in the
basement, but you were living in quite difficult conditions. You were going
through a lot together and you were staying friendly and close and charming
people all along the way. What was it that you were able to do? What did you
bring to places that people responded to in this way? We were kind of a very
cheerful group of young people from Poland and everybody kind of enjoyed us
because we were also, besides we were kind of explorers, we were kind of party
animals. We like to sing. Actually, we were a really nice little singing group.
And imagine me, I was the smallest guy in this whole group and I was this
deepest voice, this baritone, so I've been looking for this big guy. And Sali
was this short guy using his voice. We were kind of a likeable bunch, wild
bunch. Are you still both in fine voice? Oh yeah, absolutely. I'm playing
guitar. So you know what I'm going to ask you now. Do you feel like singing a
stanza of a, I don't know, a song that you might have sung at the time? We can,
I believe. We can, we can. What do you want to sing? Czerwony pas. Okay. Jacek.
Czerwony pas, czerwony pas, za pasem broÅ„, za pasem broÅ„, i to pur bÅ‚ysz. Oh
Jacek, Jacek, you forgot. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
no, no, guys, please, please erase it. The Czerwony pas entertained the
residents of Kasper for the whole of that winter, by which time their travel
passes had well and truly expired and they were getting angry messages from
Poland to return the military truck. So they headed back to Mexico to put the
truck on a ship. But would they go with it? Five of us returned because of
family obligations, wives and et cetera. And five of us just realised, gee, this
adventure is not ending yet. We have to finish our expedition. And we were kind
of stubborn with our decision. They got hold of a second-hand Chevy and
continued south. With their spirit and enthusiasm, they charmed the Polish
ambassador in Mexico. He was no fan of the communist regime in Warsaw either.
And he introduced them to high society in Mexico. A tourism minister gave them
an official letter of support and $10,000 to document Mexico's rivers. The trip
was back on. They drove and kayaked through Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, got
a boat from Panama to Ecuador. And finally, they reached Peru and the Colca,
this unexplored river in one of the world's deepest canyons. The place is a
crack in the earth mantle between two tectonic plates filled with water. We
started at 2,200 metres above sea level and we finish in 30 days at 800 metres.
So this is more than one mile vertical drop on the distance of 100 kilometres.
We knew that this drop will cause waterfalls. When I saw this river from Cessna,
it's a horror. Some walls are even curving and covering the view on the water.
You don't know what is below. One of these walls on the right hand side is over
4,000 metres tall from the river. So when we saw rocks falling, they were
falling for minutes. They were rolling down in dust for minutes. And that also
means that there is no way out if you run into difficulties, if you break a leg
or whatever. You have to climb like for two days, you have to carry water and
you have to have container to carry water. We didn't have such stuff. We were
saying, OK, if something happens, OK, someone will reach telephone line and will
call friends and Polish embassy in Lima. But nobody said how. It was a little
fable. They calculated it would take them five days and packed food for eight,
just in case. But as they were about to set off, there was devastating news. In
Rome late this afternoon, shots were fired at the Pope and he's been seriously
wounded. The attempt to kill the Pope happened when Pope Paul was driving
through St. Peter's Square in his white open car on the way to his weekly
audience in the Vatican. It was a total shock for us. We were losing the best
son of Poland. It was his nickname at that time. Priest in a little town, he
lent us a transistor radio. We sat on the parish with broken windows. You know,
we were terribly cold, 3650 meters above sea level. Our teeth rose in our
canteens and we're listening the news. And in the morning, sun came up and we
just jump on our truck. And it was for us, everything was, you know, not
important. We wanted to conquer this canyon to sort of balance this incredible
loss, to achieve our goal that we're dreaming about for years. And you know,
from this emotion, from this shock, we forgot to buy a fishing equipment. It was
lots of fish in the river and then we were starving. Oh no. So, I mean, you go
off on this trip, you're in an emotional state. It's a lot harder than you
anticipated. And five days in, by the time you thought you'd have completed it,
you're less than halfway and you're running out of rations. What was the
situation, Jacek? What was your mental state at that point? No, we were, you
know, almost out of food and you get some eye infection and the bottom of the
raft get broken, ripped off by some tons of water. Morale was kind of going down
pretty fast, but we were committed to still move forward and because we kind of
promised ourselves that we have to do this for our Pope. I was feeling bad. I
had infection of eye. I hit my face somewhere on the rocks underwater. In
addition to that, we were drinking water from the river. I got diarrhea and then
both wisdom teeth started growing. So I was in pain and I was useless. And that
was the worst stuff, not the pain, not the hunger, but I was a leader of the
expedition and I was useless. We have to break for the headlines, but we'll pick
up shortly with Andrzej and Jacek as they and their friends battle to survive at
the bottom of the Kolka Valley. This is the BBC World Service exploring the
seriously fun work of the Flying Seagull Project. My name is Captain Bash. Ash
has been on a mission to bring fun and frivolity to disadvantaged children,
children in refugee camps, in orphanages and care homes. These kids probably
have gone through some of the worst traumas and they don't have access to
counsellors or therapists. Ash and the seagulls aren't therapists. They're
clowns. So they do what they do best to help. Escapism and fun. Give them
something to wake up excited about. Give them something to go to bed giggling
about. Otherwise, what is the point? When the Greek government allowed children
in refugee camps to go to school, the kids who'd been working with the seagulls
did far better than the other kids. If they can believe themselves to be
limitless and valuable, then maybe they can go into the next challenge of their
life with that arsenal of self-confidence. Flying Seagulls. Child's Play.
Tuesday at 9.30 and 20 GMT. Coming up in the second half of Outlook, drama on
the Kolka River as the five exhausted kayakers face their greatest hurdle yet,
three waterfalls in a row. Yurek wanted to jump down to the raft. He missed the
raft and he fell into the river. He attached rope to his leather belt, which
broke like a sheet of paper. It was wet. And current took him. We'll be back
with Andrzej and Jacek after the news. BBC News with Gareth Barlow. The head of
the United Nations has told a special meeting of the organisation's General
Assembly that Russia's invasion of Ukraine is an affront to the conscience of
the world. The meeting is debating a motion calling for the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of Russian troops. The Israeli military says it
intercepted a number of rockets fired by Palestinian militants in the Gaza
Strip. The attack follows a deadly raid by Israeli troops in the occupied West
Bank on Wednesday. The Palestinian militant group Hamas, which runs Gaza, said
its patience was running out. A TV news journalist has been shot dead while
working at the scene of a murder in the US state of Florida. A nine-year-old
girl was also killed. Police say the motive for the attacks is unclear. Hundreds
of rescue workers in northern China are attempting to reach more than 50 minors
trapped in an open-cast culpit that collapsed on Wednesday. Two people are known
to have died. Vigils have been held in major Portuguese cities in support of
victims of sexual abuse committed by members of the Roman Catholic clergy. A
report last week revealed details about the abuse of nearly 5,000 children over
the past 70 years. Severe weather warnings have been issued for parts of New
Zealand's North Island. Heavy rain and thunderstorms are forecast to hit areas,
still recovering from a cyclone which killed at least 11 people. The British
government has announced plans for major changes to the way English football is
governed. The proposals include setting up an independent regulator which could
block teams from joining breakaway competitions. And researchers say that a
54,000-year-old cave in southern France holds evidence that the first modern
humans to reach Europe hunted with bows and arrows. Tiny fragments of flint
arrowheads were discovered during excavations in the Rhone Valley. World News
from the BBC. Hello, welcome back to Outlook, I'm Jo Fidgin. Before the break we
left Andrzej PiÄ…tkowski and Jacek Bogucki and their friends in great peril in
Peru's Colca Canyon, one of the deepest in the world. They were hoping to become
the first people ever to navigate its river. This was in 1981. But they were
woefully unprepared for such a dangerous expedition. Amateur kayakers from
Poland who'd set off two years earlier on what was meant to be a great adventure
and a way to escape the repression of Soviet communism. But it was turning into
a disaster and the biggest shock of all was waiting for them at the end of the
canyon. If only they could get there. They'd run out of food. Jacek, who was
filming the whole thing, was in despair, like everyone else. And Andrzej, the
team leader, was wrecked. He had diarrhoea, toothache and an eye infection. I
couldn't paddle. So I was carrying stuff. I made a bend. There was a little
path. From my one eye that I could still use, I saw a little greenery. I thought
that I have hallucinations from all this, you know, mishaps. But suddenly I saw
a cow emerging from these bushes. So if there is a cow, must be some people. I
dropped this stuff and I was running back. I was just screaming, the earth, the
earth, like Columbus, you know, the earth, the canko, canko, we are saved. You
know, in a few hours we landed on the beach and people brought us food. How good
these people were to just help you out like that. They were scared of us. That
was the first thing. We looked terribly. We just grew our beards. Our clothes
were damaged. We were using alpinistic ropes to put our shoes together.
Everything was ripped off and we were really, really exhausted. So when they saw
us that we can do no harm to them, they just probably decided that something
happened, maybe airplane crashed. But the most important thing was a newspaper.
They brought us newspaper, I printed a few days ago. And we learned that our
Pope survived. We were crying. I really moved now when I'm saying that.
Somewhere, we found a bottle of whiskey for this last moment, if we couldn't go
forward. We open it, we drank it with our friends, we're singing, we were, you
know, jubilated. We're so happy. You remember that Jacek? Yes. Oh, yes, it was
amazing. Gee, because we suddenly came from dead to life. They gave us chicken
and they gave us some food and we were ready to continue with second part of the
canyon. You get back on the river, which has one of its nastier surprises in
store for you, which is not one waterfall, but three that you were going to have
to get down somehow. At the top of that waterfall, obviously, there's no way you
can go. You've got to go down. But what emotions were you going through as you
faced that drop? I have to pack my camera. We went down and was the second
waterfall was really nasty. Everything went upside down. We were drowning,
drowning, drowning. And it was very, very, very tough. But fortunately, this
water spit us out from this whirlpool and we survived. Jurek wanted to jump down
to the raft. He missed the raft and he fall into the river. He attached rope to
his leather belt, which broke like a sheet of paper. It was wet. And current
took him. We just threw another rope to him and we just managed to help him back
to the raft that was stopped under this undercut. It was really dramatic. Were
you all thinking at that point, actually, one of us might not make this? One of
us may make it, but then what to do next? You actually thought that one or more
of you might die trying to get down? Yes. And when we jumped the second one, oh
my gosh, the pressure of water was holding us. It was like a shower. It was an
entire river falling on us. So when we eventually left this place, so it was a
big boulder. Christopher jumped and he was holding a rope starting to stop us.
Impossible. We were weighing at this moment about three tons. So he was sliding
on his soles of his shoes. We were pulling him to the river. So we just yelled
to him, drop the rope. He dropped it and we hit the third waterfall just filled
with water. It was like six meters. So black humor was really good, you know,
for that. What else can you do? You can cry, but it doesn't help. So it's better
to crack a joke. Well, I'm amazed that you kept your good cheer at that point.
Jacek, as you said, fortunately, you did all survive and you made it out of
there. And a few days later, you could see the end of the canyon. You had made
it 100 kilometers. First people ever to achieve this. What were your feelings at
that point? Was just amazing feeling, you know, we just just screaming, jumping.
And we are so full of happiness because we suddenly realized we were first human
beings to run through this deepest canyon in the world. And we felt like, wow,
these adventures really mean something to us. And it was something
indescribable. I was elated, but, you know, when we went to shore, it was
suddenly such a wave of melancholy came on me. I was looking back to this canyon
in spite of all these problems. You know, life came back to basics, to survival
in good style. OK, now I just realize how many things we have in our homes, how
many unwanted clothing. Here I had one shoe with tie with the rope. I was
absolutely happy. I wanted to go back to this canyon and just make it again. So
that was my... Instead I went to telephone. I was hitchhiking. People were
looking at me as a dropout from Mars. Took me to first telephone and I called
Arequipa when friends were mounting rescue expedition for us. Helicopter was to
fly for us next day. You were heroes in the newspapers, weren't you? In Peru,
you know, you were celebrated. Yes, we became kind of celebrities in Peru
because we suddenly opened this area of Colca Canyon, Colca Valley, became
really big tourist attraction after our running through for the first time and
discovering to the world. Were you looking forward, Andrzej, to your triumphant
return to Poland? Absolutely. But while the kayakers had been away, Poland had
been changing. Labour unrest in Poland is spreading with 60,000 workers now on
strike. It's basically a simple matter of having food to fill the stomach at a
price that people can afford. The growing unrest is fast becoming a major
political crisis for the country's communist leadership. A new workers' movement
had been gathering pace. Solidarity, the first independent trade union within
the Soviet bloc, it had millions of members led by Lech WaÅ‚Ä™sa and was
threatening the communist order. On the 13th of December 1981, just days before
the kayakers were due to go home, the Polish authorities took drastic action.
The armed forces now rule in Poland with martial law and the threat of execution
for those who break it. Poland is in the grip of a major crisis. The country's
leader, General Jaruzelski, has declared a state of emergency. At midnight, riot
police isolated and took over the Warsaw headquarters of Solidarity. We are
going down the street and they are sending newspapers on the walls. I'm looking,
Piotr is driving, and I'm seeing a war in Poland. War in Poland. War in Poland.
Big, you know, like two, three inches letters across half of the page. I thought
again that I just read something wrong. And Piotr stopped on another red light.
I see the same. I say, Piotr, war in Poland. I jump out of car. I just grabbed
this newspaper from the wall. I didn't pay for it. And we started reading. We
just stop and tired traffic. We couldn't believe. I saw Piotr's face was white
like this newspaper, you know. All our hopes for return, all our hopes for the
Pope, everything suddenly collapsed. War in Poland. Lech WaÅ‚Ä™sa, others in jail,
our friends in jail. And return to heavy duty communists in Poland. I'm with
Piotr in Arequipa. Instead of leaving our truck, we're buying a full tank of
fuel and we're running Pan-American Highway to our group. They jump on the
truck. We're going to Polish embassy and we demand explanations. Instead of
explaining anything, they're giving us official communique, like three pages of
this nasty communist jargon, like in the early 40s, explaining everything upside
down, full of lies and everything. We just threw this paper on the floor. We
left embassy and behind it, it was a television station. We just made a loop
with the truck, parked in front of the entrance. They interrupted their
broadcasting, put us on air and we said, what's going on? And that was the
beginning of our solidarity support for Poland. Every news media outlet, TV,
print, you know, radio, they were running after us and asking questions. We are
criticizing this regime and we became instantly dissidents, which means our way
to going back to Poland was out of the question. We'd be prosecuted and sent to
jail, even somewhere to Russian Siberia. You never know. And we spent like a
couple of months in Lima, Peru, organizing support for solidarity. We organized
big march through streets of Lima. At least 5,000 people were marching and the
future Nobel Prize famous writer, Mario Vargas Llosa, he helped us write a
protest letter to Polish and Russian embassies after the march. And also we
organized Chopin music recital, which raised like almost $2,500. And we sent
this money to underground solidarity via Vatican. And in this case, we closed
our way for going back to Poland. Our march ended up with some riots on the
streets in front of Soviet embassy. Crowds of Peruvian people suddenly gate open
and this water cannons came from inside of Soviet embassy. These people were
fighting for the Pope and for Leg WaÅ‚Ä™sa and they were suffering. I mean, your
profile was growing. You were speaking to international media about your views
on what was going on in Poland. Polish authorities were well aware that you were
causing quite a stir. What were the consequences for your family back home in
Poland? So our families, they were interrogated. My mother was told he's not
going to never going back. My name was erased from every possible document in
Poland. And it was difficult for our families. In my case, probably same people
were like militia. At that time it was called militia, not police. They just
knock on the door. My grandmother was left there in Poland. So she opened and
they were interrogating her. They were trying to threaten her. They were asking
where am I. And then when they were leaving apartment building, it was at that
time that it was list of occupants with by names and by apartment number. So
they took some knife or something and just erased my name, leaving a hole. They
clearly couldn't go home, but they didn't have permission to stay in Peru
either. They had a few days left on their transit visas for the United States
and raced north to cross the border just in time. They were allowed to stay for
six months and ended up getting political asylum. You've gone from these young
adventurers to heroes to dissidents to refugees in a really short space of time.
And now here you are in a foreign country having to build new lives away from
the country you'd expected to be going home to. How were you feeling about that?
First of all, it was kind of depressing feeling because we suddenly cut our ties
with our native country and we didn't know if we ever can go back because, you
know, political situation was really tough over there. And but we have to build
our lives slowly, slowly. We spent one month in New York and finally we end up
in Casper, Wyoming, where we our good friends, the Marinovsky family, Polish
family, they embrace us and help us with first, you know, steps in this American
life. And we slowly build our lives. It was a difficult process, but we
survived. Andrei got a scholarship to complete his master's in maths at the
University of Ohio. He became a teacher in New York City. Jacek got a tempting
job offer to be a news cameraman for a TV station in Casper, Wyoming. I say in
my still very broken English, yes, and Irene never look back. You both found
your feet in the United States and started building a new life. And it was
several more years, 1989, before communism fell in Poland and you were able to
go back. Yes, I was I was like probably one week after Poland became democratic.
I went to Poland, see my family was amazing, great feeling. And I had a chance
to even meet with first Polish premier Mazowiecki. Poland was finally free of
Russian influence. It was becoming a democratic country. It was something, you
know, I can't even describe properly. Seeing my mother, my brother, my sister,
my cousins, it was something really amazing. After 10 years. After 10 years.
Andrei, how was it for you going back to Poland? I went to Berlin first. I paid
one Deutsche Mark and they lent me a sledgehammer and I was crushing the wall.
The Berlin Wall. The Berlin Wall just to release and end up this part of my
life, you know, this part under communist pressure and just repressions. At that
moment, I felt that I'm really free man and I could go and see my family, my
cousins, everybody. But both Jacek and Andrei chose to stay in the United
States, as did the others. They still meet up to go kayaking. This is great
tradition. I named this Potomac Rendezvous and for almost like 25 years we were
meeting in Reston, Virginia, where our buddy Piotr Chmielinski lives and he's
inviting us every year around Labor Day and we meet for like three, four days
and we do kayaking on Potomac and a few parties and it's really great
camaraderie and I feel like we are like a band of brothers and we are still
keeping in touch on a daily basis. You set out on this journey more than 40
years ago and completed it 40 years ago. Obviously, it didn't work out as you
planned at all. I wonder now looking back whether you would have made the same
decision knowing what you know to set off for South America and leave your home.
Yes, in my case, I will do the same in split second. No regrets. I would do the
same also in split second. It was the best part of my life, total freedom. We
were marking point on the map and going there. Nobody was telling us what to do.
We were listening to ourselves. We didn't have responsibilities, families,
children, money, mortgages and all this stuff. If I could turn the clock, I
would do it immediately. Andrei Pienktovski and Jacek Bogucki on the kayaking
trip that changed their lives. They were speaking to Outlook in 2021. A
documentary has since been made about the group featuring the footage that Jacek
shot. It's called Godspeed Los Polacos. Thanks for listening. BBC World Service
and now Witness History. Today we're taking you back to 1958 when the most
notorious plastic explosive in the world, Semtex, was invented in
Czechoslovakia. In 2018, Maria Jostafova spoke to Miroslav Brabera, whose
brother, Stanislav Brabera, invented the explosive. The killer explosive. The
IRA said it had used 200 pounds of Semtex. Four packages of the explosive Semtex
have been found abandoned in a London reservoir. Several hundred people are now
feared dead tonight after a Pan American Airlines jumbo jet crashed near the
town of Lockerbie in Dumfries. For decades, Semtex was the explosive of choice
for people wanting to launch undercover bomb attacks. It was high strength,
impossible to detect using x-rays or sniffer dogs, yet stable enough to handle.
It was developed by two Czech chemists, Radim FugÃ¡rtko and Stanislav Brabera, in
a small town SemtÃ­n, which gave its name to the product. Miroslav Brabera
remembers how proud his brother was of his invention. He was overjoyed. He told
me that he could casually carry Semtex in his pocket and that it wouldn't
explode by itself without a detonator. He also said that you could attach 100
grams of the explosive to a car and then easily blow it up from a distance,
which was later on misused. They got around 15,000 Czechoslovak crowns for the
invention. That amount of money was equal to the average annual salary in
communist Czechoslovakia, a huge bonus. The initial task assigned to the
scientists at the research unit in SemtÃ­n by the Czechoslovak army in the early
1950s was to develop a plastic explosive that would be extremely powerful, but
which at the same time could resist machine gun fire without exploding.
Stanislav Brabera, a talented chemist, was considered crucial for this
enterprise. He was called back from the regular military service, but they asked
him to return to SemtÃ­n so that he could continue his research of explosives.
The scientists had to come up with a new plastic explosive that could be easily
manufactured from cheap domestic resources. Rival plastic explosives such as C4
were being developed on the other side of the Iron Curtain. In the UK and the US
at around the same time. But Semtex was waterproof, very malleable and had a
long shelf life. Ivo Varga is a leading specialist with Explosia, the company
which produces Semtex today. Semtex was very similar to other plastic explosives
of that time, like C4 or Formax. But the advantage of Semtex was how sticky it
was. You could attach it to almost any surface and the fact that it was
resistant to both low and high temperatures. Semtex is easily mouldable even in
minus 15 degrees Celsius or plus 50 degrees Celsius. Czechoslovakia started
manufacturing Semtex in 1964. It was widely exported to countries allied to the
Soviet bloc for a broad range of purposes, from commercial blasting works in
quarries or on building sites to clearing mines. Semtex was primarily used by
the Czechoslovak army, but it was also sold to the armies of the Warsaw Pact
countries like Hungary and East Germany. And after that, it was delivered to
North Vietnam as well. But those were small quantities, like one tonne of the
explosive. In the 1980s, the Czech company specialising in defence equipment
exports started selling Semtex to Libya to support the building boom there.
Libya, however, sold on substantial amounts of Semtex to the Irish Republican
Army or IRA, which in the 1970s and 80s was fighting a violent campaign to drive
British troops out of Northern Ireland. The Libyan sales could have been an act
of revenge after the UK allowed the USA to launch attacks against Libya from a
British airbase in 1986. Then, on the 21st of December 1988, a Pan Am passenger
plane flying from Frankfurt to Detroit was blown apart by a bomb. All 259 people
on board were killed and another 11 died in the small Scottish town of Lockerbie
where the wreckage came down. This is the little border town of Lockerbie
tonight. The air is thick with smoke, flames and the smell of aviation fuel. A
crater 20 feet deep marks the spot near the main Glasgow road where the jumbo
jet came down. All four engines have also been identified in Lockerbie itself.
But it now seems that it was in the countryside, 17 miles from the town, that
the search teams found the luggage debris containing traces of plastic
explosive. When it was suggested that Semtex had been used in the Lockerbie
bombing, Stanislav Brebera was needed again. My brother was sent. My brother,
who was about to retire, was sent there to find out whether Semtex was really to
blame or whether there was some other explosive used. He said they couldn't
prove that Semtex was used. In 2003, the Libyan leader, Colonel Gaddafi,
accepted responsibility for the Lockerbie bombing but Semtex was never confirmed
as the substance used to bring down the Boeing 747. VÃ¡clav Habel, the first
post-Soviet president of Czechoslovakia, nonetheless expressed disgust over the
Semtex exports to authoritarian regimes. The former regime exported a thousand
tons of Semtex to Libya and yet 200 grams are enough to blow up an aircraft.
This means that now world terrorism has enough supplies of Semtex to last 150
years. Semtex was completely banned for exports in 1989. Explosia later actively
participated in finding ways of marking its explosives and in 1991 it
voluntarily started adding an organic compound called DMNB, which helps sniffer
dogs to detect it. The content of the explosive has undergone many changes over
the years but the one thing that hasn't changed is the name Semtex. The name
Semtex is very nice. It's actually very hard to come up with a name for an
explosive. The name Semtex has become infamous. Sadly, whenever there is a
plastic explosive used in a terror attack, Semtex gets the blame and that's how
it got its bad reputation. Ironically, the creator of Semtex, Stanislav Brebera,
never wanted to be a chemist in the first place and after secondary school he
had considered taking a degree in philosophy. It was his science teacher who
talked him into studying chemistry instead. As his brother points out,
literature remained his great passion for the rest of his life. He loved
reading. He had a large library. He was interested in history, modern history.
That was his passion. When he was a student, he even tried writing. He wrote
poems. Stanislav Brebera, a quiet family man, didn't anticipate creating a
weapon that could take the lives of so many. However, according to his brother,
he wasn't apologetic either. Well, he spent all his life in research. Semtex was
his brainchild. It made him famous. But unfortunately people blamed him for
inventing something that terrorists found handy. No, he didn't regret it. Semtex
is still being used. His family was more affected than him as the media wrote
about it constantly and chased the family. Other than that, I think that he
managed to live a calm life. Stanislav Brebera continued his work as a
researcher at the Czech University of Pardubice until his death in 2012. Semtex
has been approved for export since 1991, with its sales tightly controlled by
the Czech government. Miroslav Brebera was talking to Maria Jostapiova for that
edition of Witness History. First broadcast in 2018. This is the BBC World
Service and here's Harriet Gilbert to tell you about the next World Book Club. A
bizarre and quite extraordinary story that challenges social norms with themes
of feminism, politics and sexual corruption. The novel follows the life of a
young sex worker who enjoys great success. We are making changes to the way BBC
live streams are distributed via third party services and platforms. And the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds. I'm Marie Keyworth, uncovering the hidden
world of high-end mass catering. The newsroom is next.