TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-17H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at 4 o'clock. The Prime Minister is due to brief a group of backbench
Conservative MPs this evening on new post-Brexit trade rules for Northern
Ireland. The changes will allow businesses to trade more freely with the rest of
the UK. Rishi Sunak was in Belfast earlier, insisting that access to the UK and
European markets would offer people in Northern Ireland a unique opportunity. A
transgender woman is beginning an eight-year prison sentence after being
convicted of two rapes. Isla Bryson attacked two women in Clydebank in Glasgow,
well known as Adam Graham, and transitioned before standing trial. Officials
were strongly criticised for putting the 31-year-old in a women's jail ahead of
sentencing last month. Bryson was moved to a men's prison following the outcry.
Police are expected to give an update shortly on their search for a newborn baby
whose parents were arrested last night, weeks after they disappeared. Constance
Martin and Mark Gordon were spotted by a member of the public at a cash machine
in a residential area of Brighton. The baby's whereabouts still aren't clear.
Our reporter in Brighton, Howard Johnson, has the latest. Dozens of police
officers looking through the sheds behind this residential area. They've been
urged to search the area. Police also to look in their sheds and their
allotments to see if they can find this missing child. And we're hearing from
local residents I've been speaking to today, they've been saying that there's an
eerie feeling here. Figures suggest the price of groceries in shops in the past
four weeks rose by more than 17% compared with a year ago. It's the highest
growth recorded by the retail analyst Kantar since they started collecting data
in 2008. They say milk, eggs and margarine saw some of the biggest price rises.
China has accused the US of overreacting after federal workers were told to
remove TikTok from their work phones. Government agencies have been given 30
days to make sure staff have deleted the social media app, which is owned by a
Chinese company. There's been concern about users' data being shared with
Beijing. BBC News. This is BBC Radio 4. Now to the Shetland Islands, an
archipelago 100 miles from mainland Britain. It has a population of a little
over 20,000 people, yet they're at the heart of the UK's debate over oil and
gas. Now in a change to some listings, the journalist Jen Stout reports on a
complex energy transition and the people stuck in the middle. Cambo, 75 miles
west of Shetland, is a prospective oil field. It's actually one of several, but
Cambo is particularly distinctive due to the political back and forth over
whether it should get the go ahead. In 2021, the project seemed to be shelved
for good. Two years on, the war in Ukraine, Putin's weaponisation of gas and the
resultant energy crisis apparently mean that things have changed. So where does
that leave North Sea oil and gas? And more importantly, if you're standing where
I'm standing, where does this leave Shetland? Shetland is almost an exception in
the way that we can critically think about North Sea oil and gas. I'm 20 miles
north of Shetland's capital, Larwick. I'm up in the North Mainland near Vaux.
It's a windy day, so I'm indoors looking out of the big picture windows of my
rented house. And the view from here on the slopes of a steep river valley
looking out over the sea is every cliche you've heard about Shetland. A vast,
dramatic landscape dotted with little houses, that big, wide sky and the
sparkling sea never far away. But it's night time now. Darkness comes early at
60 degrees north. And yes, the stars shine bright, but so does something which
perhaps doesn't fit the romantic stereotype of Shetland, the unspoilt
wilderness. Behind those big hills to the north, there's a large orange glow
lighting up the sky. And it's been there a long time. It comes from the huge
Sulum Vaux oil terminal and its tall flare stack. This big industrial site,
decades old now, might be hidden away on a remote peninsula, but the light it
emits is seen far and wide. And the impact on life here is visible everywhere.
The good roads, the fine schools, the general sense of prosperity, of cash. An
oil fund, a bit like Norway's, gathered the benefits of oil and gas for
Shetland's 20,000-odd residents since the early 1980s. Good times were had. I
think that we really shouldn't understate the cultural, economic and societal
significance of the transformations that Dorset oil brought to northern Scotland
and Shetland in particular. Historian Ewan Gibbs. And it led to a fundamental
reorientation in economic activity, a whole new set of powerful economic actors
in the form of multinational oil companies who had an interest in political
affairs on the island. And it obviously led to important new revenue streams,
which have had a huge impact on the infrastructure and built environment of
Shetland as well. And of course, a lot of what you're describing there,
Shetland's story is different to elsewhere in the UK, because it was possible
for the council back in the 70s to secure something akin to a softened wealth
fund. I think that that was the product in many ways of Shetland already having
a very distinctive cultural identity and distinctive political institutions. And
it's simply physical geographical distance. Oil wasn't necessary for Shetland to
continue as it was, and it didn't desperately need, in many senses, the benefits
of oil. So it was able to drive a relatively hard bargain with oil companies.
Shetland, back in the 1970s, fought its corner hard. What could have been a Wild
West, a black gold rush, was kept largely under local authority oversight with
the council owning the port and harbour and negotiating a disturbance payment
for each barrel of oil going through the terminal. This went into what's now
called the Shetland Charitable Trust, which began in 1976. Over the past four
decades, that trust has distributed more than Â£300 million throughout Shetland
society. Arts, charities, crafts, local businesses, social services all
benefited. Shetland flourished. Ian Clarke was the man behind this deal. He was,
at that stage, the chief executive of the Shetland Islands Council. This week,
Ian Clarke, the man described as Shetland's answer to Colonel Gaddafi, left the
islands to join the board of the British National Oil Corporation. Thanks
largely to Ian Clarke, the 19,000 Shetlanders are set to become the richest
community in Britain. Shortly before he left the islands, he gave a farewell
sermon in the tiny church at Vaux, just a few miles from the site of the multi-
million pound oil terminal from which Shetland's wealth will flow. The love of
money, says Paul, is the root of all evil. Surely this verse is a very pertinent
verse for those of us in Shetland today. I don't think we should exaggerate the
extent of that in some ways because I think that ultimately it's been the oil
companies that have derived the huge benefits from the North Sea industry and
Shetland has derived some benefits at a local level from being able to impose
conditions effectively on the use of its territory. But that could all be coming
to an end. Oil production is declining and many want to stop it altogether.
Climate targets must be met. So what replaces it? Well, if I turn to the south
and I look out along the long Kergard valley, I can see another glow in the sky,
a brighter, more electric light. That's the new converter station for one of the
country's biggest wind farms under construction. 103 turbines strung out along
the high hills all across central Shetland, each one taller than the London Eye.
The turbines that they're speaking about are just vast. The blades on those are
fully as long as the ferry that connects Shetland to Aberdeen. Daniel Gere is a
Shetlander who works on the technical side of the energy transition. This is the
hub components. They look like something out of Star Wars, I think. Yeah,
there's a sci-fi to this all, the scale of it and these big, strange, shiny
objects landing on the pier here. Yeah, it's kind of, yeah, I think it's 100%
science fiction. I grew up in one of Shetland's smallest islands, Fair Isle. Oil
shaped the lives of my generation. And now that story is set to change again.
One of the biggest, the biggest burning questions at the moment is the question
of Cambo and Rosebank and the other, many other proposed new oil fields. The
debate's obviously very heated on this. There's a lot of people that feel
relatively conservative with the small C think tanks saying this is absolutely
incompatible with climate change targets. There's a lot of people as well in
places where oil is a significant employer saying, well, we can't just stop this
overnight. How do you see this debate unfolding in the next couple of years?
Yeah, I mean, I think firstly, this was never expected in the 1970s. I've been
reading a lot of archival records recently from government, from industry, from
trade unions that really view the North Sea oil boom as a very temporary
phenomenon. And the expectation when the Sillamboe terminal was built on
Shetland in the mid 1970s when construction began was that this would be done by
the start of the 21st century. So why oil and why now when even the
International Energy Agency said in 2021 that there must be no more new oil and
gas exploration if we're to meet our climate goals? Energy security fears
prompted by the war in Ukraine have changed the economic landscape. I'm James
Price and I'm a senior research fellow at the UCL Energy Institute. And my role
is essentially looking at modelling the energy system from how we transition
from where we are today, which is using a lot of fossil fuels, to a low carbon
future that meets our energy needs and also limits climate change. In terms of
how the war in Ukraine has impacted North Sea oil and gas decision making, well,
we've seen that the war has disrupted European oil and gas supplies and that's
led to prices rising, particularly for natural gas, as we've seen in just the
last year. At the same time, the UK is still heavily dependent on fossil fuels.
It relies on oil and gas for around 70% of its energy needs. And I emphasize
energy, not just electricity. So that's the oil that goes into our cars and the
gas that goes into our boilers to heat our homes. So energy security has become
a hot political topic. And in response to that, it appears to make sense to
extract more oil and gas from the North Sea to shore up the supplies that we
depend on so much. But the key issue with this is that the oil and gas dug up in
the UK is owned by the fossil fuel companies that extract it, not by the UK
itself. And it will be sold by those companies on the global market at a global
price, not at a discounted rate to UK customers. Roughly 80% of that oil is
exported because it's of a different type of crude oil than the refineries in
the UK want at the moment. So it's exported and then it is processed abroad
along with other types of oil that's being traded all over the world. And then
we re-import roughly the same amount from other countries like Norway, like the
USA, and indeed prior to the conflict, like Russia as well. So more North Sea
oil and gas doesn't actually improve our energy security, but rather it benefits
the fossil fuel companies that extract and sell it on a global market. You see
quite short term really fluctuations and changes in the political context being
used to justify what are very, very long term decisions that are going to impact
all of us in the long run. The development of the Campbell oil field, for
instance, is not going to provide oil and gas in the immediate future. It's been
very noticeable that even just in the last few months as oil majors have
recorded record profits, they've also revised their previously stronger
commitments to decarbonisation. The Campbell oil field was discovered in 2002
and it's expected to yield over 170 million barrels of oil equivalent over 25
years and 53.5 billion cubic feet of gas. The field is primarily owned by Ithaca
Energy, which is in turn owned by Israel's Delek Group. 19 miles from Campbell
is the Rosebank oil field. It's attracted a lot less attention, but Rosebank is
huge. It's the largest undeveloped oil and gas field in the North Sea. Campbell
has become symbolic of the debate over fossil fuels, and it also underscores the
tensions between the UK and Scottish governments. In 2021, Scotland's First
Minister, Nicola Sturgeon, argued that it shouldn't get the green light.
Westminster prevaricated. This political impasse was framed by the backdrop of
COP26, the UN climate change summit held in Glasgow that year. Campbell became a
political hot potato that no one wanted to touch, even energy giant Shell, which
at that point had a 30% stake in the project. Today the UK government is
pressing ahead with plans to issue more oil and gas licences. The Scottish
government, which now includes ministers from the Green Party, is pushing for a
low carbon, low emissions economy with much more emphasis on renewables. And in
Shetland, we're used to being stuck in the middle. The question that I've asked
myself there and others have asked has been, if the oil from Campbell and
Rosebank is produced, will that result in more oil being burned in the world?
Energy logistics expert, Daniel Geer. What would be the emissions if there was
an alternative? If there is no more oil burned and you're bringing that oil in
from somewhere else, does that have a positive or a negative effect? Will the
act of producing oil west of Shetland result in more demand in the world for
oil? Will the transition be supply led or demand led? And that is a big
question. I don't know the answer to that. My gut feeling is that the transition
from oil is going to have to be driven by government introducing policy that
curbs demand. But what's the right way out of this? How are we going to solve
this? How are we going to solve it with the least pain possible? Because one
solution would be to basically shut off the taps tomorrow. But actually, that
could drive the same outcome that we're trying to avoid for different reasons.
OK, we're rolling. Do you want to introduce yourself first, Billy? I'm Billy
Fox. I'm a born and bred Shetlander and lived here all my life. I spent 22 years
in the oil industry working for BP at the Sombor terminal and I'm now retired.
When oil was first spoken about here in the early 70s, I was one of the ones
that wasn't particularly happy about it. I never actually campaigned against it,
but I thought, ah, this is going to be a big change for Shetland. I'm not sure I
like this. But it was going to happen, so we lived with it. I remember being
asked by a friend of mine, how can you actually work in the oil industry? It's a
bad industry and all the rest of it. And I said, well, to be honest, if you're
going to have the oil industry here, it's inevitable. You're better off having
people who are environmentally minded working in it. You never really knew what
was going on offshore, but we could control it around our door pretty good. But
then, of course, there was the Brayer oil spill. In 1993, the worst fears of
conservationists and of all islanders came true when a tanker ran into rocks
just off the southern tip of Shetland in hurricane force winds, spilling nearly
85,000 tonnes of crude oil. Thousands of animals were killed in the slick,
despite the best efforts of local people to save them. You speak to folk, like,
they're still traumatised by that. It was extremely shocking to see just what
can actually happen fairly easily when oil goes wrong in a place like this.
Absolutely. I was traumatised by it as well because I was on shift at Solon Bow.
I was in the control room at Solon Bow when it was all happening in the early
hours of the morning, I think around about six o'clock. We were just coming off
shift at eight o'clock. So we were listening to the radio and hearing everything
that was going on. And it was scary. It was really scary. But it was human
decisions, decisions made by human beings that actually caused it to happen. And
that could happen with absolutely anything. As I see it just now, we sit at a
crossroads. Shetlander Miriam Brett is an economic researcher. She's now based
in Glasgow. It's important here that we're not just talking about one or two
projects in the grand scheme of things. The Scottish Government is currently
exploring plans to award around 130 new licences for oil and gas exploration.
But really importantly here, the industry forecasts for job numbers in oil and
gas, they show a decline. So it's incumbent on governments to plan for the next
phase. And Scotland has a huge role to play because of our green energy
potential in a green industrial transformation. There's a climate change debate
happening in Larwick tonight. And hope to be there, but proximity is a bit of an
issue as I'm visiting Fair Isle and the weather is against us. Hi, Tessa, how
you doing? Hi, Jen. Well, thanks. Are you in Shetland now? I am. Yes. Super.
Okay, you're doing better than me because I'm in Fair Isle and I'm not sure the
plane's going today. So I'd hope to be there tonight at your panel, but not sure
that I will be. But at least... Oh, I'm sorry to hear that. Pessa Khan is an
environmental lawyer. She founded and directs climate campaign group Uplift. How
did you get involved in this? We've been in touch for some time with some of the
activists in Shetland who spoke out against the Canberra oil fields. They
invited us to come over to Shetland and as a result of that Shetland News has
organised this panel. If you're still around on Thursday when I will hopefully
be on the Shetland mainland, then we could catch up then? Yeah, I'd love that.
Hello everybody and welcome to what is the first ever public debate hosted by
Shetland News. That's Hans Martyr, editor of Shetland News. Climate change is a
huge and complex topic. It's going to affect us all and in fact it is already
affecting us. Yet Shetland has grown very wealthy over the last 50 years.
Alongside Pessa and Daniel, who we heard from earlier, there's also Claire
Ferguson who leads the climate change strategy at the council and former oilman
Gunther Newcomb who heads up the Orion Renewables project. Orion is a massively
ambitious project to turn Shetland into a renewable energy hub including
hydrogen, offshore and onshore wind and marine energy. Partners include Shetland
Islands Council and Strathclyde University. Would that be the topic of
discussion here tonight? Some robust dance routines for Up Helly Aa squads,
that's the annual Viking Fire Festival, were taking place next door in this
community centre, hence the music and occasional thumps. In my view, in many
ways, Rosebank is a perfect example of how little public benefit a new oil and
gas field will bring. 90% of its reserves are oil, as I said, 80% of which will
be exported. The licence holders, which include the Norwegian state-owned
Equinor, will receive a half billion pound subsidy to develop the field as a
result of a loophole that's been written into the recent energy profits levy.
And that's at a time that I'm sure you'll agree we don't need to transfer wealth
from the UK public to a very wealthy Norwegian state. The environmental
consequences of Rosebank are of course also immense. Burning all 495 million
barrels of oil that are targeted by that project would result in carbon
emissions that are equivalent to the annual emissions of the world's 28 lowest
income countries. Well, we finally had a good day of weather, which means I got
from Fair Isle to the Shetland mainland on the small plane. And I'm now making
my way down the wee winding lanes of Lerwick to go and meet Tessa Kahn, who was
part of the discussion last night about how Shetland reaches net zero. She's
about to get on the boat, but we've managed to just grab her for five minutes,
so go and find her. Hi, Tessa. Hi, Zoe. Nice to meet you. Yeah, great to meet
you as well. You've got quite a lot of stuff. We could head in the general
direction of the ferry terminal. I think that's a good idea. OK. You do need to
get the boat. Yeah, indeed. And I assume you know which way we're going. I do
know which way. OK, great. And how was the discussion last night going? It was
really lively, actually. It was a full house. There were people standing and
lots of questions from the audience. I mean, it carried on for a couple of hours
in the end. What's your sense of how people here are feeling about the just
transition, the possible end of oil? There seems to be a kind of broad
acceptance that there does need to be a transition away from oil and gas and
that renewable energy will, for the most part, take the place of hydrocarbons.
You know, and this is also obviously a community that's benefited from the oil
and gas industry in so far as it's received wealth from it. But at the same
time, Shetland hasn't benefited from it in so far as there are incredibly high
levels of fuel poverty here. A lot of the oil and gas, as one of the panelists
put it last night, kind of bounces off the sand and then heads elsewhere. So I
think there's a realization that in the next kind of phase of the energy system
that we're moving into, there's got to be a lot more community benefit. There's
been much discussion of a Shetland tariff of cheaper energy prices here because
we're hosting one of the biggest industrial scale wind farms in the country. It
doesn't seem like it's coming anywhere with that. There's no realistic legal way
to do that that we've been told of so far. Do you worry that the just part of
the transition is getting missed out for places like this? Yeah, definitely. And
I think that's a potentially prohibitive obstacle to a transition at all. If
there's significant community opposition to these projects, then they won't go
ahead and it will, I think, undermine people's faith in a transition that
ultimately is going to be one of the biggest in human history if we do it at the
scale and pace that's required for us to stay within safe climate limits. But I
think, though, that there's a process underway here, from what I understand, to
develop new principles around consultation and community benefit in relation to
energy projects that the council, as well as some of the developers, are
involved in putting forward. And so it is a matter of making sure that the
regulators and industry embraces those and has that consent moving forward.
Well, thanks for your time. No, it's a pleasure. Good luck on the boat. I hope
it's a calm sailing. Thanks so much, Jen. Me as well. Take care. Cheers.
Shetland's benefits from oil and gas, they extend beyond jobs. It's in no small
part because of Shetland's oil fund negotiations, which have, you know, in turn
delivered wider benefits to the community. But while that is beneficial, if we
look to our Nordic neighbours, for example, Faroe and Norway and the ownership
structure they have over oil and gas, those wider benefits are very clear of a
much more kind of democratic model. And overall, the fossil fuel era kind of
more broadly has been dominated by really concentrated ownership structures and
extraction. And so stewarding a comprehensive managed just transition, it
creates a chance for us to reimagine our approach to energy. So Miriam, you grew
up in Shetland. You're familiar with the particular problems faced here with
fuel poverty, the housing stock being often very drafty, the climate being what
it is. You can see why people feel very uncertain about a move away from oil and
gas when, you know, there's a relatively few houses that have heat air pumps.
And also recently we had massive blackouts lasting up to a week in some places
with people left who were reliant on electricity with no heating at all. Do you
think we're ready for this transition? So really what that highlights is the
need to actually fundamentally rewire every aspect of our economy, because
Shetland is disproportionately hit by fuel poverty. The reason Shetland has high
rates of fuel poverty relate to the cold, windy climate and the housing stock,
but especially the lack of mains gas. People often rely on heating oil, which
doesn't get capped in price, and they have to buy gas in canisters. And it's
also a failure of our current approach to energy, right, to know how energy rich
Shetland is and how many people are in fuel poverty. And I think that's why it's
really important that as we transition, we look into these questions of
ownership of what community benefits can and should bring to the green
transition, what they should deliver for communities, because our current
approach to energy is unsustainable in so many ways. A crisp new copy of the
Shetland Times, our 151 year old newspaper, probably one of the best local
papers left in Scotland. And this week's edition really does sum up the scale of
what's happening here with the green energy boom. The gigantic blades of the
Viking energy turbines stacked on the deck of cargo boats, so big they make the
trucks alongside look like Lego toys. If we go to the inside pages, there's more
aerial shots of the huge scale of wind farm components at these industrial bases
near Lerwick. More reports about the company's attempts to blast tens of
thousands of tons of rock from the quarries it's creating around that part of
Shetland. It's fierce objection from local communities. But alongside these are
good news stories of the renewables boom. Children at a school involved in the
innovative tidal turbines there. A young man from the island able to return home
with his family to take up a job in green energy instead of staying south for
work. Pilli, you've in recent years, you've campaigned a lot against one
particular green energy development, which is the Viking wind farm currently
under construction. How do you feel about the situation now? It's a very, very
large wind farm. When it was proposed first, it was 150 turbines, which at that
time would have been the largest wind farm onshore in the whole of Europe. It's
finally been cut back to 103, but it's still very large. Former councillor Billy
Fox. And there was very little cognizance given to the amount of opposition that
was to it when it kicked off. It was seen as a possible panacea to the loss of
the oil industry. And that was actually very much the way that the developers
pitched it, that this was going to be a real winner in terms of Shetland's
economy. Back in 2005, the Viking energy wind farm was sold to islanders as a
community owned project with the prospect of huge income down the line,
something to replace the security that oil had brought. But since 2019, the
project has been wholly owned by SSE Renewables, a subsidiary of Perth-based SSE
PLC. The Shetland Trust, which invested, will get returns and SSE will pay into
a community benefit fund for local projects worth Â£2.2 million a year. The
impulse is to say we must do something. But if we do something and it is
actually not the correct thing to do, that's actually worse than taking a step
back and saying, hold on a minute, this doesn't actually produce the supply of
energy that we actually need. We need to do something else. Green energy does
not come out of thin air. Just like its fossil fuel predecessor, it has to
physically be somewhere. And once again, Shetland is that somewhere. The
importance of keeping the just in the just transition is arguably one of the
biggest issues facing us as a society as we grapple with inequality and
ecological crisis. To see how it plays out in the coming months and years, look
north. I think the phrase for this in Shetland would be a night of dirt. Yeah,
it's a poor night. Daniel Geer. I moved back to Shetland after living in
Aberdeen and I moved back to Shetland because I wanted my parents to have the
same opportunity as I had growing up and I wanted them to have the same sort of
free childhood that I had. And there is actually an opportunity for Shetland
here. We need to work together to find the best possible compromise. I think it
is ultimately going to be a compromise on all fronts to try and reverse the
situation that we're in, which is an unsustainable one. Life on the Edge of Oil
was produced by Victoria McArthur and presented by Jen Stout. BBC Sounds Seven
years ago, I was filming East London Mosque when the story broke. The three
schoolgirls from the area had gone missing. They were heading to Syria to join
the Islamic State group. Breaking news this morning, three British schoolgirls
are reportedly missing. Shamila Begum was the only one of the girls to emerge
from the ashes of the so-called caliphate. I've retraced her steps from the UK
through Turkey and into Syria to find people who knew her and to investigate the
truth of her story. What do you think people think of you? As a danger, as a
risk, as a potential risk. From BBC Radio 4, the Shamila Begum story, series two
of I'm Not a Monster. Listen on BBC Sounds. Police in Spain this morning
announced that the disappearance of the British rugby player Levi Davis is now
being examined by a criminal investigation unit describing the case as
disturbing with no logical explanation. The 24-year-old, who is also an X Factor
star, went missing in October. And this evening here on Radio 4, we'll chart his
last known movements and hear from family and friends and ask, how does someone
go missing without a trace? That's tonight's File on 4 at 8 o'clock. And now
it's Harriet Gilbert and guests with a Good Read. Hello, I'm joined today by
psychotherapist and writer Philippa Perry, currently an agony aunt for The
Observer and author most recently of the book you wish your parents had read and
your children will be glad that you did. With Philippa is Anil Seth, professor
of neuroscience at the University of Sussex and currently leading the Perception
Census, an international study of how differently each of us perceives the
physical world. Anil is also the author of the book, Being You. Anil, will you
start us off? What have you chosen as a Good Read? I have chosen Clara and the
Sun by Katsuo Ishiguro. I've always loved Ishiguro's work. In fact, since I
first saw his film Remains of the Day, or rather his book that was turned into a
film. It's just this very delicate spare prose that he uses. It's kind of
science fiction for me, but a different kind of science fiction where everything
is pretty normal in the world he evokes. And maybe then one or two things are
changed and suddenly everything is different. And in Clara and the Sun, the
theme he's exploring is the theme of consciousness, which is central to what I'm
interested in. How it is we have subjective experiences of the world. And he
explores it through the minds and the eyes of an android robot, Clara, an
artificial friend, which is a term I really like because there's so much fluff
about artificial intelligence these days. To personalize it as an artificial
friend, I think, is a great idea. And Clara, this android, this artificial
friend, is chosen by a teenage girl, Josie, and brought home with her to keep
her company. Or at least that's what we at first think. And what I find so
arresting about the book is how we go along with Clara on a journey of
understanding more about the world she's living in. And Clara, like a lot of
Ishiguro's characters, I think, has this wonderful balance of naivete about the
world she's in and intelligence in dealing with it. And seeing how she gradually
finds her place in this world or what she thinks is her place is completely
compelling. And then, of course, because it's Ishiguro, things begin to take a
bit of a sinister turn later on. Well, Philippa Perry, what did you think of it,
Clara and the Sun? I thought it was very clever. I loved the writing. But what
happened to me when I read it was that I didn't really care or enjoy any of the
characters. So I found myself not caring about the AF, the artificial friend,
and not really caring that much about the family she was put into. I wasn't
attracted to the mother. I wasn't attracted to the teenager. And I wondered
whether it was because I was being told about these people by a robot that I
didn't sort of get a sense of their souls or whether I'd like them or whether I
wanted to go to tea with them. It's interesting you mentioned the word soul
there, Philippa, because that, it seems to me, is the central question of this
book. And in fact, it's asked by several of the characters, which is, do we as
human beings have an irreproducible self? I mean, do we have an individuality
that just couldn't be copied however much somebody knew about us, however
closely they'd examined us and for however long? And the question being asked
is, is that so, this business of the soul, of the heart, I think they refer to
in the book, or is that just unscientific romanticism? I mean, to me, that's the
question the book's posing, isn't it? It's one of several questions I think the
book is posing. And for me, actually, I grew to be very fond of Clara, of the
robot. She's never called a robot, though, I think. No, she's called an AF.
She's called an AF. And at one point, she's called a machine by another
character, but in an incidental way that makes it clear that's a bit of an
insult. That's quite a shock, isn't it, when somebody calls her a machine? It's
very jarring later on, because by that point, we've come to think of her not as
a human, that's left, I think, delightfully ambiguous, but as a character that
we understand, that we find, well, certainly I found very, very appealing. I
wanted the best for Clara, even as it becomes increasingly apparent that other
things may be in store. I found her problematic. And I think what she reminded
me of is when, you know, when someone's trying to please you too much, they're a
bit annoying, because there's no one there to have a relationship with, because
they are mimicking you. And of course, that's what Clara does. So I think that
was part of me getting annoyed with her, is sort of like, oh, show a bit of
spark, you know, show a bit of spirit, fight back or something, stop being so
nice. Perhaps that's why she annoyed me, because that's her job. That's what she
was supposed to do. She was supposed to try and fit in as much as possible. I
mean, you've been implying, Anil, that she, Clara, is like other Ishiguro
characters. And she absolutely is. I mean, they are all, if you think of
Stevens, as he called the butler in The Remains of the Day, or Cathy in his most
recent book before this one, Never Let Me Go. They are all people who are very
servile in a way. And they're also people who don't quite get the world. They
get something rather radically wrong about it. They misunderstand what's going
on. So she's in some way difficult. Didn't he also say, I write the same book
again and again and again? I think you might have just proved that. He did. And
I think there's a very clear resonance between Clara and the son in Never Let Me
Go. I mean, that is another book that I love for much of the same reason, that
there's something off, there's something different. We don't know what it is.
When we track the voyage of discovery of one of the central characters, you're
right, she feels quite passive in it. But I find that even more compelling that
it's sort of, she becomes a lens or a cipher for these larger changes that are
happening in the world around her. And she embodies a perspective on what's
going on. And that, I think, is another thing that comes out of Ishiguro's book
in Clara and the Son. Yes, it's asking the question, what does it mean to have a
soul? But it's also an allegorical tale about the dangers of untrammeled
technological development, not thinking about the ethical consequences of what
might happen. And instead of this being in some weird science fiction future
where everything is different and it has therefore lost its emotional connection
with us, this is in a world that is very relatable in many ways. And I think
that makes the allegorical power of it stronger. And it is a very dystopian
future that is presented in this book, or near present, whatever you like to
think of it. Because among the scientific and technological advances, you've got
the children of the rich, quite specifically, are genetically edited, presumably
to make them brighter, prettier, who knows why. But this has created all sorts
of problems, health problems, which obviously hasn't been thought through
thoroughly, and social problems, because it is only the rich who get this
genetic editing because they have to pay for it. And they are the ones, the only
ones, who can go to university unless they're extraordinarily bright. And then
you've got the fact that the robots are taking people's jobs away, so there's
lots of discontent. I mean, it's not a pretty picture of the future, is it? It's
a picture, and it's a way of looking at the world. But I didn't feel like it was
objective. Obviously it wasn't objective. I think it was trying to be objective
because we're seeing it through a robot, but I didn't experience it like that. I
think the subjectivity of it was what made it really unique for me. There's any
number of, whether it's future fiction or science fiction, that deals with how
human beings encounter potentially artificial minds, whether it's Blade Runner
or 2001. But what was different in Clara and the Sun is we take the machine or
the Android or the AF's point of view and explore it in a really, I think,
transparently subjective way. Another thing that that brings up for me that I
found fascinating is exploring this question of what does the world like seem
from a different mind? Well we've been talking about Clara and the Sun by Kazuo
Ishiguro. To my choice of a good read now, which is a book called Being Mortal
by the American surgeon Atul Gawande. I was talking with a friend recently whose
father had just died, and the conversation segued to my own father's death,
which is a long, slow and miserable process for him, obviously, for my mother
too. And she said, you must read Being Mortal. And to summarise and simplify
greatly, what Atul Gawande is saying in this book is not only are we all going
to die, which some of us choose to forget from time to time, but we all do know,
but that the chances are these days that by the time we die, our bodies will be
in a pretty bad state, and possibly including our brains. And that how the
medical profession and how the caring profession and how we as a society deal
with that, it's just not good enough. And crucially, he says that the concern of
the medical profession, and this is fed into the caring profession, is to extend
life, survival and safety, rather than thinking or asking the person, what is it
you want from this last stage of your life? What can we do to make it better for
you, rather than just ensuring you don't fall over and making sure you don't set
fire to your bed by smoking in your bedroom and so on and so forth. In a way, it
sounds as though it's not a very cheery book, but actually, I found it both
thought provoking and rather inspirational. Philippa, Perry. I really enjoyed
it. I liked hanging out with the author as he told us his stories to illustrate
his facts and figures, and he's a really good storyteller. And he makes his
point well, with so many really sort of warm examples and using examples from
his family. And I loved the story of his grandmother-in-law, who was sent to a
sort of safe housing thing when she could no longer cope on her own, and how she
lost autonomy. And he really just showed that losing autonomy can make you very
depressed. And then what I loved about the book is he showed us other ways of
doing it. So he went to other care homes where the residents have got far more
autonomy over their lives. They can smoke if they want. They can risk going into
town, even if it might risk them getting lost. And people that didn't have their
lives bricked in with rules and regulations actually seemed to live longer, even
if it was slightly less safe. And I found all those statistics showing that
people are living a better quality of life if they were just given a little bit
more choice, a little bit more autonomy. And there were some very wonderful
people who had set up some great experiments doing things like having animals,
having something to care for. In a care home. In a care home. So you're not just
like, what am I for? I'm just useless. I sit here all day. No, you keep the dog
company or you play with the bird or the cat or whatever. There was a beautiful
scene, wasn't there, where they brought in hundreds of birds in one go in one
morning. They hadn't thought it through. They hadn't thought it through at all.
They didn't know what to do with them. They ended up just releasing them. And
the great thing about that was how all the people in the care home pitched in
and got involved and took responsibility for figuring it out. How are we going
to manage this situation? And that's... Anil, I'm assuming you got into the
book. I did. I did. It's the second time I've read it. I read it quite a few
years ago, having seen Atul Gawande give a talk about it. And at the time, it
made quite a big impression on me. My father had died not that long ago, but he
died in what, in hindsight, was quite a good death. It was at home. It didn't
last very long. We were all there. Coming back to being mortal now, my mother
has been ill for quite a long time. And really, I'm seeing her go through
various parts of the stories that Atul Gawande describes in his book. And I
found it, for this reason, really quite a challenging read and personally
challenging to me because I realized that as the primary decision maker now in
my mother's care, I'm often erring on the side of safety. And why am I doing
that? I think it's because it makes life easier for me. If I can say, oh, well,
she's safe, then I can sort of get on with other things rather than thinking,
like, is she having the best day she could ever have? And of course, that's
important to me. But because this focus on safety is accepted as the thing we
should all care about, it provides an easy way to deprioritize these other
aspects of her life. I found it really moving to read a second time now. One
thing that this book brought home to me is how very recent it is that we assume
that, by and large, the vast majority of us will live to old age, will live
until our bodies really cease being as well-functioning as they might be. But
what I like about this is that Atal Gwande certainly isn't saying, oh, dear,
what a pity we're all living so long. And nor is he saying, you know, once upon
a time, families would have taken on the care of their elderly parents, for
instance, particularly the youngest daughter. And girls back in the 19th century
must have been yearning for their parents to have another daughter after them
because as the youngest, they were going to have to look after their parents.
But Gwande isn't looking back and saying, if only things were like then. What I
love is precisely what you've said, Philippa. He's looking forward. He's looking
forward. He's saying, how can we do this better in the future? And he's found
people that have found solutions and he's spreading the word. And I find that
really hopeful. But he's also looking back in a way because he's highlighting
again for us things that in the past have worked well, because some people did
get old in the 19th century. Yeah, some did. And there was this importance of
ritual that we've also lost because we devolve old age and medical care to
institutions now and not personal family rituals. Where the book became
incredibly moving for me was towards the end when his stories became much more
about his own father's journey. I found actually the first half of the book, I
thought it was perhaps there is a criticism. It was a bit too laden with
anecdotes. I thought it was too many points being illustrated by a particular
story. I loved them. Give me the stories. I like a story. But when it became
about his own father, it gained a new emotional heft that I think it didn't have
in the first part of the book. Oh, I felt the emotional heft all the way
through. I think because I've seen a lot of people go through old age and death
and how it's been managed differently. So I was associating all my experiences
to the experiences that he talked about in the book. So I found the whole thing
really moving. And I'm 65. It's a good thing to read now and to think about. But
I think we should be thinking about it long before we're 65. I think even if
you're 25, you've got grandparents. Also although this applies to the old, I
think a lot of what he's saying also applies to people with terminal illnesses
who are young. He talks about those people in the book and how they're just fed
with false hope after false hope, which means the last two or three years of
their life are full of medical intervention and pain when they could have had
palliative care, which would have meant that they had a better life. And it's
shown in the book, not necessarily a shorter one. There's one horrifying
statistic that apparently 40% of oncologists he talked to admitted that they had
proposed chemotherapies and other interventions for their patients that they
pretty well knew weren't going to work. But it just was, we've got to be doing
something. It's almost like it's a faulty religion of hope, isn't it? Sort of
like we'll do this ritual of hideous chemotherapy and that will give you
something like hope. And if you have palliative care, then you have to face,
yes, I'm going to die. But the hope that was fed to that young woman in the book
who had terminal cancer, it was tragic. And presumably, I mean, obviously I'm
not a doctor, but I imagine that you feel that what you are there for is to
suggest cures, even if the chances of them working are pretty remote. And I
think what he's saying, I don't know if it's true here, but in the United
States, I mean, he's American, that gerontologists are very badly paid and
aren't very well esteemed amongst the medical profession, that people would much
rather be something else. And so other doctors who aren't used to caring for the
old, I mean, all they're used to doing is seeing here's a sickness, here's an
illness, how can I treat it? Aren't best equipped mentally to approach things
differently. I think the situation is rather the same here. And it is, it's a
very different skill set. What Gawande also explains is that asking the
questions that matter is hard for the doctors too. It's much easier for the
doctors to give this false hope, to go for the next intervention, to propose a
more dramatic potential cure. And of course, there are other factors too,
especially in the US, again, insurance companies are behind the scenes with
costs, but also you might get sued if you don't try everything that can be
tried. There are family expectations about interventions. And the lesson that I
took from his, it's a simple lesson in the end, isn't it? You tell them what the
situation is, most people can handle it. And you ask them what they want to do,
given the potential outcomes either way. And that, you're right, that's a lesson
that we can all take on at any stage of our lives. And it's something I think
about now. What they ask is what you want from life. That's the question. What's
the most important thing in your life right now? And there was a beautiful story
in there of his daughter's piano teacher, who he asked this question of when she
had terminal cancer. And it was to see all my pupils again, and maybe have one
last concert of them all playing. And this happened. And it was the most
beautiful. I mean, who didn't read that and cry? I think you're crying now,
Anil. I know you did. It was just asking that question, what is important to
you? It's important for me to see my pupils again, and to hear them play again.
Not it's important for me to have some no hope chemotherapy that apparently will
extend my life. And quite often by weeks. Yeah. When people were asked what's
important to you, time and time again, people said, watching the game with my
family, or hanging out with my grandkids or something like that. And for others,
it's being outside. You know, I know as my mother gets older, that's what really
matters to her now is being able to sit in the garden, having a connection with
the wider world. I can so understand that. I mean, every year when I see the
bulbs come up, I feel I've made it. I've made it. Another spring. It's just a
wonderful thing. Yeah. We've been talking about being mortal by Atul Gawande.
I'm Harriet Gilbert. You're listening to A Good Read where my guests today are
Anir Seth and Philippa Perry. So Philippa, your turn now. What is your choice of
Good Read? My Good Read is A Stranger's City by Linda Grant. And I love novels
about London because I love London. And the thing about London is you can have
lived here for 50 years and you just go a quarter of an hour's walk away from
your usual stamping ground and you discover a new lane or a new road or a new
square or church you hadn't seen before. And I've lived in London for over 40
years and I'm always discovering things like that. So it really spoke to me,
this stranger city. And stranger means it's a strange place. It means there's
strangers in it and it means strange things happen. So there's a play on words
with the stranger in the title. And I mean, I love thrillers and whodunits. So I
started reading this book and there's a mystery straight away. We've got an
unidentified body and we've got a retired detective that turns up who is really
burning with the question, who was she? Why couldn't we find out? So you think
this is setting the scene for your sort of detective kind of book. You know, it
keeps you wanting to read and find out. But it's so much more than that. Because
this is a book about the different interweaving layers of life and how we all
live together in the city, sometimes not knowing each other, sometimes knowing
each other how our paths cross. And it's set in 2016 and although the word is
never mentioned, it's got this brewing Brexit theme. It sort of opens in 2016,
doesn't it? And then progresses. Then progresses forward, yeah. And it's got
this sort of fear of foreigners and also there's a fear from people who weren't
born here or whose parents weren't born here. There's a fear that they're going
to be somehow moved. And then the whole book sort of changes and I'm absolutely
sucked in because I care about every single character in it. And it's got modern
phenomena, things like you can get famous on social media and things like that.
So it's very sort of modern. And yet it's something pretty spooky about it. And
you're a bit like Clara and the Sun. This is kind of, I mean, it opens very
specifically in 2016, February 2016. And then it moves along into what may be an
alternative future, what may be a sort of parallel universe, what may be the
future. I mean, it's got a similar, not quite science fiction feel to it. Did
you enjoy it? I did. I enjoyed most of it. I enjoyed. What didn't you enjoy?
Well, I'll tell you the bit I did enjoy first. I found it to be almost like a
Brexit fever dream that developed throughout the novel. And its evocation of
London, I thought was magnificent. I've never lived in London, but I've always
lived close by. So I have this sort of semi detached relationship with the city
that's been going on for my whole life. And so in a sense, I found it
educational to be grounded through the characters in the different parts of the
city. I loved its use of the waterways, the river that features right at the
opening where this unidentified body is recovered from. Swirls and currents,
undercurrents. Yes, exactly, things below the surface. It's fairly obvious, I
suppose, as a device, but it was very, very effective for me. I loved the
portrayal of London through this. And these departures into speculative fiction
or almost magic realism, these places, surely that's not there. And you wonder
what purpose that serves. But I think it just made the whole thing, it
accentuated the aspect of strangeness, as you say, comes through the book in so
many ways. The other thing I really liked about it was her writing. What didn't
quite work for me, it's a bit similar to your reaction to Clara Philippa
actually, was that I couldn't quite get on board with the characters. Oh,
really? We would keep shifting from one character to another. It's quite a
restless novel in this way. Didn't you love Chrissie the nurse? Come on. I love
them all a little bit. Actually, I didn't love them all a little bit. But I
found myself getting a bit frustrated that we would get a handle on one
character and then it would switch to another. And for me, it wasn't quite long
enough. I never got a full sense of the characters. That's because you were in
love with that character and didn't want to let them go. And you had to keep
reading till they came again. That's what it was. I really did enjoy this. I
have to say, Stranger City. I'm into Dickens at the moment. And this has got
very much that kind of sprawling, generous feel that Dickens has in his novels.
And also the love of London, which is, and very specifically, the love of a
London that is filled and has been for centuries with people from all over the
world, different races, different languages, that sort of feeling of it being a
very exciting city. And as the novel develops, it does, as you've implied, it
turns into an elegy really for this city. As the novel goes on, we do see people
leaving, people who were maybe born elsewhere in Europe or who were born in the
Middle East or in Asia. It feels very sort of as though she has seen something
terrible on the horizon. I mean, I guess you could say to simplify, this is very
much Linda Grant's Brexit novel, isn't it? Yeah, I suppose it is. Although the
word, I don't think the word's ever mentioned. No, it's not. It's not mentioned.
But maybe, you know, maybe she actually had her finger on it because she talks
at one point about these trains taking all the immigrants away in the night.
That's one of the things I googled up. Really? No, I was sort of going mad
because it's so surreal. And then we've got the Rwandan planes in real life. So
it's almost like she foretold that happening. Because this was published in
2019. Before the Rwandan planes. So it's coming true, I'm afraid, some of it.
And if you've got some of it wrong, there's really the Queen is still on the
throne quite late on in this novel, which she might have guessed, actually.
She's making a parallel world to ours. And it's, to me, believable. And I loved
it because I just loved hanging out with every single character. I also did
enjoy how the book was not what I thought it was. I'd not read anything about it
before. And so when I first started, I did think this is going to be a
straightforward thriller, a murder mystery. And yes, I've got an excuse to read
a murder mystery or a disappearance story, but it's not like that at all. And
bit by bit you realiseâ¦ But it's just as good as one. It's even better. Only
well written. We've been talking about A Stranger City by Linda Graham, which is
published by Virago. And before that, we were talking about Being Mortal by Atul
Gawande, published by Profile Books. And before that, we were talking about
Kazuo Ishiguro's Clara and the Sun, which is published by Faber. And for even
more book suggestions, hundreds more in fact, search for A Good Read online or
via the BBC Sounds app. You'll find guests as various as Adam Rutherford, David
Nutt, Kamala Shamsi, Trevor McDonald, talking about the books they love. And if
you've read something we talk about here, tell us what you think of it by
joining our book club on Instagram. You can follow us at, all one word,
agoodreadbc. For now though, a big thank you to my guests, Philippa Perry and
Anil Saith. And to you, as always, thanks for listening. A Good Read was
presented by Harriet Gilbert and it was produced by Elisa Lomas. On Radio 4. Our
Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. The Lord's Prayer is shared by
Christians around the world. On earth as it is in heaven. In this year's Lent
Talks, six people reflect on the words of this prayer. Sharing stories of
forgiveness, fatherhood and finding heaven on earth. Lent Talks, on Radio 4 and
BBC Sounds. Begins tomorrow evening at 8.45. This is BBC Radio 4. It's five
o'clock.