TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-17H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 for at 7.15pm and you can listen to past episodes on BBC Sounds. BBC News at 4
o'clock BBC News has been told an announcement is expected imminently on a new
deal with the EU on post-Brexit trading arrangements in Northern Ireland.
Democratic unionists have refused to join a power-sharing executive over
objections to the current Northern Ireland Protocol. This morning, the Deputy
Prime Minister Dominic Raab hinted the agreement could involve less onerous
customs checks on goods travelling from the British mainland to Northern
Ireland. Our political correspondent Ione Wells is following developments. It's
expected that full details of what any deal might include are more likely to
come tomorrow and separately I've been told that as well as Conservative MPs
being given a three-line whip in order to attend Parliament tomorrow. The
opposition parties have also been told similar. Labour MPs have been instructed
that they should go into Parliament tomorrow with the implication that there may
well be some kind of update when MPs are given further detail of what a deal
might entail. Around 60 people, including a baby, are now known to have died
after a wooden sailing boat carrying migrants crashed against rocks off the
country's southern coast. At least 81 have survived. One of them was arrested on
migrants' trafficking offences. The former Environment Secretary George Eustace
has warned shortages of some fruit and vegetables could last for as long as
three or four weeks. Supermarkets are limiting the sale of some produce after
poor weather disrupted harvests in the Mediterranean and high energy costs
hindered domestic production. Two Israelis have been shot dead in the occupied
West Bank in what Israel is calling a Palestinian terror attack. Israeli and
Palestinian security officials are meeting in Jordan to discuss a recent surge
in violence. The outcome of Nigeria's presidential election is expected in an
hour's time. People are still voting in some areas because technical issues
stopped them casting their ballots yesterday. It's expected to be a close result
between the three candidates, two from the traditional major parties and a
third, Peter O.B., who has galvanised support from the young. BBC News This is
BBC Radio 4. The wonderful Pam Ayers talks to Simon Armitage in his writing shed
in half an hour. The two poets have a lot to talk about, writing poetry of
course, but also Pam's first TV appearance in the 70s, her love of performing
live, her passion for wildlife and her latest TV series. The poet laureate has
gone to his shed is at 4.30. First his open book with Johnny Pitts. Today I'll
be exploring two books which invoke the universal through the personal. One, a
love letter to the history and landscape of Wales, revealing the urgency of the
climate emergency and the other, a long lost novel by the seminal American poet,
novelist and essayist Richard Wright, which merges black spirituality with a
culture of fear as World War II looms large. And later we'll be hearing about a
hotly tipped novel likely to be on everyone's to be read pile this spring. But
first my guest Tom Buller grew up on a Welsh hill farm and in his most recent
novel Adlens told the story of 70 years of one farming family as the winds of
modernity brought disruption to their rural life. Adlens intimately explored the
relationship between people and the landscape they inhabit. And now in his
latest work on non-fiction that same relationship is explicitly explored. This
new book, Saun Helen, is named after a Roman road which runs like a spine
through Wales from north to south. And Tom Buller walked this ancient path's
length and is with me now from his home in Breckenshire. Tom, welcome to Open
Book. I wanted to begin by asking you what prompted you to put on your walking
boots and take on this journey through a kind of ghost road. As you mentioned,
there isn't much of a trace of this Roman empire on it anymore. Well, in the
first case, really, it was lockdown in 2020. Like everybody else, we'd been
confined to this very small space for months on end and just felt this
desperation to see a different landscape, a contrasting landscape. So I took the
bus down to Neath on the south coast of Wales or close to the south coast of
Wales, just with a view to walking back a couple of days over the mountains to
where we live. But very soon after leaving Neath, I was struck by a contrast
between two different ideas, essentially. One of these was to do with the
climate and ecological emergency. This was a heatwave at the time, but it was
also passing through communities which had suffered unprecedented flooding
during that spring and were still struggling to recover from it as they were
struggling to recover from COVID-19, as zoonotic disease, of course, another
aspect of the emergency. And passing across this magnificent landscape, but a
landscape in many ways bereft of life is stripped of its biodiversity. At the
same time, and with kind of equal frequency, I was passing reminders of the age
of saints, which is the, if you like, the roots of Wales, the earliest days of
Wales. The fifth and sixth centuries when the natural world was held in
reverence, when it was a source of divine awe. And so in a sense, there was a
music that began to develop out of that tension. Tom, at the centre of this book
is, of course, the environmental crisis. And I wondered if we could listen to a
passage where you talk about nature's vulnerability. You could just set this up
for us. So yeah, this is just a short passage from September 2020 when I was a
few miles north of Lendovri. And this is a book which is in many ways is about
crisis, ecological crisis, and in many ways a sort of national crisis. But I
hope it gives something of a tone of the book of the writing. Slowly, slowly,
the land begins to gather, the heat to subside with the afternoon. The fields
grow pinched and angular. The lane is strewn for periods with beech mast before
at first falling leaves of the oaks, the red-yellow leaves of the few horse
chestnuts, which as ever are weeks ahead. Ahead, where it seems that the hills
converge scratched by crits, screes, and cut by cliffs, a paraglider hangs
entirely motionless. It appears to have been nailed to the sky. It remains in
its place for an hour and more, while a microlight closes, circles to check,
then buzzes away over carvingshire. While the tight lane climbs past a final
farm of elderly tractor and rusting roofs, into an openness where stone walls
crumple, where a rank of beaches remembers the winds, where a second paraglider
launches from a crayon. Look down and you look across whirling crows and ravens
which pass, then roll on their backs and give out their cough-like call. In the
valley, their farms and the cottages are huddled among trees in the angling
light. They seem suddenly vulnerable, with the hills around so hard and bare.
Suddenly all is vulnerability, whales you could just blot it out with your
thumb, it feels that small, that threatened. So pain-tilling, I think that
passage does exemplify your careful writing of both the landscape and your
emotional connections to it. I suppose it's an overused word in many ways, but
was there a kind of catharsis in being able to express all of these kind of
symbiotic threads in one piece of writing? Yes, and I think that that was
particularly because this is non-fiction. I feel in some ways as if this is a
novel inside out, it's a novel with the working shown, it's a novel in which,
it's a novel but with everything implicit made explicit, if you sort of mean. So
that connection which perhaps would otherwise be experienced by a character,
this is experienced by me and it was vital, I think, that that personal
connection was made clear such that as a reader you're able to experience what
is at stake. Absolutely, because another obviously important ingredient of this
book are your interviews with scientists from Welsh universities about their
predictions for the future. And I wanted to ask if it was a conscious decision
to pitch the hard factual information against these passages of deeply crafted
creative writing. What did you hope that the impact of that would be for the
reader? Those interviews were also part of my first thought for the book. They
were part of that initial vision, if you like. And one of the joys of walking
the length of the country is that you pass through all of these different
landscapes and so you pass all of these different cues. So for example, at a
certain point, descending, cada-idreous amount and you're passing Fairborne,
which is a village on the coast of Gwyneth, which is the first village in the UK
to have been. It's often used as decommissioned, it's an unkind and unfortunate
word, but it's the first community in the UK where the council has accepted that
it can't be saved from sea-level rise. And so you're able to set against the
descriptions of the landscape and the descriptions of the place an interview
with, in this case, Dr. Clare Early from Swansea University, who's an expert on
coastal processes and on sea-level rise and is able to explain exactly why that
community and others like it around the coast of Wales are facing, in some
cases, radical change or even total disappearance, as in that case. It's
amazing. I mean, you're even talking about how under threat a place like
Clandudno is. I mean, you've said that you see SÃ¡an Helen as part of a bigger
community of writing about climate emergency. I wondered if you could just
unpack that for us a bit more. In order to write effectively, you have to zoom
in, you have to find a point of focus, in this case, Wales, because it's the
place that I'm from and the place that I love. But I think you can only really
do that with conviction in the knowledge that there are other writers who are
attending to so many other of the aspects of this crisis. I tend to think of it
as now as something like a murmuration. I've got a bit of a weakness for
starlings. Of course, the individual participants are essential to it, but the
point of it is the overall shape. The point of it is the overall movement. And
there's a liberation in that. I've never experienced anything like it before.
And it's a source of wonder, really. I love that. It's a movement as a
murmuration. Are there any particular writers that you see yourself in as part
of a kind of constellation? They would tend, first and foremost, to be those who
were friends of mine and collaborators. So Jay Griffiths, who I walk with for a
spell during a book for a couple of days. Jackie Morris as well, of course. But
then looking back, historically, I've thought a lot about Ursula K. Le Guin
recently. So what she's talking about is giving voice to the non-human,
expanding our field of reference to encompass the whole of the earth, if you
like, as opposed to just the human perspective. And I feel that that is
absolutely fundamental to the way that writing needs to go. That's a key part of
the change that we need to make as writers. You mentioned your collaboration
with Jackie Morris and the book is filled with these beautiful illustrations of
15 species which are threatened with extinction, including Kestrel, Puffin,
Kukku and the beautiful Turtledove, which is now considered actually extinct.
What do you think that the visual images brought to this book, Tom? Well, right
from the start, I felt that these images needed to be in here and it was a
source of increasing apprehension. When was I going to ask her? Was she going to
be able to do it? Was she going to be willing to do it? And the most tremendous
relief when she said that she would, I can only say that it was necessary to the
balance that those images be in there. That it was necessary to the balance of
the book, the balance of its elements, and that she's done it so beautifully is
a great source of joy to me, I have to say. Tom Buller, thank you. Sorn Helen is
out now published by Granta. Next week, the author of 2021's Welsh Book of the
Year, Nadifa Mohammed, will be James Noctis' guest on Book Club when they
discuss The Fortune Men, a novel about a miscarriage of justice for a Somali
seamen in Cardiff in 1952. But for now, you're listening to Open Book with me,
Johnny Pitts on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Richard Wright was one of the most
influential American writers of the 20th century, in particular his novel Native
Son with its unforgettable portrait of Bigger Thomas, a 20-year-old African-
American man living in a Chicago slum. Both this and the memoir Black Boy
exposed racism through poverty, injustice and violence in groundbreaking and
often devastating ways. But despite his celebrated candour, one of Wright's
novels, written at the peak of his creativity in the 1940s, was rejected and
instead published as a short story. But now, it's finally been restored to its
original length and after being published in the US last year, it arrives in UK
bookshops next month. The person responsible for getting it into print is
Richard Wright's daughter, the poet and essayist Julia Wright, who joins me now
on the line. Julia, I want to begin by quoting your father who wrote, I've never
written anything in my life that stemmed more from sheer inspiration or executed
any piece of writing in a deeper feeling of imaginative freedom or express
myself in a way that flowed from my own background and feelings than the man who
lived underground. And I wondered why it's taken so long to reach an audience in
its original form. Well, originally in 1942, two small excerpts were published
because there was pushback. The pushback was against the first 50 pages. The
first 50 pages were about the police brutality leveled against Fred Daniels the
hero, who as my father writes, is a nice Christian boy going home one Saturday
night with his pay in his pocket. He's honest. He's innocent. He's not done
anything wrong. The police frame him up and the first 50 pages are his torture
at the hands of the police and they are graphic. And so in 1942 and later in
1944, the work was truncated. I even say dismembered because I like to be strong
about it because censorship is a dismemberment because publishers back then, and
I don't know about today, I won't venture about today, but certainly about back
then did not want to make their audience feel, quote, uncomfortable. Richard
says something so shocking in this book. He says we're all guilty. Yeah. I mean,
that's a very powerful moment and it's very interesting how the character learns
so much in the depths of his despair because, of course, he's wrongly accused of
murdering a white couple. And then after being forced to sign a false
confession, he manages to escape the police and literally goes underground into
the sewer system. And this is where the novel does expand into something else.
What else do you think Fred experiences there and what impact does it have on
him, Julia? I think that he escapes the laws above, of the world above, for a
time. And there's a great element of time there, loss of time and reinvention,
reimagining of his own time, of his own needs, of his own imagination. He
repossesses his dreams. We get into his unconscious mind. He repossesses himself
and he likes what he sees. He repossesses the freedom of his mind and he finds
his first person singular. That's really eloquently put. And I wondered if
actually we could hear a passage which speaks to this experience in the
underworld of the sewer. As he gripped the iron pipe and stared in horror at the
proceedings, he wanted to scream to Murphy that the man was innocent, that the
man did not know anything, that no one knew anything, that no man could explain
his innocent guilt. He wanted to yell, he's innocent, I'm innocent, we're all
innocent. The thoughts came to him so hard that he thought he had actually
yelled them out, but he had not spoken. His teeth were clenched. The words had
screamed inside of him, hot words trying to burst through a tight wall. And
again, he was overwhelmed with that inescapable emotion that always cut down to
the foundations of life here in the underground. That emotion that told him
that, though he were innocent, he was guilty. But blameless, he was accused. The
living, he must die. The possessing faculties of dignity, he must live a life of
shame. Though existing in a seemingly reasonable world, he must die a certainly
reasonless death. As Daniels is underground, he finds these secret passages into
various entrances, into basements and there's one place where there are diamonds
and watches. There's another place where there's money which he's not interested
in ever spending the money, but he wallpapers his underground cave. And there is
a real surrealist element to his writing of the underworld. In the beautiful
essay at the end of the book, he talks about how the prose was influenced by
improvisational black American music like jazz and blues. But do you think that
he was influenced by European writers like Kafka or Kamu? How did he go about
bringing this self confluence of influences together? Kamu. Kamu, he loved. They
had met. He had deep admiration for him. When he wrote The Man Who Lived
Underground, Kamu had not yet written Les Tranges, surprisingly enough. So
that's interesting. And do you think Kamu would have been familiar with your
father's work before then? That's an open question. That would have to be
researched. I would be very interested in that question. And when I was there in
Paris with him, when the news of Kamu's sudden tragic death came, he was in a
very bad accident and my father was devastated as if he'd lost a brother. Can we
talk about Paris a little bit? Because, you know, Loom's large in so many,
especially black writers, that African American expat community in France, in
Paris. And of course, you know, you'd want to bring up people like James Baldwin
and also somebody like Ralph Ellison. I was thinking about this notion of Fred's
invisibility and how it's been described actually as being a founding premise of
Ralph Ellison's Invisible Man. Do you agree with that? Because I know the
rumours that this was the source of their subsequent fallout. You know, I have
to be very careful here because there's still a lot of research being done. But
what I know or feel I can say at this point is my father was slightly older than
Ralph Ellison. My father was a mentor. They had quite a correspondence and they
would send each other their manuscripts to comment on. So I am sure, but I would
like to be able to prove it, that my father sent the manuscript of the man who
lived underground to Ralph Ellison. And therefore, Ralph Ellison would have read
the whole manuscript. Take it from there. Yeah, no, well, let's take it from
there because what also comes with this novel, and we've mentioned it a lot
throughout this interview actually, is the essay that comes along with the
novel. And I mean, he explicitly talks about his fascination with the notion of
the Invisible Man and how that kind of applies to black culture in that essay.
As soon as I read the essay at the end of the book, I wanted to go back to the
first page and start reading the novel again with new eyes. Where did that essay
come from and why is it included with the book? That's a very good question. My
impression is that my father was so hurt that this book of his kept getting
rejected or subjected to dismemberment that is not being published in totality,
that he wrote this piece afterwards to justify its existence. If you would
allow, Johnny, I would like to say why I felt it was so timely to publish this
book in 2010. It was because I felt there was more and more body cam around
deaths in the street in the US and elsewhere in the world. And there was
something so amazing about the fact that here were 50 pages that were like body
cam. They were so graphic. And we think of Tyree Nichols or when the book came
out in the States, it was George Floyd, you know. And those 50 pages have the
graininess, the presence of body cam. I just think there is a timeliness of
those pages that give weight to the book that anchors the book in our 21st
century. Julia Wright, thank you so much for joining us. Richard Wright's The
Man Who Lived Underground will be published by Vintage Classics. And just
finally today, our editor's tip comes from Emma Herdman at Bloomsbury, who's
picked out one of the most hotly anticipated debuts of the spring. The book that
I've chosen is In Memoriam by Alice Wynn. It's set between 1914 and 1919. And
it's this heart wrenching story between two English boarding school classmates.
There's the repressed Henry Gaunt and the beautiful, charmed poet, Sydney
Elwood. Sydney has spent the first few months of the war totally romanticising
it. But Gaunt is a little more serious. He has German blood. He's quiet and he's
respected. And he's handed a white feather when he's in town. And not just
because of this, but for a few other reasons, he decides to sign up young and
he's sent to the front. But before he goes, the boys share a kiss. But there is
so much left unsaid between them and the reader really understands that these
two boys can't communicate with each other about the fact that they are in love
with one another, but they simply cannot admit it. It gives the novel this
intensity. And I think beyond just wanting the boys to survive and they really
are boys, you really get that sense in the book. You really care about it and
you want them to be together. But of course, so many lives were lost. And as the
book goes on, you get to know all of these boys that they are friends with. And
the book's interspersed with their school paper and you get to see how many
names that we become familiar with are just on a list of dead, of injured, of
missing. I bid on this book at auction. It was an incredibly exciting auction. I
love doing auctions where you get to talk to the author and hear about why they
wrote it and how they wrote it. And Alice speaks incredibly engagingly about it.
But sadly, I didn't win this one. And I think the end product of this book,
rereading it, it still has all of that magic of the first time that I read it.
It's incredibly gripping. It's page turning, but it's also got so much emotion,
so much heart. I've chosen to read from a section near the beginning of the
book, which is where Gaunt is at the front and Elwood is still at school, still
romanticising the war. Elwood is distraught because a book of his poetry has
been burnt in the fire by some of the other boys at school. So this is a letter
from Gaunt to Elwood. He's talking about censoring his men's letters. Obviously
the men talk about the mud and the rats and God. We have to censor the mud and
the rats, but God is allowed to remain, which strikes me as ironic. It is a dull
job, but less odious than the other, writing condolences. Over and over again.
About men I know or men I don't. About men who died valiantly or men who died in
ways I refuse to describe. Men I liked and men I didn't. Men too old to go to
war and boys too young. One runs out of ways to say, your son died painlessly
and was a credit to the Empire. The worst is when you realise you are addressing
the same poor woman twice, two letters to thank her for her two sons. I don't
think they should allow brothers to join regiments together. I'm sorry, this is
not what I intended to say. What I meant to say is this. You'll write more
poems. They are not lost. You are the poetry. Yours gaunt. The reason I chose
that passage is because I think it really shows you that there is this beating
heart throughout the novel of their love for each other. You can see that it is
his love for Elwood that sustains Gaunt when he's at the front and dealing with
these atrocities. I think it's very rare that a book comes along that you read
on submission as an editor, where it might have had an editor too with its
agent. It may not have had an editor with its agent, but you read it and you are
so convinced that this is somebody who is a writer. It's not that they've found
a good story or that they're good at writing plot or character. It's somebody
who has everything and somebody who I think will become a really big writer of
the future. To have that in their debut novel is amazing. I think that this book
crosses genres. I think it's literary. I think it's commercial. You can't beat a
good love story when you are rooting for two people so ardently. Yes, incredibly
moving. Emma Herdman was talking about In Memoriam by Alice Wynn, a novel that
seems destined to make a massive stir this year. Well, that's all from me today.
Next time I'll be talking to that giant of literary fiction, Margaret Atwood,
about her latest collection of short stories, Old Babes in the Wood, which
features the return of Nell and Tig from a book Moral Disorder. How difficult is
it for a novelist to resurrect old characters? Find out next time. Open Book was
presented by Johnny Pitts and produced by Kirsten Locke. The reader was Ethan
Harris. On BBC iPlayer. Step right in. Perfect timing. The East End is ever-
changing. What is this? Scooter. The order has entered the 1960s. Early eight
years late. But the midwives of Nanata's house are forever constant. You've a
home here now. And purpose. And people who love you. Call the midwife. We will
be with you every step of the way. Watch on BBC iPlayer. Now ready at four,
we're off to the Pennines to find out who Simon Armitage has invited into his
writing shed. The poet laureate has gone to his shed. My guest in quite a windy
day in the shed today is as recognisable by her voice as she is by her work. In
fact the two things are very much intertwined. I can't read her work without
hearing her very particular style of delivery. And for many people over several
generations now, she's been the voice of poetry as we might hear it on the
telly, on the radio, in theatres and in many places of performance and
entertainment. Pameres, welcome to the shed. Thank you Simon. It's actually
smaller than I anticipated. I thought it might be a big fancy shed that called
itself a shed but was actually a fancy studio. But it's not at all. It's quite a
modest shed. Suitably stained with rain. I like it. And I particularly like the
spectacular view which is just sumptuous. I need to start by telling you Pam
that I'm a huge fan. The story of your dad wringing out his waterlogged ham
knitted swimming trunks while still wearing them, still makes me roar with
laughter. I think because I saw my own dad doing this fitting. It's got that
kernel of truth in it hasn't it? I mean it's perfectly true. Now I'm not sure
how many people remember those old knitted swimming costumes but certainly my
dad had a terrible old loose knitted ginger coloured droopy swimming costume
with white elastic threaded round the waist with a big knot in the front. And
you know it did get horribly waterlogged and heavy and it sort of wring out the
gusset before you could emerge with any decency. I usually describe this part of
West Yorkshire as semi-rural even though the view in front of us as you were
noticing is entirely rural. Am I right in supposing Pam that you're at home in
the countryside? Yeah. I'm not an urban person. I did live in London for a few
months in the 70s when I didn't know what I was doing and I had a flat in the
Kings Road. I think it was quite interesting to be able to go out to the cinema
and walk sprawns down the Kings Road and see. You were a Chelsea girl right?
Yeah until I spoke. Yeah but you know I understand the country. I was brought up
in it. I understand the community and how it all works and the farms and what's
happening around me and I feel entirely at home and I feel really like a fish
out of water in towns and cities particularly in places like New York. I've been
to New York a few times and it petrifies me to be honest. They're like canyons
and the wind whistles down these terrible high-rise buildings and it just seems
alien to me that there's nothing growing. Was your childhood a rural one? Yes
definitely. I'm one of six children. I'm the youngest of six children. My dad
worked for the electricity board and we lived in a council house on the village
Green and at the back of us there was a market garden run by a peppery old
Brigadier, a retired Brigadier who everybody tugged their forelock to. There
were just farms and cows going up and down through the village but it was very
quiet and flocks of sparrows, dust bathed in the road and it was entirely rural
and very insular. There was only one bloke who had a car, Johnny Moss had a car.
What sort of car was it? One of those little boxy jobs, Austin Seven is it?
Could have been, yeah. We all used to laugh at it but really we were jealous
because Johnny Moss could get in his car and go further afield. So a childhood
of collecting frog spawning in jam jars and corn dollies, that kind of thing?
Well I didn't make any corn dollies, certainly we collected frog spawn and we
used to give them pieces of liver which seems a bit grotesque now. Where you put
liver in the frog spawn? For the tadpoles to suck. Don't take my advice because
I have no idea it's good for them. How about worse soups than that actually?
Tapple and liver con sorme. Yeah, it sounds quite French doesn't it? You were
talking about being the youngest of six, did your position in the family make
you a natural entertainer? Either because you had to speak up to be heard or
because you were expected to be the apple of everybody's eye would you say? I
don't think I was the apple of everybody's eye, I don't think it was that sort
of a family. I mean there were six of us and without trying to give you a hard
luck story we were pretty hard up and so there was no time to pamper one. We
were all in it together really, one wasn't made a fuss of, if anybody was made a
fuss of and I say this with no envy whatsoever, it would have been my sister
Jane because my mum had four boys and she longed for a girl and she finally got
one when she got my sister Jane and Jane was very beautiful and had lovely long
blonde hair and was a proper little girl and I think I was a bit of a tomboy and
was always bringing home half dead crows and things that I'd found. So I think
mum was delighted with my sister and I love her dearly so I'm not jealous and
Jane wanted the things that I didn't, she wanted a family, she longed for a
family of her own and I couldn't think of anything worse, that was the last
thing I wanted. You know it was sort of hand to mouth really. My dad had two
huge allotments and a big back garden and he produced an extraordinary amount of
food so we were well fed but I don't think anybody was particularly spoiled and
I don't think that I stood up and started cracking jokes, I think I would soon
have been slapped down if I'd done that. They were amazing weren't they that
generation for growing their own food. Extraordinary, yeah the knowledge. When I
think about my dad's allotments they were extraordinary, you know he was so
meticulous, there'd be two rows of runner beans and there'd be a big patch of
broad beans and then rows of peas and a great acreage of potatoes and all the
staples that people needed but there was a post office in the village and it
used to sell a few vegetables and he used to laugh and say oh look at that
bloody old cupboard you've been cut a fortnight, you know because it may be all
brown where you cut them not nice and fresh and juicy like ours. Did your
parents, either of your parents, encourage you particularly in a literary
direction or as a performer? Well my mum was very good at English, her father
was a soldier, he was killed on the railway and so her mum was left with five
children and no husband and so my mother was offered a scholarship because she
was good at English which they were unable to take up because of financial
restraints, constraints. Were the books in the house? No not really, we had
hardly any books. I tell you what we had, we had a book called Character from
the Face which was a load of photographs of people's noses and eyes. You can
make assessments about their personalities. This person is not to be trusted.
Eyes too close together. And then there was an awful book about birds, for
instance the sparrows were considered to be cockneys and were given painful
dialect to speak in and one of the first books that came into Eros that I read
was A Stone for Danny Fisher by Harold Robbins and I devoured that I thought it
was a great read because there were no books in our house and I didn't say that
as a criticism, everybody was concerned with the business of making a living and
getting by and when at the village school teacher announced that there was going
to be a library I was one of the first to go and have a look and it was only one
shelf of books and the teacher was called Miss Edmonds and she said I think
you'll like this book Pammy, they all used to call me Pammy and she gave me a
book called Wish for a Pony by Monica Edwards which gave me all sorts of snobby
inclinations and that was the start really of me loving to read and expanding my
reading. What were you like as a student? I was good at English, I was good at
art, I was afraid of authority, I was always afraid of getting into trouble, I
wasn't a very brave little girl and on one occasion we went up from the first
class when I was 6 to a class and it was run by a teacher called Miss Bedford
and everybody was scared of her, she was very stern and one day I had an
exercise book with an orange cover and in lifting up my desk I caught the cover
under my thumb and I ripped it and to this day I can hear the rip and feel the
realisation that I had done something terrible because I was going to get into
trouble Miss Bedford and for weeks if not months I claimed to be ill, I had a
bad arm, I had a bad tummy, I had a bad this, I had a bad that and then got the
doctor to me lots of times and they thought it was a pendant but it wasn't, I
was lying because I was so frightened and I think the reason I mention it is
because it's so easy to sort of traumatise a child without realising and another
time I was taken as a treat to the panto in Oxford and it was Jack and the
beanstalk and at one point the dame said where's Jack when he gets back here I'm
going to skin him alive and those words I thought oh no I'm going to have to
watch him have his skin pulled off like I see my dad skinning rabbits and I woke
up screaming that night and mum said you're not going to any more panto mimes of
his is what's going to happen but it's very easy to traumatise a child without
realising. Were you funny at school, were you like the class clown or a bit of a
wag? I think I was with my little group of friends, I was considered to be funny
but only in a small way. You were in the armed forces weren't you? I was in the
WRIF yeah. Was that a natural breeding ground for somebody who will end up with
a literary career as an entertainer, were you called upon at office parties as
it were in the what do they call it the naffy to perform? The reason I joined
the Air Force was because three of my four brothers had done national service
they had to they didn't have a choice and they went to interesting far away
places at no cost to themselves and I watched them come back with all manner of
souvenirs and tales and when I left school at 15 having failed the 11 plus I
took the civil service exam which I passed and then I became a clerk and it was
the most stortifyingly boring and terrible job just writing forms out with a lot
of women older than myself and in the end when I was 17 I couldn't stick it. I
thought I'm going to do what my brothers did and join the Air Force and I joined
the Air Force because it seemed to be more elegant and had a nice hat than the
army. Parmers top gun yeah. You said that not me. Yeah and I achieved my aim in
that I was posted to the Far East I was in Singapore for a year and a half and
the great thing about the service is then I don't know if it is now but they had
great facilities so you didn't get bored so there were choirs and there were a
theatre group sports and you know really whatever you wanted to do and they
particularly in Singapore we had this wonderful theatre and that's where it all
kicked off for me really because I went along to the theatre club and I got
parts in the funny plays and people liked me and they laughed and laughed and
that was very addictive and on Friday nights I used to have club nights where
you could write things and stand up and perform them and that was when I first
started to write daft poems and it went from there really because people liked
them and wanted me to write more. That's really interesting because if the
received narrative is to be believed your big break came with a recycle of your
poem The Battery Hen on Radio Oxfordshire followed by an appearance on a talent
spotting show Opportunity Knox. Radio Oxford were great when I came out of the
Air Force I discovered folk clubs there was a good folk club in Cambridge called
the Red Cow and a boyfriend called Hank he took me to the Red Cow and it was up
above a perp and I had never seen an environment like it was dark and it had
candles with all the wax running down the sides and people got up and sang all
these lovely ballads and everybody joined in the chorus and I just thought it
was magic and I became very fond of the folk clubs and people making their own
entertainment in that way and so I was able to go on writing my poems for that
environment and then when I came back to Whitney where I then got a job as a
sort of secretary there was a folk club nearby and I used to go there and
declaim my poems and BBC Radio Oxford had a folk program and they came round
recording round the folk clubs and they recorded me doing one of my deathless
works of the parrot or I wish I would have to be teeth or one of them and they
asked me to go on to Radio Oxford and that's where I was then given a weekly
spot and I started to hear the magic words where can we buy a copy of that poem
which was the most marvellous and unexpected thing. Yeah it's an amazing moment
isn't it that kind of affirmation when it comes from elsewhere other people
going in search of your work or recognising you or identifying you as a poet
that's when it's really special. Do you think humour is valued in poetry? I mean
it's a strange question to ask someone who's published several best-selling
collections and achieved enormous commercial success but do you think there's a
literary snobbery which ranks seriousness and woe and difficulty above humour in
poetry? I don't know really Simon I never felt myself to be a part of poetry as
a thing I felt rejected from the beginning. From sort of literary poetry? Yeah
and despised really from the beginning there were people saying this isn't
poetry you know this is some awful doggerel there was a lot of that. The only
thing that really upset me about that was that I wasn't trying to be a poet in
the accepted sense I was just writing what thrilled me because it made people
laugh and I could use my love of words and my vocabulary and my timing to put
together things that would make people convulse with laughter and that was the
thrill of it. I wasn't trying to be a poet so to be kicked out so early was
unfair so I've always sort of ploughed my own furrow if you like I've written
what I felt I could do well and could perform well because to me they're
absolutely hand in hand I don't like other people reading my poems they never
get it right they never pause where I would pause to get the impact so from very
early on I felt that poetry wasn't much to do with me and I wasn't trying to be
a proper poet anyway. I'm sorry to hear you say that because I think you are a
proper poet the spectrum of what poetry is is why? It's huge I know thank you
and I think some of the things I've written are poems some of the more serious
things I've written but I agree with you and I but I don't think certainly in
the early days that many people felt that there could be funny knock-about music
hall type poems at one end and there could be the wandering and geese in the
other you know but there was this feeling certainly early on that you were only
allowed to enjoy certain types of poetry and the more impenetrable the better.
I'm pretty sure I once saw you at a literary gathering at Buckingham Palace on a
bonquette in the picture gallery having a good old chinwag with Geoffrey Hill
who's sometimes described as one of our most difficult and unapproachable poets
or did I dream that? No no I was there yes I was I was invited which was nice
yeah it was quite an august gathering as I recall. Yeah I remember thinking that
night that if there was something not quite right in the in the prone sandwiches
it might have sort of cleared the whole poetry world out for a generation
several generations. Yeah a great loss to the world of poetry. Yeah we're gonna
have the one or two other section in the programme now Pam where I just offer
you a series of alternatives and you can choose whichever one you want you can
play a pass if you don't want to answer the question. Okay this sounds
intriguing. Day or night? Night. Sammy Davis Jr or Samuel Taylor Coleridge?
Coleridge. Oxford or Berkshire? Berkshire. Burial or cremation? Burial I think
I'll go on the compost heap. Somebody wants us their dad I think about whether
they wanted to be buried or cremated and he said I don't know surprise me. I
can't remember who he was. The Holy Bible or the Oxford English dictionary? I
think I'll have the Bible thanks. Edward Lear or Hilaire Bellock? I like them
both I'll have them both please. A good night in or a good night out? Good night
in. Dog or cat? Dog. Secrets or confessions? Don't know. A good internet
connection or good plumbing? Oh gosh the plumbing I think. Fried, scrambled or
poached? Oh scrambled please. Desert Island discs or the poet laureate has gone
to his shed? Oh definitely the poet's laureate has gone to his shed. Yes good
answer. I didn't have much choice really. Foddy or soul? A soul. Passenger seat
or driving seat? Passenger seat. Shed or greenhouse? Greenhouse. Wellies or
slippers? Wellies. The sun or the moon? The moon. Time travel to the future or
time travel to the past? Oh I'll go backwards. And last one a trowel or a pen? A
pen please. We end up in the shed talking a lot about place and where people
come from and often have conversations about dialect and I wanted to ask you
about your accent. I mean I mentioned Berkshire and Oxfordshire. I think the
village you grew up in was reassigned across the border. Yes you're absolutely
right yes. But a lot of people I know assume you're from the southwest from
Somerset with your accent. Is that a Berkshire Oxfordshire accent that you have?
I don't know I'm not an expert on accents but I am attributed to a marvellous
rainbow variety of origins most of which are wrong. I've been called a Geordie,
I've been called East Anglia, Norfolk and as you say Devon come on more Somerset
all that. But I was born in the village of Stamford in the Vale and Stamford in
the Vale was in North Berkshire and it's a village, a very insular village in a
big shallow valley below Whitehorse Hill and there were innumerable little
villages and I lived in one of them and the accents were just, people didn't
travel you know it's like I said about a village there was only one bloke with a
car, Johnny Moss. So those accents endured for centuries and that's where mine
is from is the Vale of the Whitehorse, a very specific area. Do you think if you
went back there now people would still sound like that? No I don't. It's gone.
Unless you're talking to people of my generation it's gone because now it's very
much a dormitory village for Oxford, Swindon etc. Whether you like it or loathe
it, and I know plenty of people loathe it, it's a genuine accent. I never think
about how I speak. I lived there till I was 18 and then unless you go to
elocution lessons and try and get rid of it you're stuck with it really. Yeah I
was going to ask you whether you were ever threatened with elocution, I'd
actually written electrocution down here, were you ever threatened with
elocution lessons because we were as kids? Well certainly my grandma's
generation they thought we'd never get a proper job if we spoke like this. I
know, my dad used to be very apologetic he'd say oh I'd be very broad and sort
of send it up in a way I didn't like. Because all it says about you is where you
come from. It doesn't signify anything other than that. You were a successful
act on screen in theatres in a world that might have been thought of as a stand-
up at a time when most of your fellow performers were fellows. A lot of your
books from a woman's point of view isn't it? I was thinking about that poem they
should have asked my husband. Yeah. You know about mansplaining. A long time
before the word mansplaining was ever coined probably. Yeah that is one that's
when everybody asked me to do is they should have asked my husband because I
think everybody knows somebody who's a man who's a knower who overwhelms the
conversation with his sort of vast knowledge or not. And that is one of my most
popular ones. I was at Glastonbury I got the street cred. Yeah I got a great
street cred because I was performing at Glastonbury my family came as well which
was lovely and when I asked the audience what they'd like to hear they all said
I should have asked my husband. And that's really that gives me a lovely
feeling. It's amazing. It's great that you were at Glastonbury did you get a
good crowd there? I did get a good crowd. I did my son. I think my sons we got
two sons and they brought their families. I think they were all petrified that
nobody was going to turn up you know. But actually as you've asked me I will
tell you that we had the biggest crowd in that particular tent that they had had
at all. That's brilliant. It was lovely. Yeah congratulations. Thank you. Glasto
granny they call me that. How much of the real pamers is in the work and the
performances? Yeah I think what you see is what you get. I talk about things
that matter to me. I'm very interested in wildlife as you probably know. I try
and do as much as I possibly can to preserve some of the species I grew up
alongside in Stanford in the Vale. And so a lot of my time these days is spent
in trying to I've got a piece of land that I manage as a wildlife reserve and
that really matters to me. In more recent years I've written a lot about
wildlife and hedgehogs and the value of hedgerows and you know the things that
matter to me. Maybe you could read something Pam or recite something. They're
all in your head aren't they? Well not all of them. This is a poem I wrote about
the hedgerow for the people's trust for endangered species they were doing a
hedgerow week because hedgerows are immensely valuable. Now the hedgerow casts
its shade, the tall, the sparse, the neatly laid with campion and parsley lined
and honeysuckle intertwined. Here a butterfly may rest or blackbirds build their
sturdy nest and little creatures in the green can slip along and not be seen.
Here may livestock sweetly browse, here may sickly sheep or cows in the
hedgerows richer lure seek a comfort and a cure. Then blackberries and rose hips
red, slows and damns and freely shed their autumn bounty spread the news to
native birds and voles and shrews come now make a winter storm fatten up and
carry more to bramble burrow crevice lair for when the winter boughs are bare.
Regard again and celebrate the hedgerow with its beauty great which in pollution
ever rife breathes oxygen to give us life. You're making me think of John Clare
there. I like John Clare. His nature poems and of course written in his
Northamptonshire accent as well. Thanks Pam. It's all right you're welcome. We
ask people who come to the shed to bring an object to talk about have you
brought something with you? I have. I have indeed. Are you ready? Let me just
clear his face. Yeah. Oh it's in a bag. It's in a shoe bag. I'll let you
describe that Pam. Well it's a piece of pottery that I bought in Vancouver in
about 1976 and it's a parrot with the most utterly gormless expression on his
face and he's got great big yellow feet and I just love him because I can't look
at him and not smile and I brought him along because I think it is his gormless
expression. His beaks wide open and he's got his head on one side and he just
looks excruciatingly daft and I bought him in Vancouver which was a place I'd
never been to before and the reason I brought him along is because he represents
quite a lot of things to me. A sculpture. He is a kind of sculpture so on the
one hand you could have Michelangelo's Pieta which would make me cry or you
could have this. It's like a wide spectrum. This is a piece of pottery that
somebody's made and they've made him look funny so that I can't look at him
without laughing and I always want to cuddle him. He's so friendly and he sort
of underlines to me that there is a great spectrum in the arts of the elite and
the friendly that works a bit like me in a way and it also underlines to me that
my work has enabled me to travel all around the world and also I wrote a poem
about a parrot, a very early one which I did on Opportunity Knocks which won so
he represents all sorts of things to me. So it's a kindred spirit. Yeah great
well thanks parrot for the point. I can't let you go Pam without giving you a
few things. I've been writing about butterflies and moths in the shed. Not
haikus but flycus where I've made the wings of the poem bigger than the little
body bit in the middle. So everybody who's come in the shed I've written them a
little butterfly or moth poem and given it to them as an origami butterfly. Oh
that's terrifying. So somewhere inside that. Take it home and clutch it to my
bosom forever. You've made me very nervous about reading it now. It's about the
butterfly the small white. Touching down it tips the scales of summer then flies
off weighing less than its shadow. I like that that's very sweet less than its
shadow. I love that. Pam thanks for being such a wonderful guest. I've enjoyed
it I really enjoyed it thank you it's really lovely to meet you. And there's a
longer version of Simon's Conversation with Pam airs right now on BBC Sounds.
The poet Laureate has gone to his shed was produced by Susan Roberts. BBC Radio
4 launched after a young firefighter of colour took his own life a damning
report into the culture of London Fire Brigade found a toxic mix of racism
sexism misogyny and bullying. Well after the news we'll hear evidence that the
problem more widely across the UK. Phylon 4 is in a couple of minutes. I've
known about this word for decades but now everybody seems to know about it but
I'm not sure exactly how. What can we learn from the evolution of the word woke?
With woke it got appropriated and then weaponized. From its first recorded use
in 1938. I got it right up to the present day. It's become utterly politicized.
There's a boogie man out there and that boogie man is woke. That's woke the
journey of a word with me Matthew side on Radio 4. Listen now on BBC.