TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-22H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 at 11.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at nine o'clock The Prime Minister
Rishi Sunak will meet the President of the European Commission Ursula von der
Leyen in Berkshire tomorrow. A joint statement said they would work towards
finding a solution to the dispute on post-Brexit trading arrangements for
Northern Ireland. Conservative and Labour MPs have been told to come into
Parliament while a special meeting of the European Union ambassadors has been
called for the afternoon. Our Europe correspondent Jessica Parker says all the
signs are a final deal is set to be agreed and announced. I think it would be
pretty strange if Ursula von der Leyen, the European Commission President, so a
real EU Chief here, was to go all the way to the United Kingdom to meet with
Rishi Sunak to talk about the Northern Ireland Protocol at this stage and not
announce a deal. So that's where my money would be at the moment. Of course,
until it happens, we can't be sure and it's Brexit. Things can fall apart at the
last moment. Nearly 60 people have died after a boat-carrying migrants sank off
the coast of southern Italy. At least 12 were children, including a baby and
young twins. Around 80 people survived, but it's unknown how many were on board.
The first results have been announced from Nigeria's tightest election since the
end of military rule in 1999. The governing party candidate Bola Tinubu won in
one of the party's strongholds, the southwestern Etiki state. More results are
not expected until tomorrow. Police in Northern Ireland have been given more
time to question a man about the attempted murder of an off-duty officer last
week. In total, six people remain in custody in connection with a shooting of
Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell in Omar. football in Manchester United
have won their first trophy since 2017. They beat Newcastle United 2-0 in the
League Cup final at Wembley. And police have launched an investigation into a
mass disturbance ahead of the Scottish League Cup final. Two rival groups
clashed outside the Hampton Ground in Glasgow. In the game, Celtic got the
better of the old firm rivals Rangers, beating them 2-1 to retain the title. BBC
News On tonight's analysis, how were Russians persuaded to support a war against
their closest neighbour Ukraine? That's at half past nine, but first on Radio 4
it's time for Moneybox with Paul Lewis. Hello. Vulnerable customers are being
left for months with a prepayment meter that won't let them pay for the
electricity they're using. And how can savers take advantage of rising interest
rates to earn more on their savings? But first, the Chancellor is expected to
use his budget on March 15th to introduce changes to encourage people over 50 to
return to work. Since 2019, there's been a big rise in the number of people
defined as economically inactive. That means they're not working, self-employed
or looking for work and claiming benefits. The number rose by 830,000 in the
last three years, and three-quarters of those were aged over 50. The Department
for Work and Pensions has a programme to encourage people of that age back into
work by offering help with health support, pension planning, flexible working
opportunities. Claire Worden has had exclusive access to the programme for
Moneybox. We're just in Shrewsby job centre now. We're going to have a bit of a
tour. Simon, are you working at the moment? Not at the moment, no. How's that
been? Quite a struggle, really. Financially anyway. What did you used to work
at? Well, this I was a builder, but the body's given up. After walking into the
job centre for the first time at the age of 65, Simon's now found a job as a bus
driver and is looking forward to a new challenge. It's going to be a lot
different if I do do this, because there won't be a hassle with tools and
chasing customers and all the rest of it. It'd be nice to have a regular sort of
job. And what have they been like here? They've been very good to be honest.
Yeah, they are very friendly, very supportive. Did you ever think about retiring
or were you always going to work till the end? Not really, I was just going to
work till I dropped on you. Another older worker who's found help here is
Svetlana. She fled her home in Ukraine a year ago after the Russian invasion.
She's made a life here in Shrewsby, finding work after getting extra help
learning English and support using computers to apply for jobs. We spoke via an
interpreter called Jakob. Currently, Svetlana works in Shrewsby Hospital as a
senior kitchen assistant. She likes the job because she has an ability to speak,
to be part of an international team. A lot of people from Ukraine, from India,
for example, are working there with her. And also she likes very much working
with her supervisors, with her managers. It's always a pleasure for her to work
with them. How did the job centre help you get into work and what was harder,
the fact that you weren't speaking English or the fact that you were an older
worker or was it a bit of both? She says with a little bit of patience in the
job centre and after waiting on others, after all this paperwork has been
processed and after all the procedures, she managed to find the position. They
made it happen just with a bit of patience, with a bit of everything, maybe with
a bit of luck. At the Shrewsby site at the moment, there are 19 job coaches.
They can see up to 20 job seekers every day. But older people are being offered
longer appointments to discuss the kind of work they want to do and the
transferable skills they've been developing over a lifetime. It's all part of a
push by the Department for Work and Pensions, who say they've invested Â£22
million extra to support people in this age group. Some of that money has been
spent on people like Dan. Hi, my name is Dan Clinch and I'm the 50 plus champion
for Mercier. What people are beginning to realise, and this is the reason for
the initiative, is we're an ageing country and the 50 plus cohort will be one of
the largest demographics in the workforce. And so companies are now realising
they have to start planning strategically. You know, some of the key things for
older workers might be flexible hours because they have, whether that's health
or their caring responsibilities. There's been lots of wonderful research from
people like Centre for Ageing Better that older workers are resilient, we're
reliable. We're also much more likely to keep the job at 50 plus. It's an
opportunity, not a problem for you, isn't it, having these older workers?
Absolutely. And hopefully, you know, a few years from now, we won't need to talk
about ageism in the workforce. And also the 50 plus cohort will realise that
absolutely, you know, don't dip your head when you say you're over 50, but, you
know, keep your head held high and be proud of being in that age group. Dan
Clinch, and Dean Clare Worden's report. Well, listening to that is Gregory
Thwaites, he's Research Director at the Resolution Foundation, a think tank that
concentrates on people with low and middle incomes. This week, it published its
own report into the role older workers could play in boosting economic growth.
And Gregory Thwaites, what did your research find about why so many people over
50 has left the workforce? There are several reasons. What we can see is that
there are lots more people with long-term sickness who are now no longer in the
workforce. We can also see that people when they retire early tend to be quite
wealthy. So it's going to be difficult for government policy to reach the people
who that who retired or left the workforce around the time of the pandemic. And
one of the things the report says is we need to think very broadly about getting
everyone who wants a job into the labour force and not just trying to un-retire
that cohort. Your report says that most countries with large economies, the so-
called OECD countries, have seen their working age labour force participation
rate rise since the start of the pandemic. Ours has fallen. What are other
countries doing that we're not? Yes, there's three or four things going on. And
the first thing to say is that before the pandemic, we were doing relatively
well. We were seven out of the 38 OECD countries, which is the group of rich
economies, and we've moved to about 15. So we're still not doing too badly, but
we're moving in the wrong direction. And most other countries are moving in the
right direction. And there's a few things. One is it seems that access to
healthcare is worsened more in the UK, although we can't be categorical about
that. It's much easier to get hold of your pension savings in your 50s in the UK
than it is in most other advanced countries where more of the money would come
from the government. And then you've got more people in their 50s living in
mortgage-free houses, and those people are likely to retire earlier. So we've
got a few things here, but it's partly other countries catching up and then some
UK-specific factors as well. There are early signs though, aren't there, from
the Office for National Statistics that older people are beginning to return to
work. Is this a problem that is going to go away? Well, it's possible, but I
think it's far too early to tell on the basis of those dates. We just had a few
months and some very early signs, some very welcome signs. But these numbers
bounce around from month to month, so I wouldn't place too much weight on them.
How could the government best act to get people back? Jeremy Hunt seems to think
they're on the golf course, and from what you said, some of them may well be,
but they're not going to stop access to pensions, for example, in your 50s, are
they? Well, they might not, but what they could do is, for example, reduce the
amount that you can take tax-free out of your pension. So people get very tax-
favourable pension savings and can take a big lump sum out tax-free, and then
they can get all of the money at age 55 rising to 57. But there's going to be
several things that the government can do, and what they shouldn't do is just
focus on this cohort of recently retired people. They need to think about people
with health problems and disabilities. They need to think about women with
children as well, for example. But would employers even welcome over 50s back? I
mean, I've had an email just this morning from a lady who wants to remain
anonymous. She's over 50, and her husband is too. For 12 years, they've been
looking for a job. She says people don't want to employ people over 50,
especially professionals. Interview panels go for younger candidates. There is
ageism and, indeed, for women's sexism as well in the workforce, isn't there?
Clearly there is, and employers' attitudes are going to need to change. As the
package mentioned, the population and the workforce is ageing, so we need to get
used to an older workforce and the best employers already have. But sadly, there
are still lots of cases where employers don't think that way. And very briefly,
in a word, really, do you expect policies in the budget to help this group? I
expect some policies. I hope they're the right ones. People have talked about
big tax cuts for over 50s. I think that would be a mistake. Gregory Thwaites
from the Resolution Foundation. Thanks. And working over 50, or indeed trying
to, is the topic for Moneybox Live on Wednesday with Felicity Hanna. Have you
unretired but worried how it will affect your finances, or are you looking for a
job without success? Email your questions and experiences of work over 50,
Moneybox at pbc.co.uk. She'd love to hear from you. Leave a phone number if you
can. Some energy customers are being left for months with faulty prepayment
meters. Several people have told Moneybox that although their electricity hasn't
been disconnected, the screen showing how much credit they have has been blank
since before Christmas, and they can't top it up as they normally do. So they
have no idea how much electricity they're using or what it's costing them. The
law says suppliers should take appropriate action within hours of being told,
arranging to fix or replace the meter, or at least arrange an appointment in the
future. But the people we've spoken to tell us they've made repeated calls to
their supplier, but no one has come. Our reporter Dan Whitworth went to meet
Brian and his daughter Jenny. Brian lives in Shropshire, is 80-year-old and
blind. Brian just talked me through how long your prepayment meter has not been
working. How long it's been broken for? Since October last year. What do you
think about that? The fact it's been broken for so long? I think it's terrible.
We don't know what the bill will be at the end of it. I mean, they said we'll
have a bill once the meter's been fixed, but when that will be, I don't know. I
mean, we're talking nearly four months now since it's been broken, so you have
no idea how much you've spent on energy in that time. No, no idea at all.
Scottish powers said we wouldn't be without electricity. So they told you you
won't get cut off, but not at all how much you're spending on it? No. Energy is
a big part of everyone's bills right now. Jenny, you're here with your dad,
Brian. You obviously live local, come and help Brian out with things. What do
you think about all this? I'd have thought they would have sorted it out by now,
really. I mean, like you said, my dad's blind as well. So, you know, and
obviously he feels that the cold and everything. Would it be all right if Jenny
showed me where your meter is, Brian? Is that all right? Yeah, that's fine. I'd
like a little utility room right up here. So this is it. Wow, that's just
completely dead. Yeah. There is nothing going on there. Well, I don't think it's
good enough. It's not right, is it? And you know, like my brothers have been
getting in touch with them quite a few times. And Brian, how often do you top up
your meters, you know? It's roughly about Â£15 a week. Are you worried it might
be more now? Yeah, I am, yeah. And how are you feeling about the prospect of
what could be a very large bill coming for you? Not very good, really. You know,
it's money coming out of my savings and what have you. So you know, it's going
to be a lot. So instead of doing that Â£15 a week, which is money you know you've
got, you can top up and everything else, you're now going to get this huge bill.
Yeah, exactly. After Moneybox got in touch, Scottish Power apologised and says
it has now arranged for a new meter to be installed. It told us it will not
charge Brian for the electricity used while the meter was faulty. It will also
give him more than the statutory Â£60 in compensation. We also spoke to
Catherine. She bought a holiday home on the Isle of Skye in November. The
electricity was off, but just before Christmas when she turned it on, she
discovered the meter was blank so she couldn't top it up to pay the standing
charge. She contacted her supplier right away. Another Bhutan advisor who said,
we'll have an engineer out to you within four hours. So I came back up here and
sat in the car out there for four hours. No engineer. So after Christmas I gave
it another little prod via complaints and on the 5th of January I got an email
to say to get myself over here because an engineer would be here within four
hours. So I came and sat over here for four hours again. No engineer. And that
was when a numerous emails started going backwards and forwards between myself
and the complaints department of OVO. They said it will be an estimated amount,
but how on earth are they going to estimate how much electricity I've used when
I've only owned the property since the 11th of November and the electricity was
switched off at the main until the 22nd of December. Catherine bought the
property to let it out and for that she needs a certificate, but without a
working meter she can't get it. Obviously we will be seeking some sort of
compensation because it's delaying the opportunity for getting some sort of
return on the investment in the house. The supplier OVO told Moneybox it's sorry
for the delay in replacing Catherine's meter and it has made a new appointment
and it says it will also pay compensation. Well Matt Cole is from the Fuel Bank
Foundation, a charity specialising in giving financial support to people on
prepayment meters. Matt Cole, we've heard from several people affected by this,
it's hard to know the scale. How often do you hear about this as a problem? Hi
there Paul. We don't hear about it that frequently so I think it's fair to say
it's not a volume problem across the UK. It happens infrequently, but as rare as
event it is, if it happens to you it's a really big issue and it needs to get
sorted really quickly. Having a meter which doesn't work, it sounds a really
crazy thing this day and age. They need to get sorted and need to be sorted
quickly. Yes and the regulation indeed says that doesn't it? If a customer
thinks their meter's faulty but the power supply is working, suppliers have to
arrange an appointment within three or four hours. That's obviously not happened
in these cases. Catherine waited four hours twice and no one turned up. What
should they be doing? It's a really simple thing really. I think regardless of
who your supplier is, customers expect that if there's a problem things are
sorted really quickly and those standards should be consistent across the
industry, both within a supplier and across the industry as a whole. I think
it's really important that suppliers, when they find these kind of issues,
they're on them really quickly and they're trying to solve them because when you
spoke to Brian you see the stress and anxiety it causes when he's not able to
top up the prepayment meter he normally tops up. The fear of the bill is a
really big thing for him. Yes, because of course a lot of people on prepayment
meters are just about getting by aren't they? So they need to know what they're
using and what they're paying. Luckily he's not going to be charged. But will
that happen generally? Can they charge you? Certainly Ovo told us it could and
would be charging Catherine. Ultimately it depends what's happened with a
prepayment meter. So if it's impossible to see what energy has passed through
it, it's really hard to identify what you can be charged but a supplier could
charge you an estimate based on what you'd used previously. I think it's really
sensible to assume that you will be charged something, not to just assume that
if your meter's broken it's free energy because probably that's not going to
happen. No of course, but always worth checking and asking for it to be free and
then perhaps even going to the energy ombudsman. Now those firms have said
they'll pay compensation. What are the rules for that? How much should they get?
So like the piece said, if your meter's faulty and it's not working at all,
somebody should be out to see you within three or four hours, depending whether
it's a weekday or a weekend. If the meter's broken but the energy's still
flowing through it's okay and appointments should be made within three or four
hours. And if the energy company fails to meet that promise you're entitled to
Â£30 compensation and another Â£30 if the original targets aren't met. But people
don't want compensation. People don't want compensation there. They just want
the meter to be sorted. Â£30 isn't as good as a meter which is working properly
and that's the issue I think. Indeed. We did ask major energy suppliers and they
said they're not experiencing many delays like this. So if somebody finds
themselves in this situation, what should they do? First thing to do is speak to
your energy company. We also say as well, best put it in writing as well so
you've got a record of when you raised your concerns when you said it wasn't
working. So you can follow it up more simply. I think that was the key for the
lady you spoke to from Skye. She needed to follow it up to make sure that people
were looking at her situation properly. And then to escalate it quickly if it's
not being sorted people like Sitan's advice is extra help you need to have a
really good place to go. They can advise what needs to happen and escalate it
for you on your behalf as well. And this of course is the latest of some fairly
damning stories about prepayment meters. Forcibly installing them is on hold.
Compensation may be paid for that. Just briefly in a few words, what do you
think needs to happen about prepayment meters? So prepayment isn't a bad thing.
A lot of people who have a prepayment really like it. But we need to have a
proper route and branch review of the way prepayment works today to make sure it
works properly and meets people's needs today. People struggle with that have
energy and we're sadly seeing so many people now who are clearly vulnerable have
a prepayment meter and probably they shouldn't have. Matt Cole, thanks very
much. And a bit of news breaking this morning about energy bill support and
Claire Worden has more. Yes, from today the 900,000 households who don't pay
their own electricity bills, so people living in park homes or on boats, some
people in care homes and those who are just off grid, can now claim the 400
pound energy bill support scheme payments. For details of how to make your claim
go to gov.uk and search energy bill support not automatic. That link does work.
And an update on another story Moneybox has been following Claire. Yes, a
company which charged taxpayers to make claims for tax refunds can no longer
operate. HMRC said this week it had found that Tax Credits Limited had committed
serious breaches of anti-money laundering laws. It means it's now a criminal
offence for Tax Credits Limited to trade as a tax repayment agent. You might
remember Moneybox reported on this company last year and those hefty fees it was
charging customers to make claims for marriage allowance or working from home
tax relief. HMRC has already refunded 48,000 of the firm's customers and now it
says it will contact the remaining 11,000 by the end of March. It's also
reminding people that no one needs to use an agent to claim tax relief. You can
make your own claim directly through gov.uk or call the tax helpline. Their
number is 0300 200 33 00. That's fee free. Thanks Claire. Useful tips. Now
whether you're saving up for a deposit for a home, a holiday or indeed for your
retirement, the interest paid on your savings is rising. The Data Service Money
Facts says this month average rates paid for easy access savings accounts hit
their highest level in more than 14 years which is 1.75%. Well a big improvement
on the 0.01% some banks offered until recently but you can do much better than
that. Annabose is a founder of savingschampion.co.uk. Annabose savings rates
have been rising. Many people just stick them in their bank don't they? What can
people get now? Well it depends on what type of savings account that you want
but when we were looking at that easy access figure just now the average rate
that you can get over 3% now. So from 0.01% just over a year or so ago to 3% is
a very very good improvement. Yes and of course some high street banks are being
criticised aren't they? They've reported these big profits last week or so.
They're being accused of not passing on the Bank of England rate rises to
savers. Is that fair? Yes that's fair. I'm not surprised unfortunately but the
Bank of England base rate has gone up by 3.9% and for example Barclays has an
everyday saver so its standard easy access account has gone up by 0.54% so it's
only paying people 0.55%. There's an account with Virgin Money which isn't a
high street bank but a well known brand and that's paying 0.25% still. So if
you've got one of those accounts you just need to move your money away from
them. Yes I mean UK Finance which represents the banks told us saving and
lending rates aren't directly linked and they'll move at different times. As
rates rise though is there a danger that people with substantial savings will
have to pay tax on them? Well yes we've all got used to because interest rates
have been low and there was something called the personal savings allowance
which was introduced in 2016. That meant that for basic rate taxpayers the first
Â£1000 of savings interest earned you don't pay any tax on. Now back a year ago
when the best easy access account was paying 0.75% you'd need over Â£133,000
before you breached that personal savings allowance. Today with earning 3.15 you
only need Â£31,700 so a lot less money will mean you use up your personal savings
allowance which is good news it means you're getting more interest but it does
also mean you have to watch out because you'll be paying tax. Yes and what about
then what about ISAs because their interest is tax free are they more worthwhile
now? Yeah the good news is that ISAs are really improving so we've known for a
long time we've seen big gaps between the best non-ISA bonds for example and the
fixed term ISAs there's been a big gap so actually in times the net rate you'd
earn on a bond would be better than the best rate on an ISA but now you can do
much better especially if you're starting to pay tax you're going to be doing
much better if you make sure you utilise your cash ISA allowance if you haven't
used it elsewhere your ISA allowance. And very briefly on national savings I
mean they've put rates up three times and of course on premium bonds are they
now a better buy? Definitely so especially if you've got a lot of money because
the all money that's with national savings is guaranteed by the Treasury and
therefore you can put and so you know they've got an easy access account paying
2.85 you can put two million pounds in that and it's all safe unlike with the
financial services compensation it's up to 85,000 but yeah so these rates are
much much better now and premium bonds tax free prizes you're not guaranteed to
win a prize but it's quite fun when you do and when you do get one it's tax
free. And the law of statistics is on your side if you've got a lot and yes
literally in a word should you be fixing for four or five years or going for the
best rate every year? It's a difficult one depends on your circumstances I'm
afraid but you know the interest rate cycle is coming to a height we think. Okay
and above some savingschampion.co.uk thanks. One way to make the most of your
money is of course listen to Moneybox and if you miss an episode you can hear
the programme at any time on the Moneybox podcast on BBC Sounds. Moneybox Live
with Felicity Hannah working after the age of 50 lots of emails coming in about
that and our email is Moneybox at pbc.co.uk. Today reporters were Claire Wurden
and Dan Whitworth researchers Thunder Hardiel and Joe Krasner. Studio manager
Jack Korda, editor is Jess Quayle and I'm Paul Lewis. And you can hear that next
edition of Moneybox Live with Felicity Hannah on Wednesday afternoon at three.
Now on Radio 4 the broadcaster Gemma Kearney makes the Radio 4 appeal on behalf
of Raising Futures Kenya. In primary school Lynette was bright and dreamed of
becoming a successful Kenyan fashion designer when she grew up. The future was
exciting. Until she was 11 when her parents died within six months of each
other. Lynette went to live with relatives in Nairobi where she thought she
would be cared for but she was sexually abused and became pregnant. She was
thrown out onto the street with nothing. A young girl alone and scared. She was
selling coffee on the street to survive when she heard about Raising Futures
Kenya. The charity runs free vocational and business skills training for young
people including young mothers. Lynette joined the fashion and dressmaking
course. Alongside the training she got the counselling she desperately needed to
cope with the grief of being orphaned and then raped by someone she thought she
could trust. She received practical support like cooked lunches and period pads
so nothing stood in the way of her learning. And she had individual care from
her teachers that gave her the self-belief to thrive. After finishing her
training Lynette worked at a local clothing shop. She earned enough to rent a
room and saved up for a sewing machine to make and sell her own clothes. Three
years on Lynette runs her own successful business. She has a home for her twins
and she's able to pay for their school fees and for her siblings too. And she
mentors current students to become strong, independent business people too. I
recently spoke with Lynette and reflecting on her experience with Raising
Futures Kenya she said something profound. She said, I'd never known a love like
it. I've travelled to Kenya and seen the challenges young people, especially
girls like Lynette face every day. The sharply rising cost of living,
unemployment and severe drought have forced people into extreme poverty, making
them vulnerable to abuse and exploitation. Raising Futures Kenya trains and
supports 900 young people every year who've experienced poverty and abuse,
equipping them with skills to find employment or start their own business. Â£25
can fund a month of training, counselling and support for a young person in
Kenya to have the chance of a different future today. You can give now. Just
search online for BBC Radio 4 Appeal or call 0800 404 8144. Or you can write a
cheque to Raising Futures Kenya and send it to free post BBC Radio 4 Appeal.
That's free post BBC Radio 4 Appeal. Please mark the back of your envelope
Raising Futures Kenya. Thank you. Gemma Kearney. Calls are free from landlines
and mobiles. You can find all the details for giving online if you search for
BBC Radio 4 Appeal. Remember that if you're a UK taxpayer and if you want
Raising Futures Kenya to collect the gift aid on your donation, please include
an email or postal address so that they can send you a gift aid declaration.
Time now to look ahead to the Westminster hour at 10 o'clock. All the
indications are it's going to be a busy week in the world of politics. Lucky for
us. Carolyn Quinn is on hand to guide us. Hi Carolyn. Thank you very much Ron.
Yes, a deal on Northern Ireland. Will it actually happen and does Rishi Sunak
have enough in his kit bag to persuade the Ulster Unionists and his own hardline
Brexitors to back it when or if it does? That subject will pretty much dominate
tonight's discussion with the big question could we be on the brink of a return
to politics as normal in Northern Ireland after Brexit and the suspension of
government at Stormont? The former Prime Minister Sir John Major offers his
views on that and on the state of politics more than 30 years since he took
office. And my panellists tonight are the former Justice Secretary Sir Robert
Buckland, Shadow Cabinet Minister Fungom Debonair, the director of the think
tank UK Interchanging Europe, Professor Anad Menon and Isabelle Hardman,
assistant editor of The Spectator. Join us if you can at 10. Carolyn thanks,
that's the Westminster Hour coming up in half an hour. Before that in this
week's analysis the journalists Nick Sturdie and Tim Huyl examine the reasons
why many Russians support their country's war against Ukraine. This guy's got a
gun in front of you. Is he pointing at me? It was a cold grey morning almost
exactly a year ago. I was filming at Chastormal Airfield just outside the
Ukrainian capital Kiev when we ran into three soldiers. He says g'day. Where is
Tel Aviv in your BBC, where do you go with this? A Ukrainian patrol I assumed
until I saw their uniforms. Those are Russians. Get in the car. It was a
Ukrainian counter-attack and the beginning of a full-scale war between two
countries that had been so entwined that just a few years earlier a popular
Ukrainian comic called Valod is in the country that President Y And yet many
Russians believe, as one of the country's biggest stars sings, that right is on
their side, that they're the ones under attack fighting for survival. I'm Nick
Sturdy. And I'm Tim Huyl. We've been covering Russia for most of our lives and
in this programme we're trying to understand how millions of educated 21st
century citizens have been persuaded to support, or at least accept, a war with
their closest neighbours and inhabit what seems a parallel universe. Maybe it's
too easy to say they've simply been brainwashed, zombified by Kremlin lies. You
cannot be turned into a zombie if you don't want to be a zombie. People are
choosing to believe in this truth. We're going to find out how Russia's parallel
world has been built over many years by playing on a nation's memories and
fears. In the spring of 2014, the year ushered in by Zelensky on Russian TV,
crowds chanting Russia, Russia, seized government buildings across eastern
Ukraine, including in Donetsk, where I was filming. It's a mainly Russian
speaking city and perhaps more than anywhere else, the place around which the
Kremlin's alternative truth has been built. armed separatists declared a
breakaway People's Republic in reaction to the overthrow, shortly before, of
Ukraine's president Viktor Yanukovych. He fled after massive protests against
his refusal to sign a deal with the European Union. But many Ukrainians in
Donetsk and other eastern cities, who'd voted for Yanukovych in democratic
elections four years earlier, saw it as a western-backed coup orchestrated by
Ukrainian nationalists. So too did volunteer fighters who came from Russia
itself to defend Donetsk, including one called Pavyukuk Mirov, who cooked us a
military supper of beef and macaroni in his barracks. Why do I say Donetsk is
Jerusalem? Because this is a holy war of the Russian people for its future, its
ideals and its great country that was cut into pieces 25 years ago. Holy war? He
meant that Donetsk had been retaken for Russia just as the Crusaders retook
Jerusalem. Then such lofty language seemed outlandish. Now it's commonplace in
Russia, thanks partly to the information war waged by nationalists like Pavyuk,
who's still in Donetsk, blogging prolifically on social media. He's a rather
intellectual Crusader, whose non-Daguerre is at Shakespeare, because he loves
the playwright so much. But he had to take up a gun, he told us then, to help
save Donetsk from a Ukrainian-Nazi bloodbath. Now, when we speak to him again on
the phone, he claims it's only last year's Russian invasion that finally averted
that threat. If it hadn't struck first, there would have been genocide, just
like Rwanda, pure and simple. But where's the evidence for this? For years,
before 2014, they had already been promising to slaughter Moscowites. A video
clip, much shared by bloggers like Pavyuk, shows young protesters in western
Ukraine in 2014 briefly chanting, Moscowlyaku na hilyaku, hang the Moscowite, an
old contemptuous term for Russians. It's just one of the tiny grains of fact
used to build myths and spread fear. And the shells that Ukraine has
intermittently fired at Donetsk since 2014, trying to regain its own territory,
are also supposedly evidence of its murderous intent. Pavyuk says he's lost
comrades. Some of the lads you saw then are gone, after 30 were killed, I
stopped counting. It sounds like NATO shells. There is snow outside and very few
people, because it is an act of courage, just to go out for food or medicine.
Donetsk now is a hell. It's not a problem, but it is a problem that has been
made in Donetsk. Ever since 2014, the Kremlin-controlled media has kept the
suffering of Donetsk near the top of the news. And that's convinced many
Russians that they'd already been at war for eight years, when Putin's so-called
special military operation began last February. Even now, relatively minor
Ukrainian attacks on Donetsk are reported in detail, with no mention of far
worse Russian attacks elsewhere in Ukraine. But the hyperbole spread by bloggers
like Pavyuk and repeated on talk shows doesn't stop there. If Donetsk falls,
they argue, all of Russia may eventually be lost. On many Western platforms,
they say openly that Russia should be carved up into 26 separate states. Look,
Ukraine's head of military intelligence, Mr Kirill Budanov, has a map in his
office of Russia divided up. Another grain of truth, weirdly. Perhaps it's a bad
joke. Budanov does have a map a bit like that. You can imagine how Russia's
influential talk shows lap that up. On one, 60 Minutes, host Yevgeny Papov told
viewers the map showed how Kiev dreams of decolonizing Russia. And yet, when we
talked to Papov, he insisted, following the Kremlin line, that this isn't a war
against Ukrainians. It's just against their Western masters. My own father right
now lives in Ukraine. It's a terrible situation for all Slavic people, for all
Russian people, for all Ukrainian people. But you should blame yourself, because
you, the Western world, are moving your military infrastructure to our border,
close and close. We are at war with NATO and the Nazi regime of Zalesky. Sorry,
just come back to this point. About your father? I'm not going to tell you more
about it. Oh, please just tell me a bit about his circumstances. No, no, listen.
Is he suffering or does he think the same things as you? Stop, stop, I'm not
going to tell you more. For security reasons, he says. Or is it just too
uncomfortable to put himself in his father's shoes right now? Papoff is an
experienced correspondent, and yet there's something about his approach to his
work that takes me aback. You were chief correspondent of Russian TV in New York
for six years. I'm interested, did that change the way you thought about the
West? I knew everything about the United States before I came to New York, and I
did not change my mind on anything, because I knew everything. We have three
breasts in our country. Why you two dictators? How to live? That's the main
question I can ask the Western world. But if Russia invades a sovereign,
neighbouring country, how is that not ultimate dictation of its will? Ask
yourself, if Great Britain would invade sovereign country as Iraq, tell me, how
do you feel when you occupy Malvin Islands? You're talking about the Falklands?
Of course it's Malvin Islands, and they are Argentinian islands, not yours.
You're asking me about invasion. What's the hypocrisy, man? As he's talking, I
feel myself transported back to 1982. The year the Falklands, or Malvinas, were
retaken by Britain after an Argentine invasion, and I was a student in Leonid
Brezhnyev Soviet Union. And what was surprising in that then-isolated country
was that many people I met believed, or claimed to believe, that they knew more
about the West than I did, just as Yevgeny Papovna says he didn't need to go to
America to learn about it. He was only 13 when the Soviet Union broke up, but
the yaboo, anti-Western tone of TV shows like his feels like a time warp. Has
anything changed, in your opinion, in the relations between Russia and the West?
In Soviet times? I was born in Soviet Union. I like this country, of course, and
nobody asked me when you destroyed my country. And we made a great mistake when
we hugged each other in the 90s. Oh really? When the Western Russia embraced,
when it hugged, that was a mistake. You destroyed my country. How do you think I
can feel about you? But today in Russia, it's not just servants of the Kremlin's
media who inculcate scorn for the West. There are other voices who started
scoffing in similar fashion on their own initiative who appeal to a younger,
cooler audience. Can I introduce myself? My name is Ivan Kandekov. I was born in
Arkhangelsk, it's a northern part of Russia. Now I'm an engineer, I'm a
scientist in aviation structures, and also I'm a poet, I'm a singer, and I'm a
comedy maker to say it a fatter. In this slick video, Ivan, a jovial character
with full-blonde beard, is strumming his guitar and clinking champagne glasses
with friends in his kitchen as they tuck into plates of brawn. Brawn? Well, it's
an old-fashioned Russian dish that has to be boiled for hours. And that's the
joke in Ivan's song. Russia's not short of cheap energy, so we can enjoy our
lovely pig's trotters in jelly, thank you very much. While you Western
Russaphobes who won't buy our gas just shiver through the winter. Ivan's
nationalism, like Yevgeny Papovs, dates back to the 1990s, when I lived in
Russia and I remember it well. He was a teenager back then. As you know, we have
lost the Cold War, so in Russia, especially in the province, it was a complete
fallout, industries have been closed, people lose their jobs, so yes, it was a
feeling of shame, a feeling of absence of the future. But at the same time, the
90s was a point when there was a democracy, was there not? Democracy is the same
fairy tale as a communism. They say you have some choice, in fact you have no
choice. Your salary can be measured, democracy and elections cannot be measured,
that means this is nothing. I'm not going to do it. Territory, however, can be
measured. And in 2014, Russia got more when Vladimir Putin announced to a
jubilant Moscow crowd what he called the return of Crimea to Russia. It was that
seizure of Ukrainian land that turned Ivan from a fairly apolitical aviation
engineer into a flag waving patriot and eventually into a Zed singer and Zed
poet, part of what's now a whole cultural movement named after the letter that
denotes support for the war. He's got thousands of followers on his YouTube and
Telegram channels and his own radio show, bringing him a measure of fame he
quite enjoys. My life changed. I can see when some people on the streets
recognize me and say, hey, it's you, it's you. I'm looking at this influence and
I think I'm doing right. Because I know the Russian mentality, you know, what
people are worrying about. And I try my best to make them a little smile. He
mocks liberals and anti-war campaigners who are traitors in his book. But
perhaps the biggest target of his humor, as he sees it, is a group that the
Kremlin also attacks ever more in its information war. LGBT people. He has a
favorite poem. Can I read it? The right translation is that in English there is
a lot of words, meaning genders. Everyone needs their own toilets. SjÃ¶ge,
MÃ¤ggus, Sxval, Furi, Kari, Gari Potter, Yuri, Kari, Harry Potter, non-binary
helicopter. So plenty of them. Who challenged him about his homophobia, but his
answers became ever more offensive. Do you like being intolerant? I don't
understand how people can like to be tolerant. Russia is for traditional values.
Frankly speaking, Western world now is for, we call it, Satanism. You call it
what? Satanism. That's quite an apocalyptically black and white view of the
conflict. And one that Sasha Arkhipova, a social anthropologist researching
Russian attitudes to the war, has often encountered. Many many people to whom I
was speaking, they are believers of the idea that we are living in this bipolar
world and everybody is in the war against us. So we are not aggressors. We are
defenders. And we are defending our spiritual core. And the last time the
Russians defended their country, their values, and won, was in the Second World
War. The Great Patriotic War, as it's known in Russia, commemorated every year
on May the 9th, Victory Day. As the number of surviving veterans has dwindled,
people carrying portraits of fathers and grandfathers who fought have joined the
parades, part of what was originally a grassroots initiative called Immortal
Regiment. The original idea was not to commemorate victory, but to commemorate
loss. And the main slogan was never again. But especially after annexation of
Crimea, a lot of new people started to participate. And the main idea for them
became not never again, but we can repeat. Why? Because they start to feel that
the revolution in Ukraine is something very bad and the West is trying to steal
Ukraine and steal our victory. And this idea of going to war, of heroic behavior
became more and more popular every year. An idea strongly promoted by the state.
In Russia, there is a big country with different languages and there is a lot of
people who doesn't like Soviet past. So the victory in the Second World War is
the only thing which can unite people. And the presidential administration, they
make this idea of war against the evil, against the Nazis, the new common ground
to the new Russian identity. We are the sons and daughters and grandsons of
people who fight the evil. And now this evil is in the territory of Ukraine.
Last year on Victory Day, Vladimir Putin, carrying a portrait of his father, led
a million people through Red Square. He wore the orange and black ribbon of St.
George, originally a tsarist military decoration that was used again in the
Second World War. Since 2014, it's been promoted and worn as a symbol of a so-
called Russian Spring, the annexation of Crimea and aggression in eastern
Ukraine, and now a support for today's war. That's why I'm talking about this
cult of dead, like about the new civil religion. It became a symbol on the
battlefields too. Those young Russian paratroopers I saw, who landed at
Hastormal Airfield a year ago, all wore thick orange and black stripes sewn
along the lengths of their sleeves, hardly effective camouflage. Days later,
pictures emerged of scores of dead Russian soldiers in the outskirts of Kiev all
wearing the same stripes, dead testimonies to a cult of reliving heroic history.
Not long after me, Russia's most celebrated war correspondent, Alexander Kotz,
also reported from Hastormal Airfield. He called it a new site of Russian
military glory. Its occupiers, though of course he didn't use that word, were
worthy successors to Russian warriors who'd fought the Turks in the 19th century
and the Germans in the 20th. By chance I'm an old acquaintance of Kotz. We've
been in contact since we met in 2008, after he reported on the poor state of
preparedness of the Russian military in a war where he was wounded when Russia
invaded its neighbour, Georgia. Kotz reports for the popular daily Kamsa
Moskapravda, which Putin himself says he reads every morning on his way to work.
Kotz's Telegram channel and those of other war bloggers are followed by
millions. And in a very rare interview with the Western media, he told us he
sees himself and his colleagues as more than mere reporters. They're also the
link between rank-and-file soldiers and the country's leaders. Sometimes
messages get passed up through us and we become leaders of public opinion for
certain social groups. People may not trust official statements on TV, but
they'll certainly read war correspondence on Telegram. Kotz says openly that his
aim is to raise Russian morale. And he says he's learnt a lesson about that from
the enemy. Driving through Russia early in the war, he saw no patriotic posters.
Whereas in Ukraine... When we entered towns we liberated that had been under
Ukrainian control, we found every park had a monument to a defender of the
fatherland. Every school had a portrait of a soldier. They had been building up
their ideology, and I have to say they'd done it rather well. So Kotz set out to
create Russian heroes. He wrote, for example, about a young airman called Pyotr
Kashtanov, shot down, along with his navigator, by Ukrainian anti-aircraft guns
over enemy territory. They started to walk towards our lines 30 kilometres away,
but the navigator had a broken spine and he said, just leave me behind. But
Kashtanov replied, we'll get out of this together. I won't leave you. To
Russians, his experience recalled the story turned into an iconic film of a
second world war pilot, Alexei Mariesyev, who was badly injured in both legs
when he was shot down by the Germans and crawled through snowbound forests back
to Russian territory. I was very touched when one man told me he'd read my story
to his child at bedtime and he said stories like that should be taught in
schools in patriotism hour. And yet, despite all the propaganda for the war,
anthropologist Sasha Arkhipov's research suggests most Russians just accept it
rather than actually supporting it. Russian government punish you for any type
of street rallies, protests. So people feel more and more you cannot do
anything. That's what psychologists called enforced helplessness. One of my
informants, she gave me this image that I'm like a leaf in the stream. I'm just
going somewhere and I cannot influence anything that is happening around me.
It's a very popular position now. Okay, it's terrible what is going on. And I
don't like this war and people are dying, but what can I do? Arkhipov says that
enforced helplessness may even lead to enforced patriotism, a feeling of my
country right or wrong, because if there's nothing they can do, opponents of the
war who stay in Russia may accept elements of the Kremlin's truth just to stay
sane. People try to avoid any information which is unpleasant for them. There is
no alternative sources of information inside Russia for many, many, many Russian
people. But even if you have a possibility to read, I don't know, Telegram
channel, maybe you don't want to do it because you are very tired of this
situation. So it's not a brainwashing because people are choosing to believe in
this truth. But for how much longer? BBC Russian service researchers have
corroborated the deaths of more than 14,600 Russian military personnel in
Ukraine over the last year. But the real figure is thought to be at least twice
as high, probably more. So will the ever rising death toll change what Russians
choose to believe once it inevitably becomes public knowledge as happened in the
wars in Afghanistan and Chechnya? Or will it just reinforce the Kremlin's truth
because no one wants to believe that a son, husband or friend died in vain? The
nine years that Pavel, fighter blogger and Shakespeare lover, has spent on the
front line seems only to have strengthened his patriotism. What makes
Shakespeare a great writer is that he is able to look at reality through another
person's eyes. What do you think the war looks like for ordinary Ukrainians?
Look, how can I put myself in the position of people who are trying to kill me
every day? We are on our own land. Let's get out the whip. The words of the
Zsinger Ivan Kondakov in this video full of triumphant images of bullets,
rockets, tanks and guns. There's no wit here. Only crude menace. And it's hard
to remember that the performer is a jovial charismatic man with a PhD in
scientific engineering who used to love visiting London. Now the ugly language
of songs like this is gradually filling more and more public space in Russia,
part of a tide of aggression and hatred that citizens can't insulate themselves
from. But what will Ivan and other turbo patriots do if the war eventually ends
badly for Russia? Even Putin's go-to reporter, Alexander Kotz, is worried about
that. Defeat will really shake the trust of those most loyal to the state and
lead to a revolutionary move. I don't even want to think about it because it
won't be like the uprising in Ukraine in 2014. It will be far bloodier. A coup
or uprising by the nationalist right? It's no longer inconceivable. As Ivan
Kondakov sings, this is the time of Z. And whatever happens in this war, the
stories that have built Russia's parallel world may have changed the country
forever. Just before the Westminster Hour, let's take a look at the weather.
Tonight most of the UK will start dry with widely clear skies, but northern and
central England and eastern parts of Scotland and Wales will see cloud building
later. Eastern England will then have a few spots of rain, a chilly night with
gentle winds. Tomorrow will be rather cloudy, although north-western areas will
have large amounts of winter sunshine, particularly in western Scotland.
England, Wales and the far east of Scotland will see a few light showers
drifting off the North Sea, but elsewhere it will be largely dry. We are making
changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third-party services and
platforms, and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will stop working
by mid-2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing
this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you are listening on web or
mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.