TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-17H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at four o'clock. In the past half an hour
Rishi Sunak has announced he's reached a new deal with the EU on post-Brexit
trading arrangements for Northern Ireland. The agreement was renegotiated
because of concerns about the checks imposed on goods arriving in Northern
Ireland from the rest of the UK. Opposition to those checks led the Democratic
Unionist Party to withdraw from power sharing at Stormont. The DUP has said it
will need to see the revised text before deciding whether or not to back it. The
Prime Minister gave details of the deal at a news conference at Windsor Castle
alongside the European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen. Today's
agreement delivers the smooth flow of trade within the United Kingdom. Goods
destined for Northern Ireland will travel through a new green lane with a
separate red lane for goods at risk of moving onto the EU. It means food
retailers like supermarkets, restaurants and wholesalers will no longer need
hundreds of certificates for every lorry. The new IRA has said it carried out
the shooting of a senior police officer in Oma last week. Detective Chief
Inspector John Caldwell, who's 48, suffered serious injuries when he was
attacked after coaching young footballers while off duty. Six people remain in
custody. The energy regulator Ofgem is lowering the price suppliers can charge
for gas and electricity from April. The price cap will drop by almost Â£1,000.
But typical household energy bills in England, Scotland and Wales are still set
to rise, as government support for soaring bills is scaled back and a rebate
scheme ends. It's feared more than 100 migrants may have died after a boat
carrying people from Afghanistan, Pakistan and Somalia sank off the coast of
Italy yesterday. At least 62 people have been confirmed dead, including 12
children. The former Speaker of the House of Commons, Lady Boothroyd, has died
at the age of 93. Betty Boothroyd was the first woman to hold the role and
became a household name thanks to her no-nonsense management of debates in
Parliament. BBC News. In half an hour, the digital human will be looking at what
effect AI is having on curation in the arts world. As more and more algorithms
choose what content we see, what might this mean for the future of culture?
We'll hear more in 30 minutes. But first, here on Radio 4, we continue our new
theatrical documentary series. Each week, we're hearing stories from actors
across the world who've all played the same part. In today's episode, it's Peter
Pan. This is Roleplay. Here we go, here we are. This is it. So, we are in the
dressing room. We're in the adults' dressing room at St George's Theatre in
Great Yarmouth, and I have just laid out my costume to have a look at. We have
got some lovely Splitsoul jazz shoes that I've been given. They're amazing.
They're great for jumping around. I've got a very nice sort of Robin Hood-esque
hat. With a nice feather in it, sort of green trim on that. And I guess the best
piece that I've got is this pretty amazing vest that I've got here from Norwich
Theatre Royal. And it is kind of embroidered with these amazing leaves all the
way around it. And they're different colours, you know, you've got your reds,
your oranges, your greens, your browns. And it just shows that connection to
nature and this kind of almost wild boy feeling that Peter Pan has. Where do you
live? Second to the right and then straight on till morning. What a funny
address. No, it isn't. You know, there's only one child that can stay young
forever, and that's Peter Pan. Good or bad? One of the thrilling things about
playing Peter Pan is stepping back into one's own childhood. And it's brilliant
for an actor to play because it's all about being in the moment. I think Peter
Pan actually saved my life. Every one of us has a little bit of Peter Pan in us.
I mean, I think I've got quite a lot of it, really. I'm Peter Pan, enemy to
pirates, prince of the seas, king of the skies, the most incredible, unbeatable
and majestical boy in all of Neverland. Neverland? That's where I come from, me
and all the lost boys. Hello, my name's Charlie Randall. I'm playing Peter Pan
at St George's Theatre in Great Yarmouth. I love doing panto. If I could do
pantomime every year for the rest of my life, I probably would. One, two, three!
It's a lot of people's first experience of theatre, especially children, and it
is just magic. When you look out at those tiny little young people who are
watching this show, and they've got this look of awe and happiness on their
face, nothing beats it for me. He's not there, and they're tricking me! He's not
there! I would say the best thing about playing Peter Pan is it is such a well-
known character, and it is such an almost archetypal character. This boy who
never grows up, it is literally all about putting as much energy into it as
possible. But it's quite useful as an actor because you've got stuff to go on
already when you take on the role. There is so many versions of this story that
can really help you. The whole thing is magical, and it's very difficult to put
your finger on why it is such a wonderful experience to play Peter Pan. He's
ageless, he's a boy, but he's not completely. He's on the brink of leaving
childhood, a childhood for all of us, even if we've had very, very unhappy,
difficult childhoods. There are magical things about being a child. My next
guest made her first movie at the age of 12, was signed up by Walt Disney and
became a world star in those dear departed days when child stars wore pigtails
and radiated innocence. Today she's matured into a splendid actress. Ladies and
gentlemen, Hayley Mills. APPLAUSE My name is Hayley Mills, and I played Peter
Pan in 1966 at the New Victoria Cinema in London. After having been under
contract for Walt Disney for six movies, which was a marvellous experience, and
wanting very much to go on the stage, playing Peter Pan really launched me into,
you know, working in the theatre in a wonderful way, and it was very liberating.
And I think it was a really good choice because it was a part that I could
really identify with. You know, James Barry loved children. Children responded
to his marvellous imagination. You just feel very connected to him as well when
you play Peter Pan. Sir James Matthew Barry was the man who wrote Peter Pan. He
was also, by the turn of the century, one of the most prolific, rich and
fashionable of all British dramatists. Peter Pan appears only very briefly in
The White Bird, which was an early novel of Barry's. And then, it's around about
the time that he befriended the Llewelyn Davies family, and they'd play games,
and the idea emerged for Peter Pan, the boy who wouldn't grow up, and then he
went on to write it in a novel form again, Peter Pan and Wendy. But around Barry
the man, there still hangs a kind of mystery. We know that he was unhappily
married, that he was childless, and that in his middle years, he virtually
adopted five young boys. They were the Llewelyn Davies brothers. The boys were,
he claimed, the inspiration for Peter Pan and for much of his other work. My
name's Tristan Thurrock. I played Peter Pan at the Bristol Old Vic in 2012. When
we were doing the show, the Queen came, and then I was asked if I could be in
the dressing room and have a chat with her, and it was bizarre, because I was in
this little tiny room with the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh and some security
guards outside, and then I said, Your Majesty, is it true that J. M. Barrie used
to read to you when you were young? She said, Oh, yes, yes, he used to. He came
down to London, but he also came to Balmoral, and he would read to us. I think I
was about seven at the time, and I said, That's incredible. And I said, What was
he like? And she said, He was an angry little man. SHE LAUGHS And she kind of,
had a kind of a twinkle, but she was, again, her demeanour changed, and she
said, Oh, he was an angry little man. The part of Peter Pan seems to be to
actresses what Hamlet is to actors. They all want to play it, and yet it can't
be an easy role, for not only do they have to portray a boy, but a boy with a
touch of magic, and a boy, moreover, who is so riddled with whimsy that he
confuses kisses with thimbles and thimbles with kisses. The first Peter was Nina
Boussico. She created Peter, and she did it a number of times. You would ask him
what he meant by such-and-such a passage, and he generally gave you a most
quizzical answer, one that you couldn't really reproduce, such as when I asked
him what was Peter Pan, and he told me that he was a bird, and a day old. That
wasn't a very big thing to go on, but, oh, it was so laughable. Jean Forbes
Robertson also played Peter many times. She liked to greet her guests when they
came to see her sitting on the mantelpiece, and she had the mantelpiece extended
and made bigger so it was more like a big shelf. She could sit there. It's such
a wonderful image. Is it true? I don't know. Well, now we've got boys playing
him as well, which, you know, why not? But at the same time, it's not the Peter
Pan that Barry imagined. To play Peter Pan is a recognition, an accolade in
anyone's career, and in any case, what actress could resist a part where her
first entrance is to come flying in through a window? Peter Pan begins with the
Darling family getting ready, the children to go to bed, and the parents to go
out to dinner in the evening for his job. And Nana the dog is watching them, and
there's a sense of foreboding for Mrs. Darling, and she says, Dear nightlight
that protects my sleeping children, burn clear and steadfast tonight. She's a
little bit afraid that something's going to happen. So the children fall asleep,
and Tinkerbell slips through the window. She turns off all the nightlights, and
all of a sudden you hear, dun-dun-dun-dun, the windows open, dun-dun-dun-dun,
and Peter just flies through the air, and the kids go, aah! The flying is
actually one of the most exciting aspects of Peter Pan. It gets me every time,
you know, and I know how it's done. When I did it, to get your wire attached,
you would have to back into the wings and stand looking unconcerned while
someone fiddled around hooking you up, and then you would walk back and you'd
find the right spot, and then a Kirby flying guy would jump off the ladder,
whoop, and up you'd go. The first few times, I was kind of terrified, but like
sort of terrified when you're on a roller coaster and you're like, Oh, my God,
I'm going to die! In our productions, instead of fairy dust, we said, I'm just
going to put my fairy strings on. So you declare it, which is sort of true to
the spirit of what Barry was doing when he first performed those plays. And when
it's declared and so obvious and seen, I think it becomes magical. I think every
child wants to fly, and I'm not quite sure what it is, except that it's just
like they want to go too. I've had some really great moments with children. We
were at our theatre, we've had like the Make-A-Wish Foundation bring children in
to fly, and we had one little girl that was in a wheelchair, and I was in Peter
Pan costume, and she was very sick, you could tell, but she wanted to fly. That
was her wish to fly. So we put her in a harness that goes over your shoulders
and through your legs, and as I look at her, I thought she looked like she was
going to cry, and I thought, Honey, you don't have to do this. I said, Are you
OK? She goes... So I said, Think lovely, wonderful thoughts, and I threw the
fairy dust on her, and she started to ascend very slowly and carefully, and as
she got up and started going from one side to the other of the proscenium hall,
she said, Look at me, Mommy, I'm finally free. My name is Kathy Rigby McCoy, and
I have played Peter Pan over 3,000 times. Peter Pan is about a mythical little
boy who has all the characteristics of any child, but he goes to this magical
place, Neverland, where he can have everything that he wants, and he can fly,
and he can fight the bad guys and always win. He can come and go as he pleases,
and the only thing he doesn't have is the love of a family, friends that
actually stay with him, so he continually uses his imagination to recreate his
life, and he learns to shut down emotionally, but he always has fun. And there's
only one child that can stay young forever, and that's Peter Pan, good or bad. I
competed in gymnastics from the age of 10 till I was 20. I made my first
Olympics in Mexico City at 15. Gymnastics was not a big sport in the United
States at that point, and I think being the first American to place as high as I
did in the 68 Olympics was very unusual, and I was only 15, so there was a story
there, you know. I went on to compete in the Munich Olympics in 1972, and then
at the ripe old age of 19, I retired from the sport and had to figure out what I
wanted to do the rest of my life. The greatest musical adventure of all, 1999
Tony Award nominee... I think Peter Pan actually, after I retired from
gymnastics, saved my life. It was one of those roles that, you know, demands
spontaneity and creativity in a way that I had not experienced in my childhood
because I was very disciplined and very, you know, focused on what I had to do
and not emotional. I first played Peter Pan in 1974 in an arena version of the
show, and the last time I played it, I was 59 years old. I'd worked with Sally
Cookson, the director of Peter Pan at Bristol, on a production of Treasure
Island, and she then approached me and said, Look, we're thinking of doing Peter
Pan, and I immediately thought, Oh, great, Captain Hook. And then she phoned me
back a few days later and said, So, yes, we'd love you to sort of look at Peter.
I was 40 and thinking, Oh, OK. Fantastic. Brilliant. Sally was very interested,
and we were all interested, in the darkness that surrounds somebody who doesn't
grow up. I did the musical Peter Pan always, but I always felt like it was a
play with music, and the more I read the James Berry novels and all the books,
there were so many wonderful moments that I could draw from. And to this day,
one of my favorite quotes from Peter Pan is when Mrs. Darling watches her
daughter in a garden and Wendy picks up a flower and gives it to her mother, and
Mrs. Darling says, Oh, if only they could remain like this forever. And having
watched my children grow up and now have grandchildren, I sometimes think, Oh,
God, if only they could remain like this forever. The key moment for me that I
remember of that production was there's a nightmare scene where he has these
dreams of his life before and that sense of abandonment by his mother, where he
goes away and he comes back and the window is barred. And there's such a deep
sort of tragedy in that. The very core of him is this rejection, and so
therefore he will never grow up. Peter Pan is a real classic tragic hero because
he's cursed by the fact that he can't grow up. And it's brilliant for an actor
to play because on the stage it's all about being in the moment. As a clown, for
instance, you are in a state of innocence where you're continually forgetting
what's gone before and what's in the future. You're literally living in the
present. And that is the state that Peter is consistently in. If anything goes
wrong, it's a gift and that's fantastic and you can use it. And it's a continual
adventure. So there's so many parallels, there's so many things that tie in with
the state of that play for a performer. I just want always to be a little boy
and to have fun. Oh! Now then, no fuss, no blubbering. I hope you will like your
mothers. Are you ready, Tink? Then lead the way. I was an ice skater back in the
day when I was short and flexible. And I was in the Scaniatlas Figure Skating
Club in upstate New York, and the club every year put on a big ice show, and
they needed a very small child who could also do a camel spin, which is the
thing where you sort of make a spiral out of your body and spin. And I was the
smallest kid who could do it, so I got to be Tinkerbell. My name is Allison
Cavey. I'm a professor of history at City University of New York, John Jay
College, and the Graduate Center. And I co-edited Second Star to the Right,
Peter Pan in the Popular Imagination with Les Friedman. My name is Les Friedman.
I'm an emeritus professor and former chair of the Media and Society Program at
Hobart and William Smith Colleges, and was the co-author of this book. When I
come to something quite different, I'm quite sure all of you know the story of
Peter Pan and Wendy very well indeed. Well, Walt Disney has made a cartoon film
of it, which is on general release now. And in the piece that we're going to
show you......it's the voice of Peter Pan in Disney's 1953 version, and that was
perhaps, along with Treasure Island, his most famous role, and ironically, he
wasn't seen. The second star to the right Shines in the night for you Bobby
Driscoll was the voice of Peter Pan in the movie when he was 16 years old, went
through an incredible change that's unfortunately not particularly aberrational
in Hollywood with child stars. By the time he was nine years old, he was a movie
star. But I want to thank everybody that had to do with me getting this award. I
want to thank God for giving me such a wonderful mother and father. Thank you.
He actually won a juvenile Oscar when he was 12 years old. He was the voice of
Peter Pan when he was 16 years old, and he was dead by the time he was 31 years
old, best guessed being as a heroin overdose. So my interest in Bobby Driscoll
is, I think, in his body, as one that was ruined by adolescence for film, and
therefore was deemed unacceptable to put on camera, and then he lost his career
and lost his way as a result. If he could have stayed a child, he probably would
have had a career. But instead he became an adult, a teenager, with an
incredibly bad case of acne that they could not somehow cover enough for him to
be able to make the transition, if he could, into adult roles. Of course, he
turned to the never, never land of heroin, which allowed him to participate in
the real world as opposed to the Hollywood world. The fact that children found
his dead body after he overdosed and died is perhaps the most compelling
narrative arc of a real story I've ever seen, in which a lost boy who became a
lost man was found by children playing in a lost space. Right, this was an
abandoned house where his dead body was found. He was indigent by that point, no
one knew who he was. He was buried in Potters Field, which is the graveyard of
paupers. A person whose body and voice were made immortal by the Disney film,
and whose movements were associated with eternal youth, with eternal lightness,
with a flippancy and joy, then became nothing but a corpse, the leftovers of an
adult person. It reflects for me the very dark potential, or the flip side of
all that lightness and joy. There is this moment in the play when Tinkerbell,
who adores Peter Pan and is with him all the time, and in the play she's
depicted as a light, and the pirates, Captain Hook, tries to poison Peter, and
she drinks it to stop him drinking it. It was poisoned, and you drank it to save
my life. Tink! Dear Tink, are you dying? She goes back to her little house, and
she's lying on her little bed, and her little light is getting smaller and
smaller and smaller. Her light's growing faint. If it goes out, that means she's
dead. Her voice is so low, I can scarcely tell what she's saying. And Peter's
desperate, and he turns to the children in the audience. She says she thinks she
could get well again if children believed in fairies. He says, if you believe in
fairies and you clap your hands, this will give Tinkerbell great strength, and
she will come back to life. Children everywhere say that you believe. If you
believe, clap your hands. So when the clapping starts in the audience, the
applause grows to an absolute roar. And the little light starts to get bigger
and bigger and bigger. Oh, thank you, thank you! Gosh, you know, it's really
emotional, and I think about it now, and I'm feeling quite emotional. I think my
mother told me about Peter Pan when I was younger, and I'm sure as a kid, like,
I had watched the cartoon somewhere, the Disney one. And the concept of this boy
who didn't want to go gold was, I mean, Peter Pan was always quite a big part of
my childhood when I was younger, but then I didn't know the history of it until
I came here to England. It's a dreadful irony that Peter Pan's first audience
included a lot of boys who didn't grow up, because, of course, they were killed
in the First World War, like one of the Llewelyn Davies boys himself. Barry
lived through that, and he must at times have felt in a sense the play had been
prophesying that. Peter Pan was performed every year through the war. The
theatre filled not with children, but with soldiers home from the trenches. The
line, To die will be an awfully big adventure, was left out for the duration.
That really, like, struck a chord, because I was born, like, in 85, and during
that time there was, like, a civil war that was going on in Sri Lanka too. My
name is Hirana Vesekar. I'm from Sri Lanka. I came over to England in 2008. It
was the first time that I was on a plane when I came for auditions. I graduated
from RADA, and then I did Peter Pan at Regent's Park Open Air Theatre in 2015.
And it was awesome. Most of, you know, my childhood, there was always, like,
this major thing happening in the background. And during, like, news broadcasts,
like, after, like, the weather report, it would always end with, like, the body
count, which was, which was, like, such a weird way to grow up, really. But I
related to the lost boys, because there were quite a few of my friends who later
on joined the army as well. And I kind of understood it, you know, how they are
lost. When they get back, there's, like, a sort of vacant look in their eyes. So
the theatre itself is at the heart of Regent's Park. It's surrounded by huge
trees. It's open air. And I think it sits about, like, a thousand people, maybe,
even a little bit more. And around when the sun goes down and the lights come
on, it's, like, the most magical place, really, to, like, do a theatre. Tim
Shida and Liam Steele were the directors, and they focused a lot on World War I.
We had a group of East 15 boys who were the soldiers, and they were there all
throughout the play, in different parts of the play, and sort of set the scene,
really. And at the end of the play, I remember the boys sort of walk into the
sort of sunset, and one of Wendy's brothers walks with them. And that's quite
heartbreaking every time. I mean, it's a... I mean, how many people were lost
during that time, and all these boys who were promised adventure? And they were
kids who hadn't even, like, left the country, and suddenly they were... Can you
imagine? Of course they were lost. To be honest with you, having watched all the
films recently and then coming to do this pantomime, I'd kind of forgotten the
end. I know! Let's take Wendy to the... Because you think of it all ending
happily, because I had remembered that Wendy and her brothers end up back home,
but you kind of forget that Peter Pan is almost left on his own, left back in
Neverland. Yeah, it's kind of quite sad that he's the only one who doesn't
really get to go back with his parents. So that's been quite an interesting
thing to play as well. But bearing in mind it is a pantomime, we're kind of
putting a positive spin on that. Yeah. Good night, Peter. Good night, Wendy.
Peter, you won't forget me, will you? I decided to stop playing Peter Pan
because after 3,000 times, I thought that was a good amount. I would have every
memory I could possibly have of the show. And also, it was me being Wendy,
saying I have to let this part go. At 59, I would meet children after the show
and I found myself kind of going... And I had a little boy who said, I really
like you, you're really good as Peter Pan and I love how you fly and this and
that. And then he came up close and says, but as I get up close, I see you have
wrinkles. And I just thought, leave it to a child to kind of tell you when to
get out. I don't want to lose the sense of humour or the spontaneity. I don't
want to lose Peter Pan, I don't want to lose that part of myself. But I don't
need to play the part to still keep him in my heart. Roll Play was produced by
Sam Grist and Camelia Sinclair. It's a BBC Audio Bristol production for Radio 4.
Next week, we'll hear stories of actors who've all played Vladimir and Estragon
in Waiting for Godot. In a room full of graduates, people without degrees can
sometimes get defensive about it. Not me! Lem Sissay is the one and only. He'll
like an oar. Starting this Friday morning at 11.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds.
Now, Radio 4, the digital human. Today, Alex Kratosky explores how over a decade
of living in an algorithmically curated world has reshaped the process of human
creativity. Algorithms are our new overlords. There, I've said it. They tell us
what to buy, they tell us where to look, and that is not too far from telling us
what to think. And although the most human of creative expression, I'm talking
here about art, has managed to seem separate so far, what we see as good and of
critical value is beginning to succumb to the surprising warmth of the algo's
somatic comfort blanket. In truth, the algo overlords have been influencing the
arts and culture for more than a decade, and it's altered our human connection
to it. And today, on the digital human, we are asking how it has transformed the
behavior of the traditional artistic sense makers, the human curators, and how
it is altering the human creative process itself. You know, just the simple
stuff. Follow along and comment at hashtag digihuman. We open on a curtain.
Fabienne Hess is an artist who works with fabric. Silken is quick and light, and
it is some form of representation of the digital realm in the physical realm. We
are in a white box gallery on the Portobello Road. The room is divided by
Fabienne's ethereal silk curtain, ripples on a wavy guide rail, white base
catches the light, and on each side are printed images. This is actually a
fruitcake that was found in an Egyptian tomb, and this is called paste paper.
Someone gently painted it in these pastel-y colors, a bit of green, a bit of
purple, orange. Strange pictures overlapping, a melee of colors and shapes,
broken things. This is Fabienne's work. The other is the work of an algorithm, a
replicated Instagram feed. And of course there's more faces, more human figures,
more random as well. There are some truly random images over there that I
wouldn't have expected. This fabric we're looking at today is the evolution of
Fabienne's history of her work with the human algorithm boundary. It began in
Edinburgh in 2015 when she found herself in possession of 25,000 images from the
university's archive. The task? To sort them in a meaningful way based on
nothing but what she observed. She began scanning the images with her eyes by
color, by feature, by shape. And then showed them in this book, and this created
this different access to the collection, a non-academic access. But at the same
time, something similar was happening in other collections. It wasn't humans
doing the sorting. At that time, 2015, collections started to put their content
online, and some of them started to use algorithmic seeing to navigate them
already. So the Rijksmuseum had this feature where you could search by color,
for instance. I remember that time. A lot of sites were playing with different
taxonomies or ways of sorting things. Color, genre, era, even interestingness.
It was a way of finding something about the very nature of the image that
perhaps we wouldn't pay attention to and bringing it to the fore. And this was
because we could. For the first time, we had computers with brains big enough to
take lots of data, crunch it by what it pays attention to, and then spit out the
results. As she was lost in the archive, sorting by little details, Fabienne
realized her project was no different. I realized I couldn't delve into the
story of these images. I couldn't look at the details or understand where they
come from, what they meant to other people. It was just surface. I realized I
had become an algorithm. So then I asked myself, well, what is not? Fabienne's
next stages were to push back against what she thought an algorithm would see to
make herself distinct from the machine. And so the theme of loss surfaced. What
would a computer not be able to easily categorize? What could circumvent
traditional algorithmic labeling? Laura Herrmann watched Fabienne's work. Hi,
I'm Laura Herrmann. I'm a DPhil researcher at the Oxford Internet Institute
where I study how AI is impacting creativity. As Laura was devising her PhD
doctoral project, she asked Fabienne to collaborate to unpack how AI curation is
impacting artistic process. I think AI creation is, of course, a very important
conversation happening right now. But I think many people are overlooking the
more insidious and entrenched impacts of algorithmic curation, which is seeping
into almost every platform. Platforms are deciding what we see, where we see it,
how we see it, when we see it. Simply because there is so much content online,
we do need to rely on them to sort through the content for us. When it sorts
through that content and decides what we see, it's taking up the role of a
curator. If it's okay, we can walk over to the iPad because that helps sort of
illustrate it. All right. So when we were trying to instigate the algorithmic
curation, we actually leveraged Instagram as an application to do that. So there
was no extraction of the source codes as it is sort of the protected trade
secret that Instagram relies on. The pair scraped hundreds of thousands of
images from the Metropolitan Museum of Art's open access collection and uploaded
them into a brand new Insta account called the Algorithmic Pedestal, the same
name as the exhibition. That account was followed by one other account, and we
went to the home feed of that one other account and saw which images were
displayed in which order. So it was actually using Instagram as it exists.
Fabienne drew images from the same art collection and she curated the selection
on the other side of the veil. Contrary to an algorithm, I have time, right? And
I have interests and curiosities, so the way I gathered this is literally
spending months and months and months scrolling through the Met archive, just
spending time with it. Everything she chose was centred on the theme of loss,
strange, broken images that she thinks an algorithm would struggle with or gloss
over. You know, look at this handwriting here that someone annotated on this
beautiful red piece of silk. We don't know what was it for, and I just found it
really fascinating, I found it beautiful, I found it touched me, it moved me.
Then here is an error image that I used to encounter a lot. This sort of
beautiful error pattern turns up under an entry of a dish, I think, a fragment
of a dish. This is a... it has hole punchers, the image. Literally things of the
image have been punched away, so there's a loss there, right? Things have been
blocked out of the image by a piece of cardboard, so it talks again also about
this very human way of, like, putting 500,000 images online and all the kind of
little bits that slip through the cracks. Fabian's intention was to draw out the
images that she could use to visually explain what was going on in her head. And
she, as a person, is there in the room, and we can ask her questions about it.
But Instagram's intention? We have to take an educated guess. A course convener
from the RCA, who herself is visually impaired, came in this morning, and she
was using Microsoft's AI app to help her understand what she's seeing. When she
held up the app on the human curated side of the curtain, her app had a lot of
difficulties identifying what was here. Things are not particularly clear or
recognizable. They require a bit more engagement. So you see this image here,
which to me looks a bit like a mix between a human brain and a flower. The app
was identifying it as a leather wallet, and that's certainly not what it is. But
when we go to the other side, the images are much more, I would say, flat. They
have very clear, central focal points, and many of them have a single object
that is somewhat easily recognizable. That same visually impaired visitor, when
she held up her phone to this central image, which I would describe as a grey
and gold vase, it said, probably a gold and silver vase. And if you think about
the algorithm's goals in its curation, we might guess that Instagram is trying
to have us see as many images as quickly as possible in order to up the view
counts on their advertisements. And certainly that would necessitate the
prioritization of images that are quickly consumable, quickly recognizable, and
don't require those couple of beats to interpret them that we saw on Fabienne's
side. Some things make the intention explicitly clear. There are three images
out of the less than 15 images here. Three of them are from tobacco
advertisements from the 1800s. In the bottom right corner here, we have a very
sort of caricatured and very sort of sexualized representation of a female body,
clothed in red, tight-fitting clothes. There's not many of those in the
Metropolitan Museum of Art's collection. And so, of course, the Instagram
algorithm has picked up on the one of those, at least that I saw, that does
exist. Laura isn't just interested in trying to reverse-engineer the algorithm.
My interest stretches a little bit beyond that into the societal and cultural
implications of these algorithms. Where most of the questions seem to lie, in my
view, is how this is impacting audience perception, but also creators'
perception and their creation practices. Human beings used to be the black boxes
that decided what fit and what didn't. But the difference is that we can ask
them to explain themselves. With a machine, not so transparent and not so
flexible. It's so unpredictable. Algorithm can just, in one night, change the
whole pattern of behavior. This is artist Maxim Zhestkov. He uses digital tools
to build impossible worlds. He takes physical data and makes digital sculptures
and architecture using video and homegrown algorithms. And the result is
extraordinary. It's undulating, almost organic things that I dare you to pull
your eyes away from. Maxim used to publish his work when it was done. Instagram
was basically a form of closure, similar to when a physical artist would put on
a glaze and hang the piece on the wall. But one day, his wife suggested he
publish the whole process, the stuff that isn't ready. I said, yes, why not?
Let's give it a try. So he began posting the equivalent of his dailies. People
began to pay attention. And more importantly, algorithms did too. So, boom,
Maxim's work is broadcast across Instagram, not only to the friends and family
and followers he had, but far, far more broadly. The negative side with the
algorithms and social media is people already understand what you should produce
in the future. And when you want to explore and go further, people are not quite
ready for these sometimes radical turns. And they ignore the things which you
create. Suddenly, he was in a feedback loop with hundreds of thousands of
followers who all wanted to tell him what they thought. When you create
something and get a huge amount of feedback, and then when you make something
what you feel quite new and quite deep, but you have no feedback at all, you
can't change in your mind the idea that you're doing something completely wrong.
But as your artistic perspective, you're doing completely right because this is
your lens of experiencing life. And if you remain trapped and tangled in the
feedback loop, in order to succeed, you might end up being the reflection of
what everyone else wants. You can repeat something a couple of times, but
through this repetition I feel that I'm losing my soul, I'm losing my passion
for exploring new territory. You need to explore completely different sides of
art and history and science. And you need to grow. To create something big and
wonderful, to go away, to switch your mental mode to deep work mode rather than
to shallow mode. But escaping the trap? Not as simple as it seems. Algorithms
hate when you spend a couple of days or weeks without any posts at all. You need
days and weeks at least to get something valuable, to dive really deep, find
something and then bring it to people, to share it, to tell that, wow, just look
what I found, it's so interesting. Don't you think so? But after your question,
there will be silence. Because you spent two weeks without the game and your
rank went down. And now you need to start again. So how did we get here?
Algorithms are useful in sorting a mountain of content. And over the last 15
years, user-generated content has exploded. Algos have given us some good
things. Many of us have music recommendation systems to thank for a song that
touched the heart or a book that moved us. But the trend for visual content
seems to have narrowed the world rather than expanded it. It's become all about
grabbing and holding attention quick. Sef Shaheen is an assistant professor of
digital culture at Tilburg University in the Netherlands. And in his time, he
has witnessed a fascinating evolution of algos hacking humans. Stuff you can't
pay attention to, but you can't look away from. Jackson Weaver over at CBC has
coined a term for it. He's called it sludge. Sludge content is basically
different kinds of videos that you would typically find on different kinds of
websites or platforms, bashed together onto the same screen. And so they run
simultaneously. It's gaining popularity on TikTok in particular. The gist is
this. The screen is broken into three segments. In one, you've got a cartoon
clip playing. Family Guy clip seemed to be the most popular choice. In another,
a cooking show. And still another, bright, psychedelic colors fade in and out.
Stuff that's easy enough to keep one eye on, but not complicated enough to need
to give it your full attention. It is hard to concentrate on one thing for a
long period of time. Ooh, look. The color blue. This is not the first time some
form of media has tried to capture our attentions in this way. They were even
doing this in the silent film era. Cinemas showed two flicks at once. You were
told to sit in the middle and pick your favorite side of the room. But what's
happening now that's different is that it's being weaponized by multiple
platforms and its scale. Something that has already been happening on the
internet for a while now is platforms that have allowed the streaming of
multiple videos simultaneously. So for instance, you can watch multiple game
streams from a website like Twitch, a platform like Twitch. And what that does
is if you start getting bored or your mind starts wandering while watching one
of these streams, you just move on to another and another and so forth. And so
sludge content is the latest evolution of this idea. The way it works is that if
your mind wanders from one of these videos, like one video game stream, then you
just move on to watching the animation next to it. And then when you wander away
from there, then you just watch the psychedelic colors or kukri show or whatever
else there is on the same screen. And so you can basically ramble across three
or four different types of videos while staying on the same screen. And that's
kind of the main idea, that it allows for consumers' minds to wander. You can do
all of your mental wandering on the same screen over an extended period of time.
This is the most extreme example that we have found of an algorithm trying to
grab our attention. It seems so inhuman. It dispassionately hacks your lizard
brain, keeping your eyeballs on the screen. The weird thing is, no one knows
where sludge came from or why it exists. It is the mystery at the heart of the
black box. Did the algorithm create this phenomenon or is there another part of
the feedback loop? A human created the first sludge. Was it someone inside
TikTok? Or was it someone who reverse engineered TikTok's recommendations
algorithm and made a sludge vid to feed the TikTok beast? It could be a mix of
both. Sometimes these things start from the users themselves. And then people
behind the platforms, they pick onto it and then they institutionalize it by
making it a part of the algorithm and making it easier for people to do such
things. I mean, think about hashtags, for instance. It was not Twitter as a
platform that created the idea of hashtags as we know it today. It was common
users of Twitter who started adding hashtags to sort of indicate that a tweet
relates to a certain subject or topic and so on. So the idea started with common
users of Twitter and then Twitter became aware of it and then it made the
hashtag a part of its algorithm, made it clickable and things like that. So
similarly here in the case of sludge content, it's quite possible that some
users started doing that and then TikTok realized that this is something that
seems to be working or is able to catch more attention or maintain people's
attention on a specific screen over a longer period of time. And so it made it
easier for people to do it by promoting such content, potentially. Chicken, egg,
whatever, the result is short, shallow and compelling in a mechanistic way. And
the trend is spreading across the different platforms. And that is changing how
we do what we do online. Very few, if any, technologists are evil with a capital
E. Most of them actually start out with a really lovely idea about how they
might use computers to solve a problem with humanity. Originally, Instagram
really was playing the role of democratizing the art world. So many women
artists came to the fore because they could show their work on Instagram and the
audience liked it. And that's what mattered. It wasn't about these elite
curators choosing their work. I think if it really was driven by the audience,
then that's terrific. The problem is that now it's not driven by the audience.
Instagram is changing in 2023 to double the amount of algorithmically chosen
content in people's feeds. So it's no longer about you as an audience member
choosing whose work you want to see. It's about Instagram as a platform deciding
which work you will see, whether you like it or not. That to me is the big sort
of switch that I want to be wary of, driven by platforms like TikTok, where
there's much more limited choice over what you see. And here's one other weird
thing. After a while, the algorithm stops being a machine and it becomes another
person in the room. Even just throughout this interview, I can feel myself
slipping into that language and I try to avoid it, but it is just so natural, I
think, in human nature to personify and anthropomorphize these technologies. I
hear it especially when I speak to younger audiences. For instance, we had a
group of students in here and they talk about the algorithm like it's their pet.
It's something that they've trained. They've trained it about their niche, about
their interests. And that makes it feel more controllable, right? Like a pet is
something that you can train and you can put in its little cage at night. It's
not something that's going to take over your entire sort of way of thinking and
drive your life decisions and your creative output. Please put your pitchforks
down for a second because algorithms are pretty cool. They give humans
superpowers. We have weather reports, new medical treatments, quantum physics.
And so they can also count the milliseconds of how long you look at a thing
online. You know this is true. You leave the screen to grab a coffee while the
app is on a video about cars. And the next thing you know, you are forever
getting car videos. This is the feedback loop and the price that we pay for
something that really is incredible. We have invented machines that know stuff
about us. And yes, how easily we can be reduced into curated categories. We
don't necessarily like thinking that we can be pinned down. But what recent
history has shown us is that we can. And we can based on things that we're not
even aware of. I spoke to my friend. He's a computer programmer and he works in
one of the biggest social networks. And he said, why do we need to ask you what
do you want to see? We're already well aware because of your attention. That's
what we will bring. Not what you think that you like, but what you really like.
It's definitely a battle with what my primordial brain wants to see. But I'm
trying to stop myself from looking at this particular thing. When I create some
environment for my attention, I try to bring the best of the best books, music.
And via my attention, I should teach the feed what I really love. And sometimes
I spend a couple of small fraction of a second looking into this particular
angle of a screen. And then I see only cars. I see only headlights. My feed
became nightmarish about this stuff. Maxim tried to hack back. I started to
intentionally tell that I'm not quite interested in this content. Please don't
show it to me. No, no, no, no, no. And in one hour, I got pretty good curated
feed. And it was wonderful. And I thought that, okay, I just won. And in a
couple of minutes, somehow in my feed, it was something close to a car or
something. It was about kind of industrial design thing where I spent a little
bit more time than I should probably. And in a couple of more steps, I again got
in this car trap. I don't understand. Now, the problem is once we delegate
responsibility to the algos for our decisions, we are beholden to whatever and
however it decides for us. That is what delegation is. And so the stuff we want
to have around us and the people we want to be with can be drowned out by an
algo driven purely by the actions of a millisecond. And that behavioral data
then decides why you see what you see rather than the other way around. I have
some friends who followed me a couple of years ago and they asked why I'm not
posting at all. I'm posting. I'm sharing my work. But algorithms decided that my
work is not quite something what could be interesting for these people and just
hide it from them. The real doomsday scenario is that we are never able to share
our creativity with the people we really want to. 100,000 comments saying, yay,
you're the best, will scratch an itch. But the one question from the friend who
appreciates your deep way of thinking will inspire new directions that you
wouldn't have imagined otherwise. Maybe it's the story about our attention.
Maybe algorithms already understand us better. So, for example, I have a really
bad mood and algorithms already understanding that in this particular mood I
don't want to see anything in black and white. And maybe algorithms are so great
and they are so human-oriented that they are not showing something I'm creating
for other people because they think about their behavior and their mood that
it's not for them at the moment. Maybe I'm too romantic about this thing. But
it's pretty interesting to think how deep they are already and how little we
know about the principles in this black box of attention. We have crossed the
digital Rubicon. More and more and more data is going online. And human curators
cannot parse it in time and with the speed that we have come to expect. But that
does not mean we are obsolete. Laura again. The number one response that we've
gotten is, oh, phew, the human side is so much more aesthetically beautiful,
right? There is still something that humans have to offer. So that's the
automatic reaction. But then people really do spend a lot of time looking at
both sides of the curtain and sort of reflecting on the differences between it.
You can see the algorithm's intent represented in the images that it's chosen,
just as you can see the human's intent in the images that Fabien has chosen. And
that to me is perfectly encapsulated in these visual images in a way that
numbers or papers couldn't capture. And I hope that it's prompted a lot of
people to more critically think about how much they are allowing algorithms to
drive their visual reality. And hopefully people will start seeking out human
curation, do their own curation, and be less passive in consuming what the
algorithm serves them. Computers may be black boxes, but we could shape what's
happening within them going forward. Choose how you want to use the tool in a
way that won't stifle your creative process. And marvel at what we have been
able to do with bits of sand that we have melted down. This has been the Digital
Human. Find out more about what went into this programme by going to our BBC web
page and listen to all of our archive on BBC Sounds. That was the Digital Human.
It was presented by Alex Krodosky. The producer in Glasgow was Elizabeth Ann
Duffy. BBC Sounds. Seven years ago, I was filming at East London Mosque when the
story broke. The three schoolgirls from the area had gone missing. They were
heading to Syria to join the Islamic State group. Breaking news this morning,
three British schoolgirls are reportedly missing. Shamima Begum was the only one
of the girls to emerge from the ashes of the so-called caliphate. I've retraced
her steps from the UK through Turkey and into Syria to find people who knew her
and to investigate the truth of her story. What do you think people think of
you? As a danger, as a risk, as a potential risk. From BBC Radio 4, the Shamima
Begum story, series 2 of I'm Not a Monster. Listen on BBC Sounds.