TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-16H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and what needs to be done to change that. That's Weekend Woman's Hour, this
afternoon from 4. The Irish Prime Minister Leo Veradkam has said there's a
possibility of a deal in the next few days between the EU and the UK about post-
Brexit trade with Northern Ireland. But he says this is by no means guaranteed
and there's still a gap to be closed in the negotiations. Polling stations
across Nigeria are due to be closing in what's the country's most competitive
elections since the end of military rule. The head of the Electoral Commission
has apologised for delays in some areas where voting is likely to continue for
several hours. There are three candidates who are seen as front-runners in the
race to succeed President Mohammed Abbahari. Our correspondent in Nigeria,
Mayeni Jones, is following developments. These elections are happening at a very
tumultuous time for Nigeria, a very difficult time for the country. There's been
an acute cash shortage here since the central bank decided to redesign the
currency at the very last minute. They say it's to curb vote-buying in today's
elections and indeed in a number of places polling units we visited today, they
say it's been one of the few elections where they haven't seen cash being handed
in for votes. A meeting of finance ministers from the world's biggest economies
looks set to end without a closing statement because of differences about the
war in Ukraine. The summit of G20 delegates hosted by India has failed to reach
a consensus on condemning Russia's invasion. Anthony Albanese has become the
first serving Australian Prime Minister to march in the gay and lesbian Mardi
Gras in Sydney, one of the biggest global events of its kind. His rival was
greeted by cheers. In tennis, Andy Murray is one match away from his first ATP
title since 2019. He's playing Daniil Medvedev of Russia in the final of the
Qatar Open. BBC News This is BBC Radio 4. Next autumn, the writer Lucy Catherine
travelled to the High Arctic aboard a sailing ship with 29 other artists
searching for inspiration in the polar landscape. In this drama documentary she
tells the story of that voyage, combining it with a drama about two people
travelling to the end of the world in search of a new beginning. This is Voices
from the End of the World by Lucy Catherine. This is a story of ice and
wilderness and polar bears and merino base layers and cabins and portholes and
turquoise glaciers and climate change and strangers. A story about sublime
beauty. Are you cold? No. You're shivering. Take my blanket. You need it. Feel
the important one. Hold the oars, I'll put it round you. It is also a story
about time and how to cross the boundary between the present and the past. A
story about stories and how they can heal us. Stop saying I'm important. We both
know it's true. I have nothing to offer. We will see. It is the story about a
child, lost for decades, standing in the snow, her hood up against the cold,
with her mittens on strings. I had a feeling before I came here that all grief
collects at the top of the world, where there is space and stillness to hold it.
Lucas. Yes? We are down to our last abatures. They lasted well. This landscape
holds the grief of the world. So of course she is here somewhere. Of course she
is. She is made of grief. I just need a good enough story to find her. Why do
you keep rowing? We have failed. You are just wasting your energy. I was given
orders. I have to get you there and I will. You must see now that this is
pointless. I can't save anyone. There is no magical answer. There is no way out.
We are here at the end. They have just forgotten your powers. They will come
back. They won't. You are tired, that's all. They won't because I never had any
powers in the first place. We will see. Stop saying that. I love you. Stop
saying that too. Never. There is no one left to save. We survived. Maybe there
were others. We keep going for them and because it is the right thing to do. I
have faith. I had faith once. It will come back. It has been too long. Time
means nothing in these matters. Why do you hold onto it? What? The dream, the
story, the belief. You refuse to face reality. It is childish. Hold onto it
because it is beautiful. Without it we really would be lost. I am lost. Which is
why I am with you. To help you until you can find your own way again. I am going
to disappoint you. We will see. How long will we keep going? For as long as it
takes. What if we die before we get there? Then we die trying. My name is Lucy
Catherine. I am a writer of stories. And this is a story about an expedition
into the polar twilight aboard a Barkentine sailing ship. It is also a story
about healing and how far we journey to find it. Across glaciers, through time,
beyond our edges and into our dreams. Three months ago I gave testimony in a
court of law. The culmination of another journey that took me to a precipice. I
told the truth for the child I had been who in another realm was still in
hiding. Afterwards I sent out a message to the other realm to tell her she was
safe now. She could come back and start her life again. She stayed away. I
waited for her to find me at my work desk or my dog walks in the supermarket
checkout queue to cross the worlds between us. But she never came. So now I am
travelling again to another unknown. My bag is packed with survival clothing,
Gatwick, Oslo, Troms√∏, Long Ebyen. The airports get smaller as the landscapes
get larger. I follow the sinking sun to the high Arctic and the frozen
archipelago of Svalbard. Long Ebyen in the Norwegian territory of Svalbard is
the most northerly town on earth. The airport has a huge stuffed polar bear
above the baggage carousel. It is said you can't be born or die here because
there is no maternity hospital and the permafrost means it's impossible to be
buried. Men first came to hunt the whales and then men came to trap Arctic foxes
and seals and bears for their skins and then men came to mine for coal. Now I am
here with a group of 29 artists from around the world. We are all strangers to
each other and we will spend the next two and a half weeks trapped in each
other's company. Tomorrow we will board a small ship and leave the world behind.
Why are we here? What is it we're looking for? I'm here because this is a
lifelong aspiration. Cold and darkness and things that for me are my edges like
to take me to my edges of things. My initial attraction is to get away from
habitation, human habitation. Why am I here? I'm here pursuing my dream. I am a
painter. For me painting is not what I do. Painting is why I live. I know why I
am here but I keep it quiet. I am on a mission to hear a voice. I don't know
whose voice it is. Is it a human voice or that of the dying ice? The abused
child or the abused earth? I had a dream that it was the song of the world I
would hear. Before I left I went to see a singing teacher called Sarah. I don't
know why. I think I thought if I can't hear my own voice how can I possibly hear
anyone else's? It's trusting the voice. I don't think trauma affects people's
ability to sing per se but it does affect people's ability to put their voice
out there. So I've worked with people who literally sound like they're
swallowing their voice back in and I don't know how it is with you but people
might have a lovely tuneful voice but the minute that they hear that voice
exposed then they want to bring it back inside themselves. In the morning we see
the boat for the first time. She looks like a vessel from another century. Her
three masks so tall against the grey sky it feels like she might topple over. We
lower our bags down the steep stairs to our cabins. They are small, shared and
basic. My new cabin mate is called Yuki. We will be in cabin eight. We divide up
the shelf space next to the sink between us and joke about how it could be a
prison cell. We gather on deck to listen to the safety announcement from the
captain. We must do what we are asked at all times by the crew. Our lives may
depend on it. Only the captain and the guides are licensed to carry rifles when
we make a landing and we must always be accompanied by one of them. There are
more polar bears in Svalbard than people. If they are startled they can attack.
We watch the journey begin as our boat sets off into the darkening afternoon.
The town disappears quickly followed by the isolated huts dotted along the banks
of the fjord and lastly as the early night sets in and we enter true wilderness.
We signal on all our devices. I'll jump out and hold her steady. Go a bit deep.
You want to go over your boot? I'll jump out and we can pull her out of the
beach. Oh this place looks torn apart. So Maire the rocks are debris from a
retreating glacier. What now? Follow the compass. North? You told us. I heard a
lot of words in those days. You did. That was before the world ended. It didn't
end completely. We are still here, we are still alive. I don't feel alive.
Nevertheless. And what will I do when I get there? You will know. What if I
don't know? So much misplaced trust. You are a lost cause too. You want my
life's work. Oh that's depressing. I could only apologise. No need, it's turned
out well. It's turned out well, seriously. You've given my life meaning. By
being a failure. And only you see yourself as that, no one else. I thought I was
the important one. You're trying to start an argument to distract yourself from
the mission. Am I? Yes. How irritatingly perceptive. I won't be drawn. So I see.
A mountain ahead is north, that will be our route. I just want to sleep. Snow is
coming in. And with it will be dangerous. It's not safe to sleep yet. Please
Lucas. No, keep going. It's late morning, but the sun still sits on the horizon.
We have travelled far through the night. Our first landing is in a bay floating
with glacial ice. There is no breeze. We climb out of the Zodiac inflatable boat
onto a black beach, ungainly and stiff in all our layers, and then crunch in our
heavy boots, up a hill of pristine white snow. Beyond is a view of a black lake.
In the ghostly light of the low sun, pink mist hangs in a valley between two
mountains. It blurs the boundary of land and sky. Maybe of this world and the
next. I cannot speak. Some of the group whisper as if in a cathedral. What we
are seeing is a weight that can be felt in the body. The silence bears down on
us. I feel tears rising up to meet it in response. I don't know why. Others
cannot bear the heaviness and start whooping and laughing. I understand. They
need the release. It is so exquisite and unknowable. It hurts. When I'm back on
board ship, I go up to the wheelhouse to talk to the captain, a very tall
Dutchman called Jonathan. There is just a silence here that you don't find
anywhere else. The wideness of it is like meditation. You don't have to meditate
here. The place is meditating you. It's such an overwhelming place. Sometimes it
feels in a way like a purgatory. It's like we're not even here. It's like you're
not in a real world also. That feels such an overwhelming feeling sometimes,
especially when I go to land and take a moment and you're just here. This peace
and quietness and brute force of nature where you can still feel small as a
human. On our third day, the boat glides slowly along the length of an enormous
glacier as large pieces of ice float past us. It pops as it melts, a constant
backdrop. When the glacier carves, it booms and growls off the mountains and the
sea floor. And then the turns and the gilemots arrive and a wave rolls out. The
glacier ice is blue and green with dark cracks and seams. The light changes it
from moment to moment. On deck, I talk to a theatre maker called Alice. We speak
in whispers under the huge sky. This is a liminal space without time. If there
is a God, then surely this is where he or she or it resides. I tell Alice I have
an idea that there is a healing song of the world out in the snowy distance
where no human has ever walked. That this world is a portal to the other place,
whatever that is. She sings me a Hebridean morning song. She learnt it on a
protest at a G7 summit. It's beautiful. I tell her I don't sing. I've never
sung. I don't know how to. It doesn't matter what you sound like, she says. The
important thing is just to have a voice. How long have we been walking? I don't
know. Is it day or night? We're going to the beach. Is it day or night? I don't
know. I can't distinguish the edges of anything anymore. Land, sky, day, night.
It's become one. I need to rest. A little further. It isn't safe. You have to
push through this. I can't. You can. Why won't you listen to me? Because this
person talking to me is not you. What does that mean? The real you has hope and
energy and fire. Does she? Don't you remember her? Don't you miss her?
Sometimes. That's the real you. She's dead. Okay. I'll make a deal with you. We
find a place to shelter for a few hours if... If what? You try and be more
positive. I'm not taking me seriously, are you? I'm sorry. Don't be hard on
yourself. You've been given an impossible hand. Find a cave in the ice. Thank
you. Just for a while. Just for a while. I'm not giving up on you. I'm never
giving up on you. There is no need to keep reminding me. I think there is. When
we aren't sailing, the boat anchor holds us through the night. The crew let out
more chain when we start to drift. The sound of it clanking creeps into my
dreams. How long can we survive without phones or internet? What if the world
ends while we're away? Now we just download in our sleep icebergs and stars and
the strange ethereal light. This is what connected really means and it's
overwhelming. Everyone is sleeping more than usual to process the meaning of the
landscape. My watch stops working in the cold. Each morning we make a landing. I
cannot assimilate the landscape into my head or heart. I feel disturbed by it
and stripped of my defenses. On our ship we eat too much to subdue the anxiety.
There is performative eco-grief and flirtations and whiskey and oversharing. But
the anxiety still rises. We are truly at sea now. Our bearings lost. Time is
becoming meaningless. I lie on my bunk and listen to the engine in the water. I
wonder why am I here? Are you asleep? No. What are you thinking about? The
mission. Deep down you know it's out there. The song of the world. Right. Just
have to find it. Maybe I was wrong. Has that ever occurred to you? You have no
critical faculty. It's not your job to worry about that. If I can't trust your
critical faculty then perhaps it should be my job to worry about it. We are
going to return with the healing song of the world. It will change everything.
How will you even know when you found it? Will there be a choir of heavenly
angels and a blinding light? Or will it sound more like elevator music? Because
you'll know. And there lies the problem. Anna, sit up. What? Look at me. Why is
it now? Surely you can feel it. Feel what? That we're close. This place is
mystical and alive. It wants us here. It wants us to find the way. It wants us
to heal. No, Lucas. This place doesn't care if we live or die. My bloody hell
would it? You're braver than this. You think having faith is brave? Of course it
is. You have to be humble. You have to be open. You took me that. That was then.
I'm a grown up now and I can look at reality. Your problem is you can't face the
darkness. You're a coward. But I know you can transform the darkness. I can't,
Lucas. I can't. Please, stop it. Stop what? Believing in me. No. Then leave me
alone so I can come back to sleep. I'll take turns keeping watch. The bears are
starving just like us. No, no, we're here by now. Are you trucking us? Can you
go first? Wake me up if you get eaten. I'd sacrifice myself for you, Anna. I
don't want to hear it. I know. But I'm going to keep on saying it. How long have
we been here now? I don't know. I asked what day it is and everyone has a
different answer. The wind comes in blasts, from stillness to an icy roar. The
cloud hangs low, as dark as charcoal. The ropes whip and clang. The light at the
top of the mast shines brightly at midday. The sun is leaving us. The top only
just breaking the horizon each day, like a sliver of molten gold. We make a
landing. The Finnish guide, who looks like a Viking and speaks little, walks
ahead of us in a dirty coat. A rifle loosely hung over one shoulder. The bears
are in the mountains, living alone in the frozen wilds. What do they think
about? We will never know. We are not meant to be here. We were not invited. The
edge is near. The edge of the known. The edge of sanity. This place is dangerous
and I'm worried. I asked the Finnish guide if bears can swim. He tells me they
swim silently and you cannot see them at night. A fish kisses the surface and
sends out a circle of light in the mirrored water. On a rock are the bleach-
white bones of a reindeer. In the dark evenings we pack onto the saloon benches
and give presentations of our work. Bea, the musician, plays a double flute from
Slovakia. It sounds like loneliness and stars and the Arctic wind. Wait! What is
it? Come back here. What can you see? There's something under the snow. Let's
have a look. It's mermaid. A plane wreck? No. Metal and plastic. It's big. Looks
like the remains of a geodesic dome. There are shapes in the snow all around us.
Buildings. There must have been a settlement. Over 100 years ago, surely. I
can't believe it's still here. What were the domes for? Satellites? Meteorology?
Maybe. A research station of some kind. Who knows? I will never know. History
isn't going to survive. We'll see. How can you look at this and be an optimist?
Why not? All those dreams and plans. All that work. All that failure. It's all
now in ruins and forgotten. I moved that they tried. Bear tracks too, look.
We'll know we're here. I wish we had a rifle or even a flare gun. We just need
to keep moving. But if it's tracking us, there's nothing we can do. Sooner or
later, we'll make it so we'll know. The land will show us the way. I'm scared,
Lucas. I know. Aren't you? A little. You have the bears. Worse than that. What's
scarier than being killed by a bear? I've lost you forever. Today is the last
day of sun before the darkness. It will not rise again until spring. I've run
out of clean sops, and the craving for silence and solitude away from the ship
is growing at the same rate as my fear of polar bears. I'm aware the two are
diametrically opposed. I seem to be telling people things about myself I
shouldn't. Personal things. And then I feel weird. I take more sickness tablets.
I think I might have COVID. Everyone seems to have it now. They cough over their
giant breakfasts. It's not possible to isolate. This is a plague ship. I'm aware
I'm getting bad-tempered. At night, I stonily tell myself, I must not waste this
opportunity. I must find meaning here. I must write something beautiful. I must
find a way to sing. I think of the courtroom, and the trauma, and the child I
was. And I feel cold, and a long way away from home. I am in the most majestic
place on Earth, where I can feel myself closing down. In the wheelhouse, the
captain tells me how the navigation equipment and the radio works. I file it
away in my brain in case of emergency. On the wall are photos of us all. I
presume so the crew know who to go looking for if the headcount is down one at
breakfast. What does he think about us being here? In the summer, so busy.
There's now 70 ships operating in the area, a lot of them are very big also. You
have expedition-style cruise ships made for like 100 people, 200 people. This
summer it was crazy, like getting out of hand. It was double because after
COVID, all the ships couldn't sail for two years, and everybody wanted to make
money. This is a place where you can make money fast. Sailing. So a lot of
yachts came that never sailed here before, because then you're waiting in line
for a polar bear. With three ships, and then they go with the 20 Zodiacs, and
then they're close to the bear chasing it away. And then the next ship is in
line, and we're like, this has nothing to do with wilderness anymore. It feels
like a wild park, you know. I'm Eleanor Goldstein, and I'm 87 years old. I seek
out the oldest and wisest person on board. I'm really impressed by how you've
managed to find a kind of positivity, because I feel the last few days, it just
felt like we shouldn't be here. Oh, I feel that too. Oh, yes, absolutely. I feel
like a spoiled brat here, you know, among those that are allowed to break the
rules. Why? Because we could afford the trip. Yeah, there's no question that
we're taking advantage of nature here. The sun has left us now for the winter,
but the skies are still strange and glowing. The dark grey, silvers and blues
are luminous. We are beginning to forget what civilisation feels like. We make a
landing at a tiny research station, and are excited to see other human beings
again. We are not allowed to speak to them, because we are carrying the plague.
They are doing important jobs and can't be replaced if we kill them off. I don't
feel like we are doing important jobs in comparison. We walk around the
settlement. There is a telegraph office used by Amundsen. It has been rebuilt
and moved and turned into a museum. A few scientists we see wear Hivy's jackets
with rifles across their backs. They don't smile. Maybe because our small group
doubles the population. Maybe because they like being alone. And we are very
noisy. They open a gift shop for us, though. Key rings, sweaters, fridge
magnets, coasters and children's toys made in China. They only take credit
cards. Everyone dutifully files in and spends their money after calculating the
prices into US dollars. I know we are tourists here. I also know I am being
judgemental when I have no right to be. But I can't help myself. It all feels
wrong. I wonder how many years she has been here. Since long before we were
born. Look at the rust. Abandoned in this lonely place. Maybe she was iced in
and her hole got damaged. Maybe she was wrecked in a storm. Two of her three
masters snapped. She was a sailing ship? Looks like it. Is she safe to go
aboard? The ice is holding her fast. She's not going anywhere. I want to see
where they left the ice. There might be human remains. After all this time. The
cold preserves everything. It's a ghost ship. The wheelhouse is still intact. We
should have a look. Maybe the captain kept a log. What a mess. The instruments
are smashed. Compass, radar. And the radio. Looks deliberate. Someone went mad.
Maybe. Look at the old photographs on the wall. Who are they all? The crew? Too
many of them. What were they doing here? Perhaps they were on a pilgrimage like
us. What happened to them? Tried to trek to safety and died. Exposure. Hunger.
Bears. Broken hearts. I doubt they lasted a winter. Let's look below. It's been
ransacked. They're just looking for food. They've destroyed the place. There's
nothing left here that's useful to us. There's a bar. What? There's a bowl of
whisky in here. It's too old to drink. Let's find out. They're so gay. What's
leave now? I think we should stay here for the night. That's not a good idea.
There's a stove. We can burn some of the broken furniture and warm up. We can't
get drunk. Why not? We could sabotage the whole mission. We're going to die
soon, Lucas. We both know that. Let's have one last night of denial. Will it
help you to continue? Let's get warm and drunk and find out. After our trip to
the gift shop at the end of the world, some people get emotional about dying
glaciers and the personal growth they are experiencing. One person says they
feel like Mother Earth has invited them home. They meditated on whether to fly
here or not and decided they had permission. Someone else says they feel they
can help change the world with their art. It will offset their carbon footprint.
Another says they are spiritually connected to the ice and if a polar bear wants
to eat them, they will willingly give their body. I get very irritated. My words
don't go down very well. Apparently I am not choosing love and positivity. I
return to my cabin and think about this. I conclude they are right. I am not. I
am choosing the darkness. The darkness is here with us now. We should be paying
it some respect and looking it in the face. I remember my therapist telling me
years ago that the words should and shouldn't are not helpful in the context of
healing trauma. I take more sickness tablets and think my therapist can go to
hell along with everyone else. If you are five months, six months on a ship, I
have done those kind of seasons in the past and you are really just going crazy.
I remember going sometimes to the toilet just to be alone for a bit. Just
sitting there. And they are not very big for the toilet. Just to have some me
time. And you get sometimes annoyed with everybody. This is the last of the
wood. Past the whiskey. When the fire goes out, we start walking again. What was
I like back then? Before the end? Yeah. You don't remember? I don't have many
memories. You were a visionary. You were full of ideas and passion and energy.
You gave us hope. So many of us. Thousands of us. Yeah, I couldn't save anyone.
You saved me. One person. That makes me a failure. Not to me. What was the point
of it all? This is all we've got. This life. This world. We have to fight for it
until the last moment. I'm only keeping going because of you, Lucas. When we get
there, you'll find your own reason to keep going. Will I? You'll have faith
again. Shall we finish the whiskey and kiss? I can't see how one kiss is going
to hurt. Come over here then. We haven't done this in a long time. Hmm. I'm not
sure I remember how. We'll figure it out. Do you hear that? What? There's a
noise from below us. There's music. I can't hear anything. The cabins are below
us, right? What's left of them? Someone is down there. No-one's down there.
Shall we kiss again? Maybe later. I have to check. OK. Will you come with me?
Yeah, of course I will. Too dark to see much down here. Can you still hear it?
Maybe it's just the wind against the metal of the hole. The cabins are all
empty. What about this one? Number eight? It's locked from the inside. How can
that be? There's only one explanation. Someone's in there. And they've been dead
for a long time. Break it open. Is this something you want to see? Ugh, break it
open. Why is it so bright? Moonlight coming through the porthole. Someone's
lying on the bunk. It's a woman. She's dead. She doesn't look it. It's just the
cold. It's preserved her body. She's holding a notebook. What's in it? She was
writing a story. What about? A child lost in the snow. What's wrong? I don't
know. There are. There's too many ghosts in here. I don't like it. I wish I had
no stop walking. The sadness is too much to bear. Just get me away from here. I
never want to come back. Take my hand. We're leaving now. In the days that
follow, the grief that mutated into anger now mutates into depression. I get up
last so as not to speak to people at breakfast. My chronic migraines return. I'm
disappointed in myself and in my inability to feel joy or to be brave or to
sing. I think I hate artists and Americans and maybe all of humanity and most
definitely myself. People ask me what I'm going to write about. I tell them they
don't want to know. After dinner, I discovered Daryl, the quiet poet from
Alaska, has noticed some of the questions I've been asking the guides. This
one's for Lucy. UK Lucy. It's called, Can the polar bears enter the town? The
answer is, yes. Can the polar bears enter the town? The answer is yes. Can the
polar bears swim to the zodiac? The answer is, yes. Can the polar bears climb
into the zodiac? The answer is, yes. Can the polar bears claws puncture the
Kodiak? The answer is yes. polar bears ransacked the kitchen the answer is yes.
Might the polar bears theoretically be watching us now? The answer is yes. Do
the polar bears ever enter a boat, a house, a car, a bedroom, a dream? The
answer is yes. Slow down! We have to get to the top. I can't do it. I can't push
this, this is the way! It's so good. What can I do? How can I help you? There
are voices. What? Ghosts. Can't you hear them? No. Oh God, so cold. We'll be
less exposed on the other side. We have to keep going. Can't you hear the
voices? No. What are they saying? I agree. Well don't listen to them. Your mind
is playing tricks. They aren't real. They are real. I have to listen to them.
Why? They won't let me pass until I listen. Well what do they want? They want me
to die. No, why would they want that? Because it's all my fault. I destroyed
everything. You're just broken. We are going to fix you. That's why we're here.
Then the world will be healed. I can't be fixed Lucas. It is too late. The
voices are telling me the truth. Where are they coming from? Off the mountain.
They're all around. Right. Go away you bastards! Leave her alone! It's so good.
I'm not going to let them do this to you. I have to get away. We'll fight them
together. No, it's too late. Anna, where are you going? Come back! It's not
safe! I tell Yuki, my cabin mate, I came here wanting to face the existential
void to heal my soul. But found there is no void. I'm too full of cake and hot
dogs and lamb shank and Norwegian cheese and duty free single malt. I lie on my
bunk because I feel queasy. Queasy with consumption. On the first day, I cried
at the landscape. Now we all take photos. The dark and cold cloaks us as we
search for safe anchorage from the winds. I dream we are a ship of rats trapped
together. All our food stored in the hole beneath our feet. We are eating down
into it. When I wake up, I see Piet, the chef, opening up the floor in the
corridor to drag out more carbs from the hold. He spends a lot of time hunched
against the cold outside the kitchen, smoking roll-ups and looking surly. I ask
him what will happen when all the food is gone? Will we start eating each other?
He ignores me. He never speaks. I get the impression he despises us all and is
trying to feed us to death. I rather respect him for it. Anna! Anna! Where are
you? Shit. Anna! Lucas! Anna! Thank God. Get down, get down. Hide with me. What?
Look, look, look. Out there on the ridge, can you see him? Yeah. He's sniffing
me hair. He can smell us. He's big. How long has he been there? I don't know. I
don't know how long I've been here. I've been looking for you for hours. Sorry.
I had to get away from the voices. Have they gone? They stayed until the bear
arrived. The bear scared them off. I don't know. Maybe. Well, he hasn't attacked
you. No. He's starving and he knows where you are. You trust him? I'm just
keeping an open mind. I'm not saying we should take any stupid risks. Okay. I'm
glad you're, you know... You scared me there. I thought... What? You were gonna
listen to the voices. Do what they said. I thought about it. But you didn't.
Something stopped me. What was that? I'm not sure. A feeling. What kind of
feeling? I don't know. I suppose... I want to see how this ends. I want to see
if you're right. About what? About... the boys out there. About me. That sounds
to me like hope. Does it? Don't you think? Yeah, let's not jinx it. All right.
Where's the bear gone? I think he's gone over the ridge. The same direction
we're going? You want us to follow the bear? Don't be stupid. We have no choice.
We have to go north. Why does this journey have to be so frightening? It's not
much of a journey if it's not. Where did you learn that bit of wisdom? I have a
guess. I never said that. Yep, you did back in the day. Ugh, I was intolerable.
Inspirational. You know it. Come on, let's go. Tell me something. What? What is
the song of the world supposed to do? Heal us. And it will just come out of the
land? When we have found the place, we have to call for it. Invite it to meet
us. How? By singing. I can't sing. We'll see. Stop saying that. Everyone can
sing. You haven't heard me. I'm looking forward to it. I dream of my mother
again and again. Maybe they are fever dreams from the virus. Maybe her spirit is
here somewhere, calling me through the darkness. I miss her. I wish she wasn't
dead. It gets darker still. I begin to feel like we are fat and seals in our
layers. Base layers and mid layers and outer layers. We need armed guards on
every excursion to protect us from nature. We are told the bears don't actually
want to kill us. I wonder why not. Khaki, the filmmaker from Hong Kong, drinks
gin with glacial ice she's dragged on deck. She speaks English with a Cockney
accent and has not taken her hat off for 12 days. At Aoyuki, I want someone to
come and club us all to death, and we laugh for too long, slightly hysterically.
Eleanor sits in the hut on deck and creates ominous charcoal drawings of
icebergs and storms in her sketchbook. Did you come here searching for
something? If so, do you think you found it? Well, never find what I search for.
I'll find pieces of it, but not the whole of it. I'm not even sure I know, and
besides the call and necessity to stand witness to such magnificence why I'm
here, except as I follow things that are, well, let's put it, gruntly, dying, I
also find the things that keep me alive. So there's a combination of sadness and
joy here. I'd say that's a perfect explanation of what it is. It is a joyous
beauty beyond belief with a group of compatriots who I've never met before, fun
as hell, some I understand, some not quite, and then always, always the dark
beauty of the night, which is the Arctic in winter. On our final day, we have
one last landing. It is a silent walk through a quiet valley. Spaced out
mentally and physically, we all lie down in the snow without saying a word. We
sink into the top of the world. Cold seeps up from the permafrost through my
layers of clothing and into my body. I let it. I have given up. I think how easy
it would be to decide to die. When we finally pull ourselves up to sitting, we
see reindeer arrive silently. Two males clash antlers. The sound bounces off the
mountains. They're not afraid of us. They walk within a few meters and stop.
Their muzzles are large and white and soft. I can hear them sniffing the air as
they look at us, the vapor cloud of their breath, the only thing moving in the
universe. Watch your footing. It's slippery. Is it getting darker or lighter? I
can't tell. Neither can I. The light's changing from moment to moment. So misty.
It's hard to know where we're going. Don't go too far ahead. I'll lose you. Is
it this way? Let's stop and check the compass. Well? It's not working. What do
you mean? It won't settle. The pin is spinning. Is it broken? I think we're
close to the magnetic pole. We can't be. Much further west. The magnetic pole
has moved then. It's always moving. This far? That's impossible. Then we've
crossed over. Crossed over where? Two worlds. A portal between the two at the
top of the world. That's right, isn't it? We're in the other realm. You've been
here before. It's too long ago to remember. We'll come back to you. I can't
believe it. This is a good sign. When did we cross over? Maybe it happened
slowly. Over miles. The light is different though, isn't it? Perhaps. I can't
tell. I think it is. We have to keep moving or we'll freeze. Forget the compass.
We'll just walk. All right. Are you feeling okay? I don't know what I'm feeling.
Me neither. Whatever happens next. I'm glad I came here with you. You too. Thank
you. What for? For believing enough for both of us. The anger is gone and the
tears return. I wonder if my mother is here too. I wonder if I could have spoken
in court if she'd been alive. I feel shame and guilt from what I've done to the
world she carefully constructed. For the artifice I've destroyed. I wonder if
she's hurt. I wonder if she blames me. I feel grief for the life she wanted and
never had. I wish she'd been happy. I wish she'd shown me how to be happy too.
It's steeper than it looks. If you get down here there's a plateau ahead. Look!
It's stunning. It really is. It's like a huge flat cloud as far as the eye can
see. Wait for me Lucas. Is it land or ice? Cloud. I can't tell. It doesn't look
real. We're in a dream. Lucas! I'm here. I'm here. You're okay. My leg. And
every knee. It's bad. You'll be okay. It's broken. I'll tie it up. It's an open
fracture. I can feel the bone through the skin. I'll carry you. Where to? I
don't know. You have to continue. I need you. No, you don't. I'm not leaving
you. That plateau is just ahead. I'm sure that's where you'll find what you're
looking for. I'm not looking for anything. There's a reason you're here. You're
the key to everything. I want to know. Because when your heart is open, it's
more powerful than anything else. You just have to trust it. You have to go
alone now. No, you're wrong. I'm not. I'm not the only one who knows it. No.
We've run out of time. He came here with us. He came to the other realm. We
followed him here. He showed us the way. Now we have to give him what he needs.
He's starving. He needs to survive too. Just like you do. I'm here. You're the
important one. I'm just a gut. I'm not. I'm not. I'm not. I'm not. You're the
important one. I'm just a gut. You're the muse, Anna. Without you, nothing will
be saved. Without you, the world is lost. Far away, I say. A hundred meters. Get
out of here. I'm not leaving you to be eaten by a bear, Lucas. I can't. It's
time to let me go. The bear knows it too. That's why he's coming for me. This is
your land and his. I'm not needed here. You're the one who does the trick. Half
or away? He knows you're strong enough to do this alone. And he knows you have
to. I love you. Promise me. You'll keep going until the very end. Promise me. I
promise you. I love you too. Now run. No, no. Lucas, no! It is the last night
aboard. There is a big party. Dancing and drinking and declarations of love. I
have forgiven everyone and hugged them. I think they have forgiven me. We have
been through something together and we don't know what it is yet. We don't know
how we will explain it when we get back to the world of cities and cars and
Twitter and daylight. In the early hours I lie on my bunk as the boat rocks me
from side to side in the darkness. I remember what my singing teacher said.
Singing is really trusting your voice. And trusting the world to hear it. I
close my eyes. I see a house from long ago. A house that never was. Hello? What
is this place? A house from a childhood dream whirled into existence to stop
time. To keep it safe from the horror, she brought the dream house here to the
end of the world. And then she moved in and closed the door for all eternity. It
stands here still, alone on a platter of snow and ice and cloud, beyond the
compass and the sunsets and the northern lights, beyond the land of the living.
A red brick new build from the 1980s, a perfect lawn, tulips in the flower beds,
flowery curtains. Inside she sits upright on the sofa, still in her coat,
mittens on strings, hood up, still vigilant. A Christmas tree, a gas fire with
all bars burning, sending out an orange glow. It's silent. She doesn't move or
speak. She is surrounded by her pets, a pack of large black dogs. Hello? Is
there anybody in there? Three months before I came here to the High Arctic, I
gave testimony in a court of law. I spoke for two days about the years of
childhood abuse I'd endured. I thought it would be impossible. I remember in the
witness room before I was called, I rot back and forth on my chair to stop
myself running away. I remember the woman from victim support giving me a
tonic's tea cake because she thought I needed the sugar. I remember being walked
to courtroom one thinking, this is going to kill me, and then zoning out. I had
to hit my chest to make myself return. At first I couldn't speak at all. I had
no voice, and then so Lee arrived. I hadn't heard it before. It was alien to me
and strange. For two days I told the truth, not expecting to be believed. I told
the truth so I could grow up. I told the truth for the child I was who was in
hiding at the end of the world. Later a jury of ordinary people convicted him on
all charges. That was the day I stopped being an outsider, the day the world
opened a door for me and invited me in. Now I'm going to walk through that door.
Hello. Who are you? What are you doing here? I'm not going to hurt you, I
promise. Why are you here all alone? Why don't you look at me? What is it you
want? It turns out the song of the world is not elevator music or a choir of
angels. It is just the voice of a vulnerable child wanting to be safe. I'm going
to sing for you. And then you're going to sing back, okay? Please stop your dog
scrowling at me. Take my hand, little one. She takes it. Yes, you. You're safe
now. The world is going to be born anew. We're going to start our lives again.
You can even bring the dogs. Do you trust me? Yes. Yes. Then I'll take you home.
And I do. Voices From The End Of The World was written by Lucy Catherine and the
director was Sashi Evtechenko. This service is available to stream on BBC
Sounds.