TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-13H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 to moneybox at bbc.co.uk, include your phone number if you can and listen today
at three o'clock. BBC News at midday. The Home Secretary, Swela Braverman, has
insisted that her new asylum plans are legal and will see the number of small
boats crossing the channel fall dramatically. Under the proposals, anyone found
to have entered the country illegally will be removed from the UK within 28 days
and blocked from returning in the future. The UN's refugee agency said it would,
in effect, create an asylum ban. Ms Braverman said up to 80,000 people could
arrive by illegal routes this year and the steps she was taking were bold and
forward-leaning. They will ensure that people who come here illegally, who jump
the queue, who break our laws in doing so, won't have a right to settlement in
the United Kingdom and it will enable, in fact, impose a duty on the Secretary
of State to remove people who fall under our scheme. These are necessary and
compassionate measures that we need to take to stop the boats. Swela Braverman
has also said she's very disappointed by the comments by the BBC presenter Gary
Lineker after he tweeted that the plan to tackle the small boat crossings was an
immeasurably cruel policy. The Home Secretary invited the Match of the Day host
to visit England's ports, saying he should see what communities are feeling
about the issue. The BBC says it will have a frank conversation with the
presenter about his use of social media. The UN Secretary-General Ant√≥nio
Guterres is in Kiev for talks with President Zelensky about how to extend a deal
allowing the export of Ukrainian grain via the Black Sea. The United Nations and
Turkey brokered the agreement with Russia last year, but it's due to expire in
10 days' time. Ukraine has denied involvement in last year's sabotage attacks on
the Nord Stream pipelines, which brings gas from Russia to Europe. The New York
Times has suggested a pro-Ukrainian group was responsible for the attacks.
Investigators in Germany have revealed they searched a ship seven weeks ago
suspected of transporting the explosives used in the incident. German
prosecutors say they're still investigating the identities of the perpetrators.
Speaking as he arrived at an EU meeting in Stockholm, Ukraine's Defence Minister
Olexy Reznikov said his government had nothing to do with the sabotage. For me
it's a little bit strange story because this story is nothing with us and I
think that investigation of official authorities will describe every detail.
It's like a compliment for our special forces but this is not our activity.
Large numbers of public sector and transport workers are on strike in Greece as
anger continues over last week's train crash which killed 57 people. Police say
more than 50,000 people have taken to the streets in protest. Our Europe
regional editor Danny Abrahad reports. Greece's worst ever train disaster has
catalyzed a sense of anger over years of underinvestment and systemic failings
in the rail network and beyond. Teachers, health workers, bus drivers and ferry
crews are among those joining rail workers who've been staging strikes since the
accident demanding safety improvements. Further protest rallies are also taking
place. All this with an election imminent. Greece's centre-right government is
scrabbling to assuage public rage and assure citizens that the rail system will
be made safe. Last night was the coldest night of the year so far with
temperatures in the highlands dropping to below minus 15 Celsius. The Met Office
has issued yellow weather warnings across the UK for snow and ice until the
weekend saying power cuts are likely. Travellers have been warned to prepare for
disruption. Bristol Airport has reopened in the past hour after being forced to
close this morning due to snow on the runway. The England football captain Leah
Williamson has welcomed a new 600 million pound package of funding for girls'
sport. After winning the Euros last year the entire Lionesses squad wrote to the
government urging them to open the doors to football for more young girls.
Schools in England will be required to offer the same access to sport as boys
and deliver a minimum of two hours of physical education per week. BBC News.
This is BBC Radio 4. Greg James will be back with us on Saturday morning heading
into the BBC archives to extract some prime audio cuts. This week he'll head
back 50 years when Uri Geller became a TV and radio sensation. Greg has
unearthed some fascinating audio and a few intriguing letters, one concerning an
electric clock that stopped. A rewinder is on Saturday at 10.30. But now back to
this afternoon and it's time for you and yours with Winifred Robinson. Hello,
welcome to Radio 4's consumer programme. Today this is a really pin back your
ears and listen edition courtesy of our investigator Shari Vahl. Now Shari's
cracked some complex dodges in her time, all of them damaging to ordinary
people, but today you're going to hear a really big one. It's about a new
generation of ticket touts and the devastating new software that they're using.
Shari Vahl has got right to the heart of it and what she has found is being
raised in the House of Commons right now at Prime Minister's Questions. If you
want to get in touch with us as you listen, here's how. Email us youandyours at
bbc.co.uk or tweet us hashtag youandyours or send text messages to 84844. If you
tried to get tickets for the Eurovision show in Liverpool in May, you were
almost certainly disappointed. They went on sale yesterday lunchtime on
Ticketmaster. 6,000 tickets for the grand final sold out within 36 minutes.
Tickets for the rehearsals and semi-finals, there were about 64,000 of them,
they were gone within the hour. The chances of ordinary fans getting hold of
those tickets were vanishingly small. A new generation of ticket touts had been
preparing to snap up thousands of them by using software that jumps the online
queue. Our reporter Shari Vahl can tell us more about it. I mean software that
jumps the queue, that's awful isn't it? Yes and so you have to imagine that
you're standing in a long queue of fans outside a stadium waiting for the ticket
window to open for the hottest show in town the excitement is building. Now just
for a moment, forget online, forget new tech, think old school. The queue snakes
around the stadium with thousands waiting in good happy cheerful order to buy
their four tickets or whatever the allocation is. Now imagine dozens of people
sailing past you barging their way into the front of the queue and not only
that, they bring hundreds of their mates to stand behind them and push you
backwards further and further away from the front of the queue to the point that
almost all of the tickets are gone before you even get to the window. Now in the
real world you'd call security or you'd call the police but this is happening in
the cyber world every day. These tickets are gone in seconds and almost
instantly listed for sale elsewhere at many many times the face value price and
that's what's happening right now when tickets for hot acts like Beyonce or Ed
Sheeran go on sale and it happened yesterday with the tickets for Eurovision and
it's why you probably didn't get a ticket if you tried. So touts have always
found ways to get tickets first Shari but this is different. Yeah they have.
Some tickets never go on sale, they're given to artists or promoters or
commercial partners and they sell them on a higher price. Now in the past some
touts have used robots that phone in for them when tickets are released but this
is different. This is software that can penetrate the online queuing system for
tickets and that was what was happening here. These touts were effectively
pushing the public backwards down the online queue and shutting them out of
ticket sales. Now I know you've been investigating this for months now because
every now and again in the office you shout out aha and it's about these
tickets. Did you know that it was going to happen with the Eurovision tickets
yesterday? Did you know that for sure? Not for definite but I strongly suspected
it would because I started investigating this after a tip-off from a man called
Reg Walker. Now he's a ticket security expert and he's been helping me with
stories about ticket touts for about 15 years and he had a tip-off and you won't
believe this but it's true. He had a tip-off from an old style tout. They told
him about a group of kids who were popping up online using new queue jumping
software. Are they really kids? They're really kids. Some of them are really
young. They're really bright, they're literate and they have eyes on profit or
as they describe it return on investment. Now they're very good at writing
computer code and they talk openly about what they do on the internet and I've
watched one lad who is 17 happily describing how he uses this software that he's
written to get in front of as many people as possible as in the queue. So Shari
what happened yesterday then with those Eurovision tickets? Well we think about
65,000 tickets went on sale at midday yesterday just as you were presenting call
you and yours. Yeah I had excitement of my own. Yes you did. Eurovision will be
a huge international event this time because Ukraine won it last year and it
should have been held there. So I put this report together as the ticket sales
went live starting with a reminder of how big Eurovision was in the 60s. I
remember that. So do I. BBC television nine o'clock. Good evening ladies and
gentlemen on behalf of the BBC together we can all join in welcoming the star
artists who are here in London tonight. Perhaps something like 400 million
people could be watching at this moment. Ukraine won the Eurovision final last
year and because of the Russian invasion the UK offered to host it for them this
year and a competition was launched for cities who wanted to host it. Liverpool.
Good morning it's eight o'clock on Tuesday the 7th of March. The headlines this
morning. Tickets for the Eurovision song contest go on sale this lunchtime with
fans able to attend nine shows during the week of the competition in Liverpool.
At midday large numbers of fans across Europe will be waiting online for one of
the most in-demand tickets in the world. Never mind midday the excitement at the
thought of actually being inside the 11,000 seater M&S arena on the banks of the
Mersey started a lot earlier than that. Right it's 10.45 it's Tuesday the launch
goes in an hour and 15 minutes and I've been going on the Ticketmaster site and
it tells me sorry there are no currently no upcoming events and it's been saying
that for days actually and then all of a sudden it changed and it says important
info. It's changed just a moment ago. Eurovision 2023 general sales for
Eurovision events start at 12 o'clock today. You can expect to see the events
listed here just after 10.45 so here we go we're waiting. Brilliant. I'm looking
at the Ticketmaster website now it's 11am. We asked Scott from Glasgow, Gina
from Bristol and Ed from Liverpool to record themselves whilst like me they
tried to buy Eurovision tickets. Okay it's got a countdown clock at the moment.
If I select see the Saturday night if I'm in a queue only for the Saturday night
show I might not get anything because that'd be really really busy or if I click
and see a semi-final will there be more likely to get a ticket? I've got to work
out those tactics. So I've just checked the Ticketmaster website, countdown
live, I'm going to go for a live semi-final. I'm not too sure I can get into the
final but that's what I'm going to go and try and get into. Okay so it's about
quarter to 12 and it's all starting. I'm on the Ticketmaster website and it says
I've joined a waiting room so I'm hoping that I'll be let in soon to buy some
tickets. Fingers crossed, oh my goodness this is nerve-wracking. Of course
people may have different tactics here and people may have 15 different devices
open with different accounts so that may get them around it but I'm just going
to stick one trusty laptop and go for a realistic game. So I'm going to go for a
realistic game. I'm just going to stick one trusty laptop and go for a realistic
show I think. But what Gina, Scott and Ed don't know is they're competing for
tickets with groups of people who aren't using one trusty laptop to sit in the
queue but are using special software which provides them with hundreds and
hundreds of places in the queue in front of me, Gina, Scott and Ed and tens of
thousands of other ordinary fans. Okay it's saying one minute left, I'm
sweating, oh my god, oh wish me luck. I just tried a sneaky thing there and
tried to open another tab to see if it would allow me to join a waiting room for
more than one show but no it's not that daft so semi-final will wait on then.
The waiting room has now gone live so I've refreshed my screen and I am now in
the waiting room which is quite exciting. Seeing a lot of screenshots of people
claiming there's an internal server error when they try and get into
Ticketmaster which is unnerving. I'm still sitting in the waiting room with
three minutes left apparently waiting to see if something happens. One of these
groups is called the Golden Circle. The Golden Circle is a group formed
specifically to provide software so members can get to the tickets first. Not so
they can go to the show but so they can sell the tickets on at inflated prices.
They call it return on investment or profit. Josh Silverman is 34 and he runs
the Golden Circle. It's a secret society and Reg Walker and I have found a way
of watching what Josh Silverman does. Welcome to the Golden Circle. I'm Josh one
of the co-founders and in this video I'm going to be taking you through our
server but first and foremost I need to introduce you to the tiers of membership
that you're going to see inside the circle. So at tier one this is where you're
going to be getting the main calls and the low risk calls. This does not mean
low profit it's still going to be a higher return on investment but it's going
to be the big acts the big events so we know you are going to take a profit
home. Josh Silverman and his colleagues charge ¬£99 a month for a subscription to
the Golden Circle and for that its members get guidance on how to use the
software. It's known as a queue pass. A queue pass is a piece of computer code
which members use to manipulate the queuing systems used by companies like
Ticketmaster. So you now have access to Golden software and tools. Golden
software is a queue handler so imagine you have a few hundred people in the
queue for you when Ticketmaster releases an event that has 20,000 people in the
waiting room. The software tries to put you right into the front and generally
gets a load of people through for you. It will then send a URL to your Discord
where you can then go to cart the tickets and check out. Carting is another word
for putting something in your online basket. You and I would do it by clicking
on a mouse. The Golden Circle software does it for ticket tarts automatically.
We also run this ourselves so if you didn't have the time let's say for a couple
of days to go on to pre-sale because life or your wife or husband got in the way
we'll ensure that we have a bank of codes for you to use so that you are not
left behind. Now at tier three you reach our power seller phase. We can't really
go into much detail on this because a lot of the stuff that we do here is very
secretive. Not because it's illegal because we do follow all UK consumer laws
but we want to keep this very low key because a lot of this stuff no one else is
doing so we do not want this going outside of the server. But trust me it's only
going to benefit you and this can help you make this more of a career and not
just a side hustle. Okay it says you are now in the queue 2,000 plus people
ahead of you. Oh my god 2,000 plus. How many is that? It could be 40,000. Oh my
goodness. Oh my goodness. Oh I can't take it. It's nerve-wracking. Back in now
I've got 2,000 people ahead of me so I've not got strong hopes for getting some
tickets for the show. Oh we have movement there's there are 966 people ahead of
me in the queue apparently. Okay let's see how this goes. So that was some of
our listeners waiting to see if they could get tickets right at the end there.
Josh Silverman then who runs this thing the Golden Circle. How did you find him
you know just selling his services on the internet like that? I can't tell you.
I can't tell you that. I can't tell you because it's come from a source and
basically if I told you I'd have to shoot you. Okay. So Josh Silverman asked me
the same question actually. So you've spoken to him? Oh yeah I've had lengthy
conversations with Josh. He's really nice. We had a good old chat yesterday.
He's 34 and he lives in London and I tracked him down and I called him and he
told me on the phone yesterday that he's been involved in this idea of using
these bot software. They're called bots to jump queues for about 10 years and he
told me previously he used this software to buy trainers to sell on. Some
trainers are made in limited numbers and they trade for thousands of pounds
above the face value and groups like the Golden Circle realised that they could
jump queues waiting online to buy new editions of trainers and then sell them on
at a huge profit elsewhere. So during the lockdown trainer trading or sneaker
reselling was huge. There were no tickets of course. There's a fantastic podcast
on BBC Sounds actually called Sneakonomics which explains this kind of trade in
detail and it's extraordinary. Now the whole system of buying something cheap
and then selling it expensive has coined the name arbitrage and that's what Josh
Silverman and loads of other people using or writing or licensing the use of
these bots to jump queues and buy tickets or whatever say they're doing. Simply
taking advantage of the price difference in two different markets to make a
profit. Now in that sale pitch that he was doing online that you recorded he
said and I'm quoting now because I wrote it down as I was listening, we follow
all UK consumer laws but wasn't the use of bots to buy up loads of tickets,
wasn't that banned by law in 2017 and wasn't the law you know that bit of the
law just intended to stop Taos? Well that's a really good question actually.
I've asked a lot of people about the use of this queue jumping software, the
bots, could it be legal? I asked Josh Silverman when I spoke to him on the phone
last night and he said it's a grey area. I've asked the Department of Culture,
Media and Sport, I've asked the police, I've asked National Trading Standards,
I've even asked the National Cyber Security Centre which is part of GCHQ and I
cannot get a straight answer. This is as far as I got. It's illegal to use
software to buy more than the ticket limit allowed by the promoter or the venue
and that's in the wording of the Digital Economy Act of 2017 that you mentioned.
Now this software is being used to buy small numbers of tickets each time it
would appear and that would be Josh Silverman's grey area. Venues allow you to
buy small numbers of tickets so that one person can buy them for a group of
friends or their family. So the new legislation anyway that outlaws these bots,
we've reported on this in the past, that isn't policed very hard is it? No there
was a prosecution, there was a big prosecution actually in 2020. Peter Hunter
and David Smith did go to jail for a large number of years but it was the first
UK prosecution for large-scale ticket fraud and they used multiple identities
and these computer bots to harvest thousands of tickets for major events and
they went on to sell those tickets for about 26 million pounds. They used 290
email addresses to hide their bulk buying and Trading Standards brought that
prosecution but they told me that that was a one-off and it was specially funded
and they don't have the resources to do any more. So in the real world then does
that mean that whatever the law says mostly touts are left uninterrupted and now
they've got this brand new software that jumps the queues? Yeah Josh Silverman
and the Golden Circle are proud about this. They declare how much profit their
members take on make on tickets and you heard him say in that clip that he wants
people to make this their career and not just have it as a side hustle. So
there's no one trying to stop them? Well the people who make computer software,
the queuing software that for example Ticketmaster uses, lots of other
organisations like parts of Tokyo City Council, they are trying to stop it.
They're called Q-It. Now I spoke to Q-It and I asked them how they feel about
the groups of these ticket touts attacking their systems to jump the queues and
they told me for them it's a constant battle against the bot makers like Golden
Circle and others. Q-It said that they change their systems and then minutes
later the bot makers change theirs and on it goes it's a war of attrition. Now I
know that you sat with some heavyweight experts on this yesterday in a studio
off the you and yours office as the tickets for Eurovision went on sale and I
was on air doing Call You and Yours and I know that you tried to buy some
tickets yourself? Yeah I was with some pretty impressive people. There's Reg
Walker, the security consultant who tipped me off about this whole thing and he
was working with me remotely. At the same time we were watching on one screen
the activities of Josh Silverman's group Golden Circle, on another screen I was
in the queue for Eurovision tickets myself. Now with me in person in the studio
were two people whose job it is to fight these bots. They're Matthew Gracie-
McMinn and Danny Middleton-Wren and they're from a company called Netasea. Danny
was also queuing for Eurovision tickets with me and then you came in and joined
us when yesterday's programme was over. Matt can I just introduce you to Reg?
You tell Reg what you do. So I run the CTI team. I've already seen your website.
So we know that the touts have an advantage over me because I've only got my
iPad here and my phone there. So tell me what the touts are doing that will give
them massive advantage over me. So what they're essentially doing is barging
into the queue, they're getting hundreds of people, think of them as hundreds of
friends, they're essentially getting hundreds of computers and just barging into
the queue right at the front to try and get in there first and then buy up all
the tickets. And they can create all, because it's all digital, they can create
these sort of imaginary people to barge into this imaginary queue and that's
essentially all they're doing. And of course they're not just competing with you
and me, aren't trying to buy the tickets ourselves, they're competing with each
other to get as many people into that queue as possible. And the risk of course
is if you've got too many people rushing into the queue everyone bangs heads and
they all fall over unconscious. And essentially that might be what's going on
now because 500 dash internal server error is essentially what you're saying,
too many people trying to get into the queue at once. Potentially yes. So not
only have we got people like me and Danny here trying to buy tickets for real
because we want to go to the concerts, the touts who don't want to go to the
concerts, who are only interested in profit, are there. So say you've got one
person who's a tout, how many people is that one tout pretending to be? How much
processing power have they got on their computer at the end of the day? They can
do, my simple laptop in tests that we ran against a fake site could generate
thousands of people essentially. And that is a small laptop I use for taking to
conferences so it's designed to fit into a small underarm bag. So you with your
laptop under your arm can pretend to be thousands of people barging into the
queue in front of me, pushing me essentially to the back of the queue. Yep and
we have seen attackers using cloud services, cloud servers, so not just like
your home desktop computer but the big, imagine the big server racks you see in
movies that hackers have. They're hiring those off cloud computing companies and
firing all of that power into this. So I don't stand a chance? Not really, no,
no, not unless you have a very big server and the same tools that they do and
want to do exactly the same thing. So it's an arms race? It is literally an arms
race, yes, yeah. It's now eight minutes past 12 and I am still 2000 plus in the
queue and what about you Dani, where are you? One is on 1499 and that's moving
along quite quickly. What date is that though for? The 9th of May, Tuesday the
9th. Okay that's Tuesday. And the other one for Monday the 8th of May is still
on 2000 plus but my queue gauge is moving. Yes my queue gauge is moving so I
don't actually know, although it says there are 2000 plus people ahead of me, I
don't actually know how many plus 2000 there are ahead of me and I suspect
judging by the size of that bar underneath there are quite a lot and a lot of
them are touts trying to get tickets ahead of me and I'm still 2000 plus and
Dani's 12, 1300 in one queue, 1310 in one queue and 2000 plus in the other queue
for different dates. That's really serious, it means you can't trust your place
in the queue at all. No, not at all. It's a myth. What you're looking at and
what the ticket companies will see is it will look like tens if not a hundred
thousand people in the queue when in fact most of those are not people, they are
electronic placeholders that just sit there and then you can use a link to that
placeholder and then you push in the queue in front of everyone else. What's
interesting is we're getting some positive results here as well, it says looks
like seated worked, another one's using a non-queue link which means they bypass
the queue altogether. Just to show you this one, this shows that their bots
work, can't hold waiting so it's carted two tickets. So someone has pushed in
front of Julia who was 30 second in the queue. This is a tout who's used a bot,
used queue bypass software and is now using a bot to grab the ticket, it's now
carted, i.e. it's in your basket and you can now pay for those tickets and then
you're out. You can very clearly see there, seated AIO bot today at 12.08, four
minutes ago. And what's AIO? Seated AIO is the name of a particular bot that you
can lease for ¬£150 a month. AIO I believe stands for all-in-one usually? Yeah,
it's carting software so basically it grabs what you want and then shoves it in
the cart. So in other words you click and it does it for you, it does every
step, if it's all-in-one it does every step, it gets in the queue, it buys the
ticket because you've set it up beforehand, it bungs it in the basket and then
you would go through the purchase. So as quick as that. Lucky Botter says, I
think he means seated carted and then the same guy says yeah seated cooking. So
he's getting, this particular tout in this group is very clearly getting seated
tickets. So basically what they're saying is there's a lot of people making good
profit on Eurovision at the moment. There's one here who says semi-final since
20 minutes ago, that was last time I carted for live shows. Yeah, so carting
means he's actually managed to get through the queue, grab tickets, put them in
the cart and it means he can check out with them. So Winifred Robertson has come
into the studio, you've just come off Call You and Yours, how was it? It was
good. So 12 o'clock whilst you were on air we got into the queue and you can see
here I'm still in the queue, it's four minutes past one. I am waiting for over
an hour. Waiting for over an hour. There are more than 2,000 people ahead of me
in the queue. Now Dani over there, she was able to get to the front of the queue
amazingly, but I'm going for Saturday night, the grand final of Eurovision and
Dani was going for Monday and Tuesday. By the time Dani got there and what time
was it about 20 minutes past 12? Yeah, one was 20 past and one was 22. All the
tickets were sold out. In 20 minutes? Yes, but let me show you for the grand
final, where's the mouse? It's gone. So this is Viagogo, this is the Saturday
grand final. The thing that you were queuing for? The thing that I was queuing
for and there is a ticket and if I want it I can have it, but look at the price.
¬£11,800. Yeah, ¬£11,800. Amazing isn't it? On Viagogo. On Viagogo that was and
there were loads and loads for well over thousands. Now Ticketmaster told the
BBC yesterday that a very small number of fans experienced issues accessing the
queue for tickets online. Well we've put part of that top team that you just
heard together again now live, Reg Walker, the cyber security expert who gave
you the original tip-off and Matthew Gracie-McMinn, head of threat research at
Netasea, that company that tries to fight these bots. So welcome to you both and
Matt if I could start with you. I know this is what you do, try to stop these
people, so how big would you say is what we're seeing just at the moment? How
many groups are there doing what this golden circle does? It is nearly
impossible to quantify the number of groups doing this. There are groups that
are quite open and public about what they're doing and there are those that are
quite secretive. I've got a pretty large team for the sort of company that the
industry I work in and we simply cannot track all of them. There are too many?
There are just simply too many and they're not just located in the UK. Bear in
mind the internet is global, it's very easy as well to do what's called proxying
and send your connections and make them look like they're coming from another
place. So we often and quite frankly very regularly see people from other
countries all over the world launch these attacks and look like they're coming
from the United Kingdom. So it's very, very hard for us to track these groups
who may be speaking in other languages, who may as well also be positioned in
vastly different geographic locations and using vastly different communication
systems and so forth and trying not to reveal themselves. Nonetheless, I would
hazard a guess that there are dozens and dozens and dozens of these in the UK
alone going into the hundreds globally. So of those dozens and dozens, how big a
player would Golden Circle be in this marketplace? So the marketplace itself is
quite interesting. It's not just a marketplace, I prefer to think of it as an
environment. Tickets, attacks on tickets, ticket scalping, ticket touting, that
sort of thing is one small corner of this overarching ecosystem that includes
other things such as attacks on online stores to take over accounts and steal
credit card information, attacks on streaming services to take over accounts so
you can use someone else's media accounts to watch things, and all sorts of
other various fraudulent services. And they all use bots. And what we actually
saw over lockdown was the groups who were using ticket scalping bots then moved
to other products. There weren't any events, as Shari was saying earlier,
there's no events, they have to move on to other products, other topics, and so
forth. So they started targeting things like video game consoles, trainers, gym
equipment, and one that did catch my team completely out of the blue was heated
toilet seats were targeted. Well that's interesting, I suppose we had to be
comfortable, didn't we, in the lockdowns. It feels really, really unfair. Let's
just stick with this business of jumping the queue for tickets using this
software. We heard Josh Silverman tell people that it is within consumer law. Do
you think it's legal? I'm not a lawyer so it's very hard for me to say, but my
belief is, as Josh said, there's a very big grey area there. The Computer Misuse
Act is quite old now, it's not really up to date, it's not really equipped to
deal with modern day computing. What about that newer act, the one from 2017?
Again, one of the big problems legislation has is it's often quite slow to come
into force. And it has to be tested in court, doesn't it? It does, yes. So you
end up with these issues of trying to get it enforced and then of course it's
one thing to enforce it in UK courts. As I mentioned, many of these groups are
international. How do you enforce it against people in other countries that may
not have extradition treaties or good relationships with the United Kingdom? Reg
Walker, you've been working for years and years trying to combat ticket touts,
all kinds of ticket touts. Now Josh Silverman talks about recruiting what he
calls power sellers. If you just listen to him now, he's talking about that on
those secret videos. We'll also keep you up to date with what the resale price
is looking like with previous analytics, previous events and current sold prices
that most people do not have access to. And then lastly, a justification on
exactly why we called this artist, why we think the risk category is where it is
and what we think is going to happen. And again, just to really reiterate, this
is done with analytics, previous sales and loads of different history behind the
artist. Unless you are a six-figure seller on these platforms, you do not get
access to this data. So this is where we really shine through against most other
groups that are trying to do something like this. If you are in tier one, you
will have a fortnightly call with either myself or another staff member or maybe
a few of us together. So Reg Walker, how significant do you think this
development is, this software that can jump the queue for you online? First
thing I'd like to do is a big thank you to our intelligent sources that enabled
us to work with you and Shari to expose this. Yes, well done. This group in
particular is incredibly well structured, very well organized. It does have a
tout sitting behind this who provides the data analytics and the number of
coders that work in real time. And to give you an example of the impact that
this group can have, we sat there watching them on Eurovision yesterday and they
were certainly having trouble using their software to initially get through the
changes that Ticketmaster had made in its system. Yeah, that's so sad, isn't it?
They tried to stop it. Yeah, they did, but with limited success. We saw by 12
minutes past 12 that these coders operating in real time. So while they're
hammering the system and causing the servers to hang and keeping genuine fans
out, they were updating their bots and by 12.12 their bots were working. And we
saw one of this group get through with 10 separate accounts and able to purchase
tickets. Can I ask you then what I've just asked Matt? Do you think that what
they're doing is legal? No, no. I think it's too narrow to look at this in terms
of the Computer Crimes Act, which is a very old piece of legislation. But even
in that, it states that if you alter the way somebody else's system works, you
commit an offence. What you have here are fraud offences, where you have people
fraudulently reducing the number of tickets available to the public at face
value. You have the use of multiple accounts, multiple identities. And we've
seen this firsthand within this group of people openly talking about multiple
accounts, multiple identities, like Eurovision yesterday, where one stated that
he'd used 10 accounts and got through on 10 accounts. So no, none of this is
legal. Reg, what happens when people buy these tickets though from the secondary
sites like Viagogo and turn up at the venues? Because it's standard now, isn't
it, that if you buy a bunch of tickets and you are allowed to buy a small bunch
of tickets, the person whose card was used to buy the tickets has to go through
the turnstile. Yes, we saw some evidence yesterday where this group were talking
about instructions from Viagogo that if they bought four tickets, they had to
use one themselves to walk the three people that they'd sold tickets to into the
venue. So these are effectively what they call walkers. Now, this may be the
touts themselves, or it may be that they'll simply send their ID up to their
cards up to somebody else who will charge them a fee to walk these people in.
But what that inevitably leads to sometimes, if you've got a walker that's
taking three, four, five groups in, each time that person has to use a ticket
and that leaves an empty seat in the venue because they have to come back out
and walk the next group in, which isn't good. Yes, mad, mad. Matt, just very
briefly, if you would, given how quickly they're overcoming, you know, it's your
job to put the hurdles there, to help companies put the hurdles there, so these
people can't use their software. How quickly they managed to overcome it
yesterday is the only answer to just stop the secondary selling of tickets in
the way that some countries have done. That's certainly an answer. I don't know
how easy that will be to actually implement or how popular that would prove with
the public. Another alternative is machine learning algorithms on the
technological defences. A lot of the defences are very static and new advances
in machine learning and artificial intelligence allow you to create much more
dynamic defences that can react in real time to changing attack patterns. That
can offer a very good solution. Well, that's very interesting. That's a
programme for another day. Matt, Gracie McMinn and Reg Walker, thanks both. So,
Shari, let's talk about those listeners then, those ordinary people trying to
get tickets. We had Scott, Gina and Ed. They recorded themselves yesterday as
the tickets went live, trying to buy them. How did they get on? Well, it was
nerve-wracking. I'll tell you what, they had a really, really roller coaster
ride and they recorded themselves doing it and here they are. Thanks for your
patience. It's almost your turn. It may be happening. All the details are in.
Sit tight. We're securing your tickets. You're in, apparently. It's a miracle.
Wow. So, that was relatively seamless. Your order is complete. You're going to
Eurovision Song Contest Semi-Final One. I'm in and it looks like all that's
available is hospitality, which is quite a bit at my price range, unfortunately.
And the confirmation email is in. So, that seems to be promising. Oh my God, I
think I've got one, but it's only letting me buy one. So, I have to now go back
in and try and get another one for my friend. But yeah, it'll only let you buy
one at a time, but it looks like I've got one. So, Shari, two of them, Gina and
Scott, they at least got tickets. I didn't get a ticket at all. So, the queue
jumping didn't stop Gina and Scott, did it? No, but Gina wanted a ¬£30 ticket and
the only one she could get was a ¬£380 standing up ticket. So, the bot users buy
up the cheaper tickets because, of course, there's more profit when they resell
them. Now, Scott didn't really mind what he paid. He was delighted. He spent
¬£200 a ticket, so ¬£400 overall. Do we know then how many of the Eurovision
tickets were snapped up by touch yesterday? No, we have absolutely no idea at
this stage, but we may be able to find out that later as time moves on. And we
were watching in real time the Golden Circle succeeding in getting tickets quite
frequently. And as Matt said, they're not even big players in this, although
they want to be. Now, the impact on people who really genuinely love Eurovision
and didn't get tickets has been significant. This is Andrew. He runs a
Eurovision podcast called Eurobliss, and he has 5,000 listeners. And he spoke to
me yesterday just after he realised that all the tickets had been sold. I don't
know anybody who got a ticket for any of the nine shows. And I've got a huge
lifelong circle of friends who have been pinging me all morning going, have you
got a ticket? Where are you in the queue? This kind of thing. Which show are you
going for? And I don't know anyone who's got a ticket. And how many of your
wider circle do you think were going for them? Well, I've got 5,000 followers on
Mixcloud. And I haven't had one email or one text message or anything from
anybody saying they got any tickets to any of the shows. And how was your effort
to get tickets for the shows today? We had the laptop, the iPad, two phones in
our hotel room, and one of them clearly was actually working. The little blue
line was going across the screen very, very slowly. It took about an hour and a
half to get to the front of the queue. And then we got to the front of the queue
for the family show, and there was just nothing available. During that time, we
were on Twitter, and Twitter was telling us quite loudly that there was no
tickets available. So, we just sort of persevered with the queue and knew at the
end of the day that we weren't going to get anything, and we didn't. And we can
show that these tickets are for sale on the secondary websites. How do you feel
about the fact that you've been unable to get tickets, whilst people who are
only buying them to make a profit have been able to get tickets? This isn't
going to happen ever again, probably in my lifetime. So, it's like very, very,
very distressing. I can deal with it because I did my best, and we were all here
doing our thing. But at the same time, I'm absolutely gutted. And it's not just
me, it's all my friends. So, that's Andrew with lots of listeners just emailing
in, all popping up on my screen, just as we've been on air with similar real
deep disappointment. This morning, we went to a long time campaigner against
touting with what Shari has found. Stuart Galbraith is the chief executive of
Kilimanjaro Live. It's one of the UK's largest event promoters. He's Ed
Sheeran's promoter. Would you tell us then, what you make of the evidence that
Shari Vahl and Reg Walker have revealed about these groups of people, including
this group, the Golden Circle, who pay for access to software that targets the
queuing systems for concerts and events like Eurovision, but Ed Sheeran too?
We've long known that 90% of the touted tickets in the UK are controlled by a
group of perhaps as few as 10 or 20 power sellers. And certainly for the last
two years, we've very much been targeting those power sellers in an effort to
restrict the number of tickets that they can get. What's the impact on fans? I
mean, they argue, the people who do this, that they're just taking advantage of
a marketplace in which some people are willing to pay way, way over the odds for
something with a relatively low face value. Well, I mean, I think the argument
that they're providing a public service really just fall flat because they're
selling tickets at inflated prices when customers could quite legitimately be
buying them at face value in many, many cases. When you look at what they're
doing, their defence would be that the way the legislation's been framed is that
it outlaws the use of bots to buy vast numbers of tickets. What these people are
doing is buying their tickets in very small batches in the quantities that the
venues allow, because venues allow you to buy a few tickets, don't they? So that
you can buy for a small party or a group of family or friends. That's what
they're doing. Yes, but the venues invariably are carrying out requests and
instructions that come from the producer or the promoter of the event and in
turn, therefore, the artist. If an event is set up carefully, you can actually
apply terms and conditions to the ticket purchase that prevent it from being
resold and the breach of those terms and conditions, therefore, tickets can be
cancelled if we can find out who the people are and the tickets that they have.
What will probably happen with these tickets that are bought using this queue
jumping software is that the touts themselves will have to walk people through
the barriers, something they've done for years, where tickets are attached to a
single person's identity and the card they used, and then they'll just leave
seats empty. So after all that queuing and demand and people paying thousands
and thousands of pounds, artists will look out and see empty seats. Yes,
unfortunately, that's also a negative impact on the fans and indeed, obviously,
the artists and the venues themselves, because if touts can't shift their
tickets at the inflated price that they want, invariably, they won't drop the
ticket price because it then spoils their marketplace. And so by definition,
therefore, not all the tickets that are purchased in bulk actually then get sold
to customers. And there's always a proportion that are left unused. The
secondary selling site, Viagogo, is the biggest reselling site in the world.
It's told us many, many times before that it's doing nothing wrong and that by
just providing a marketplace for people who can't go to a concert when they've
bought tickets is not wrong. What do you say to that? What they are doing,
they're allowing power sellers to use their platform with a court order that the
CMA got against them some three to four years ago. That's the regulator, the
Competition and Markets Authority. Correct, yes. And what it does allow us to do
under that court order is we can then write to Viagogo when we see tickets that
are illegally advertised and ask them to take them down. And invariably they do
because they have to do so to comply with the court order. But that's a big job
for you. Yes, it is. We have one now retained member of staff and that is all
that they do. You are currently selling a pre-booking of Ed Sheeran's new album
and with that purchase comes a kind of right, doesn't it, to get into the
concerts. Now that's live at the moment and we know that these people with these
queue jumping softwares are jumping the queue to pre-book that album. How does
that make you feel? It makes us feel very frustrated because not only have we
written in advance to all of the power sellers because we actually know who most
of them are, we've also written to Viagogo and so the game of cat and mouse for
us will start within the next 24 hours so that once we start to see tickets
listed on Viagogo, we will be writing to Viagogo informing them that they're
being listed against our terms and conditions and demanding that they take the
advertising down. So if you have a lot of money to spend and you're tempted to
buy an Ed Sheeran ticket on the secondary sales market, you would say don't?
We'll try and stop you getting in? Yes, absolutely. And indeed, Ed is one of the
clients that we work with that has particularly strong views that he wants his
customers to attend the shows paying the face value of the ticket that we have
advertised. And so we have now a long-standing policy with Ed's concerts that
any tickets that we do see that we can identify will be cancelled and then re-
put back into the system to be sold at face value. So anyone that buys a
secondary ticket does so in breach of the terms and conditions and therefore
risks not having access to the concert because that ticket will be cancelled.
That's Stuart Galbraith. Well, yesterday I spoke to a politician who's done a
lot of work to try to stop ticket touting online, the mass harvesting of tickets
in that way. He's Kevin Brennan, the Labour MP for Cardiff West. He's on the
House of Commons Select Committee for Culture, Media and Sport. And that
committee's investigated ticket touting and it was its recommendations that led
to the change in the law that we've been talking about. There were amendments
introduced in the Digital Economy Act, which passed in 2017, which was meant to
stop the bulk purchasing of tickets from the primary market for resale at a
profit using bots and jump in the queue and so on. But I felt at the time that
not strong enough provision was taken and people are either finding ways around
it and claiming that what they're doing is legal or they are doing things which
may well prove to be illegal. And we've also had companies like Viagogo who have
been the subject of investigations and sanctions from the Competition and
Markets Authority but are still operating and reselling tickets at vastly
inflated prices, which they shouldn't really have hold of. What more can
Parliament do about it? I'd like to see stronger measures taken to actually
outlaw the practice of reselling on tickets at highly inflated prices beyond the
face value. It's become the general practice these days that it's almost
impossible for a genuine fan or consumer to obtain a ticket at the advertised
face value price. And I think there should be a limit on what can be added if a
ticket is sold in a secondary market. But what shouldn't happen is that prices
should be allowed to be inflated to absolutely extortionate levels, which are
just often putting money into the pocket of people who are not the artists or
not the venues and so on, but are people who are simply in this business to tout
tickets. Now just as we're speaking right this minute, so it is now Tuesday
afternoon at ten past two on the Viagogo website, there is a ticket for sale at
¬£8,849. Now if you tap on the face value of that ticket, it was ¬£380. Yes, and
so if you were somebody who had access to this software, you wouldn't have to
have too many tickets in order to make quite a large sum of money. If you're
making thousands of pounds profit on each ticket, people have become very
sophisticated. This is not just, you know, the guy on the corner who's got a
couple of tickets in his pockets. These are people using sophisticated software,
changing all the time to try and get around the systems that are in place for
the sale of tickets in order to exploit the system in this way and to bump
genuine fans and consumers from the front of the queue to the back of the queue
and take the tickets and resell them at a profit. Now what's interesting about
this one, this particular seller, is that there are two tickets for sale and on
one of those tickets it says meeting up with the seller, that you must meet with
the seller, because they're using a loophole in the rules which says that you
can buy tickets as a gift, providing that the person who purchased the ticket is
with the party. So what will happen on the night is that a lot of these touts
will walk groups of people through the barriers and then come out and there'll
actually be tickets that are empty for something that people genuinely really
wanted to see and were very excited about. And that's really shocking in and of
itself and we've seen that if there isn't proper protection for tickets that it
can end in tragedy as recently happened at the Brixton Academy at a gig there.
So it's, you know, a matter of pretty outrageous practice that's ripping people
off who are genuine fans, but it also can end up being dangerous. So I think
there's a real need for much stronger action to be taken by government over
this. Because really when you think about it, there are going to be computer
programs that can get around anything, aren't there? So maybe your thought is
then that you just ban the secondary sale of tickets at anything other than face
value in the way they have done in some other countries? Personally, that is my
view. I don't think you'll entirely, you know, deal with this problem until you
make it clear that it is illegal. Because if you watch the videos of people who
organize these harvesting practices, they are continually saying that, you know,
what we're doing is frowned upon. It's not very popular with the people, but it
isn't illegal technically. And they're looking at ways all the times you say to
find loopholes that they can exploit. I think it would be much simpler if we
said you advertise a ticket at a price and then if you want to resell it, you
can't recover more than the administrative costs of doing so. What you can't do
is use your superior knowledge of the technology in order to jump the queue and
take tickets which should really be in the hands of fans who are genuine, who
want to attend the event and should be able to do so at the price advertised.
What's happened in other countries like Ireland then where it is banned? That's
what's happened in Ireland and as I understand it, you know, that it's working
reasonably well. There's always going to be problems. You know, people will
always try and get around systems and so on. And there's a relatively new
problem in the entertainment industry where in a way the industry itself is
starting to tout its own tickets by using something, you know, called dynamic
pricing or surge pricing. Effectively, you know, they're putting up the price of
their own tickets. Well, anything of that kind, I think, should not be permitted
in my view. I think everything should be transparent about this and we should be
absolutely clear that if a ticket's advertised at a price, that's the price that
you should be able to purchase it at. So as a politician who takes an interest
in these matters, you said that you're shocked and saddened by what Shari Fahl
has found. What will you be doing next? Well, I'm on the Culture, Media, Sports
Select Committee and I'm certainly going to be encouraging my colleagues to take
a fresh look at this because technology has moved on and clearly the problem
hasn't been solved. And will you be raising it at Prime Minister's Questions?
Yes, I'll be raising this at Prime Minister's Questions because I do think the
government need to act and need to commit themselves to ensuring that fans get a
fair deal. That was Kevin Brennan MP yesterday and just while we've been on air,
he has raised what Shari Fahl has uncovered in the House of Commons during Prime
Minister's Questions. BBC Radio 4's You and Yours have exposed Q-Jump-In online
touts who've been buying up Eurovision tickets and putting them on sale for
thousands of pounds on dodgy sites like Viagogo. In this year when we are
hosting Eurovision on behalf of war-ravaged Ukraine, this latest example of
rampant rip-off culture in Tory Britain is particularly, particularly,
particularly despicable. Why hasn't his government done more to support genuine
fans over the rip-off merchants, the spribs and the ticket touts? Well Mr
Speaker, actually we will continue, we have put in place measures to combat
ticket touting. I'm happy to look at the documentary that he mentioned and make
sure that we're doing everything we can do and I'll talk to the Home Secretary
about it but more generally it is a source of enormous pride for us to host
Eurovision. I know it's something that everyone is looking forward to and we
should ensure that there is as broad as possible access to seeing that and we'll
do everything we can to make sure that that happens. So that was the Prime
Minister a few minutes ago, Shari, promising that he will listen to this
programme. I wonder if he'll have time anyway, the intent's there. What will you
do next? What happens now with what you've discovered for you? Well one of the
things you mentioned just now was dynamic pricing. Actually it was Kevin Brennan
who mentioned dynamic pricing. I just want to explain what that is. The primary
ticket sellers like Ticketmaster are using this thing called dynamic pricing. So
if you think about when you want to go for a flight, if you book a flight early
you get a cheaper ticket. And rail tickets. And rail tickets, yeah. So they're
using that in these tickets for events. Now the thing is of course if you've got
queue jumping software you get in much more quickly so you get the cheaper
tickets. Oh so it'll be everywhere? Yeah but the touts get the tickets earlier
because they've got queue jumping software. I want to find out for definite if
any of this is legal. Shari Val, thank you so much and congratulations on what
you've managed to do. Thank you. Well something else we were going to have a
look at, we're definitely going to have a look at in the future, that we want
your help with is this. On Radio 4 and 5 Live we're going to take an in-depth
look at rented housing and all the problems that surround it. We want to hear
your stories so that we can build up a picture from you about the current state
of the UK rental market. If you're a tenant tell us what impact the cost of
renting is having on you. If something goes wrong is it dealt with for you. If
you're a landlord get in touch tell us about the pressures that you are under.
If you're looking for somewhere to rent how easy is that? We'll be assigning our
best journalist to investigate some of your stories and then you can hear them
all as part of Rental Health, the Rental Health Project at the end of March, so
that's the end of this month. Do get involved please in our big conversation
about renting. Email us youandyours at bbc.co.uk. We're out of time again today.
On the programme tomorrow our gap finder is Michelle Feeney. She has set up a
British perfume company, it's called Floral Street and then it's Sliced Bread
and this week Greg Foot will be investigating whether natural sleep aids like
herbal teas, tablets and oil source sprays can really help people drift off. So
that's tomorrow. Thank you for all the emails and messages that you've been
sending while the programme has been going on. Shari Vahl is going to take
another look at this whole problem really soon. Thanks for listening today. You
and Yours was produced by Kevin Mosley. The studio managers were Amy Brennan and
Colin Sutton. Time for a check on the snow and the rest of the weather and
keeping warm in the studio is Thomas Schabenacker. I certainly am just about. It
was different this morning though. It really has been a very wintry mix so far
across more southern parts of the UK. Tomorrow the snow will affect more
northern parts of the country. But let's concentrate on the here and now because
of course many of us have actually not had the snow at all. In fact the closer
you are to the south coast of England the wetter it's been. The snow has been
generally north of the M4 although we have had some snow around Dartmoor and
Exmoor as well. But I think through the course of at least the rest of today the
snow will be concentrated more across parts of Wales, the Midlands and it should
actually peter out as we go through the course of this evening. It may clip some
southern counties, perhaps areas to the north of the M4, perhaps north London as
well come the evening. But I think generally speaking the further south you are
it's more likely to be rain. And of course it's a cold day where it's snowing,
drizzling, it's just a few degrees above freezing. Totally different story
further north across the country. In fact across Northern Ireland and Scotland
we've had some sunny spells so far and at the moment it's actually not bad at
all in Northern Ireland. The southwest of Scotland the sun's out but it is on
the chilly side. Last night was really really cold in the North Highlands
temperatures dipped to minus 15.4 degrees Celsius. Such is the cold air from the
Arctic. So what can we expect then tonight and into tomorrow? Well snow is on
the way. It should reach northern parts of Wales early hours of the morning then
spread into north-western England and snow will affect the Pennines and
generally northern England probably from about the Peak District northwards.
Could be a lot of snow come the end of the day tomorrow across the higher ground
possibly as much as 20 to 40 centimetres but for most of us a lot less than
that. Keep track of the weather and take care. Thanks Thomas. We'll try to do
that. I've got my thermals on. Now it's time to look ahead to Friday with Andrea
Catherwood. Radio 4's feedback airs your thoughts and questions on BBC radio
programmes. It made it impossible to not stop and listen to it thoroughly. I
don't think the BBC should be assuming everybody in the country feels like that.
We take you behind the scenes of how programmes get made. I absolutely agree
there's always a balance to strike. And we hold the BBC to account on your
behalf on the biggest stories of the day. You fail by not covering and
explaining the issues for the public. Join me Andrea Catherwood for a new series
of feedback starting this Friday afternoon at 4.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds on
92 to 95 FM 192.