TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-03H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Followed that up with anti-government chanting. This is the BBC World Service,
the world's radio station. It's two o'clock GMT, I'm Jackie Leonard, this is the
Newsroom from the BBC World Service. The US Justice Department has said that the
former President Donald Trump should not have official immunity from prosecution
in civil lawsuits over his supporters' attack on Congress two years ago. As the
number of people confirmed dead in the Greek train disaster rises to 57, more on
the investigation into what happened. It was a personal mistake. This has been
written and of course we will wait the police investigation to give us answers
on that. In a case that's gripped the US, a prominent lawyer has been found
guilty of killing his wife and son at their mansion. Also in the programme we'll
hear from an Iranian protester who fled to escape execution. I took off my
shirt, I shouted, shoot me, I have no fear of you. My goal was to keep the women
life freedom uprising alive. I went there to die. All here on the Newsroom from
the BBC in London. We'll begin with a news bulletin. BBC News, hello, I'm Gareth
Barlow. The US Justice Department has told a federal appeals court that the
former President Donald Trump should not be immune from prosecution over civil
lawsuits relating to the attack on the US Capitol two years ago. David Willis
reports. The US Justice Department has determined that whilst an American
president might enjoy considerable latitude when it comes to making remarks that
some might deem controversial, such a loophole does not extend to the incitement
of violence. Two police officers and nearly a dozen democratic lawmakers have
been seeking to make Mr Trump personally liable for injuries, physical and
psychological, suffered on the day of the insurrection. A spokesman for Mr Trump
urged the courts to rule in short order and dismiss what he called frivolous
lawsuits. Clashes between protesters and the security forces outside an oil
field in southern Colombia have led to the deaths of a policeman and a civilian.
After the incident, community leaders took more than 80 police officers and oil
field workers as hostage. Leonardo Roscher has this report. The violence
happened after days of protests by residents who had blocked access to the oil
field in Caquet√° province in Colombia's Amazon rainforest region. The protesters
have been demanding that a company exploring for oil there carry out work to
improve conditions on a local road. The situation remains tense in an area where
dissident members of the FARC rebel group are known to operate. President
Gustavo Petro has sent a team to negotiate with community leaders. He has also
ordered the deployment of the armed forces in the province. The US Secretary of
State has told Russia's foreign minister that Washington is prepared to support
Ukraine to defend itself for as long as necessary. Antony Blinken and Sergey
Lavrov met briefly on the sidelines of the G20 summit in India, which ended
without a final statement due to disagreements over Russia's invasion. More
details from Barbara Platosha in Delhi. Mr Blinken said he raised three points.
He made the point that the US and its allies would support Ukraine till the end
of the war. He asked the Russians to restart that nuclear arms treaty, New
Start, which it has suspended, and also asked for the release of an American
detainee, Paul Whelan. He said it was less than a 10-minute discussion. It was
informal. It hadn't been arranged ahead of time. But it was the first time the
two men had met face to face since the war started. The number of people
confirmed dead in Tuesday's train crash in Greece has risen to 57. Coroners have
been using DNA samples to identify the victims. Rail workers across Greece held
a one-day strike, insisting they had repeatedly warned about lax standards and
underinvestment. More than 2,000 people protested for a second day in Athens.
You're listening to the World News from the BBC. A prominent lawyer in the
United States has been found guilty of killing his wife and son at their
mansion. Alex Murdoch showed little emotion as he was convicted of shooting the
pair at their family property in South Carolina in June 2021. Prosecutors said
he wanted to distract attention from his theft of millions of dollars from
clients which he used to fund an expensive drug habit. A court in Cambodia is
expected to announce its verdict shortly in the treason case of the opposition
leader Kumsokha, once considered the main challenger to the long-term Prime
Minister Hun Sen. If convicted, he faces up to 30 years in jail. Kumsokha was
accused of colluding with foreign governments and arrested in 2017. The head of
Britain's domestic intelligence service, Ken McCallum, has made an unprecedented
public apology for MI5's failure to prevent a terrorist attack in Manchester in
2017. Mr McCallum expressed deep regret over an official report that found that
the suicide attack that killed 22 people might have been avoided if intelligence
officers had acted more promptly on information they'd received. Having examined
all the evidence, the chair of the inquiry has found that there was a realistic
possibility that actionable intelligence could have been obtained which might
have led to actions preventing the attack. Gathering covert intelligence is
difficult, but had we managed to seize the slim chance we had, those impacted
might not have experienced such appalling loss and trauma. I am profoundly sorry
that MI5 did not prevent the attack. The Tunisian authorities have banned a
protest that was due to take place on Sunday because they say leaders of the
opposition coalition that called it are suspected of crimes against the state.
The National Salvation Front said it planned to go ahead with the demonstration
regardless of the ban. That's the latest BBC News. Hello I'm Jackie Leonard and
you're listening to the Newsroom from the BBC World Service. Donald Trump has
long argued that he should be immune from civil lawsuits relating to the attack
on the US Capitol two years ago because he was president at the time. The US
Justice Department has told a federal appeals court that it believes the
lawsuits brought against him by police officers injured in those attacks should
go ahead. It said an exception should be made in Mr Trump's case because
incitement to violence wasn't part of his official duties. It's another big
legal setback for the former president whose legal woes are mounting. David
Smith is the Guardian's Washington DC bureau chief and he joins us now. So first
of all David just explain to us what's at the heart of the Justice Department's
legal challenge? Well it's really this issue of the free speech of the president
of the United States. Donald Trump is arguing that he has absolute immunity when
acting as president in an official capacity and can basically say anything he
wants at the time that he was president. The Justice Department argued otherwise
in court today and said yes the president has a traditional function of public
communication but that does not include incitement of imminent private violence.
Mr Trump's lawyers though have rather dismissed this haven't they? They describe
the whole thing as frivolous. That's right and we saw a spokesperson for them
saying that Trump's speech called for peace and patriotism and respect for the
men and women of law enforcement. They dispute that his remarks did lead to
violence and they also dispute the idea that he did not have immunity at that
stage. And just explain to us a little bit more about this immunity. A president
can say anything because of the First Amendment? That's right. You know this is
the commander in chief. The idea is a bit like members of parliament in Britain
I suppose or members of Congress in the US. The normal rules of libel and
slander and so on do not apply and American presidents have traditionally been
given a very wide berth. But there is a ruling from the 1960s that suggests,
certainly the Justice Department argues that that does not protect speech that
incites or produces imminent lawless action or potential violence. And so that's
the road they're going down. Okay, so what might happen next? Well this is only
step one. Even though the Justice Department is arguing this, the court may
decide otherwise and certainly legal experts think that the members of Congress
and police officers bringing this suit still face an uphill battle. They would
actually have to show that Trump made a direct and intentional call for imminent
violence which is going to be pretty hard to prove. But presumably if they did
then potentially they could sue Trump for financial damages in addition to all
his other legal troubles. David, thank you. That was David Smith who is the
Guardian's Washington DC bureau chief. Alex Murdoch's murder trial, a tale of
death, deception and drugs has gripped the US. The lawyer was once considered
one of the most powerful men in South Carolina but two years ago he found
himself on the opposite side of the law when he called the police to report that
his wife and son had been shot on the grounds of their family estate. Charges
followed and a few hours ago after a six week trial he stood emotionless as the
judge read out the jury's verdicts. Mr Murdoch, you now having been found guilty
of two counts of murder involving your wife and your son, two counts of
possession of a weapon during the commission of a violent crime, of course the
minimum sentence for murder is 30 years, the maximum sentence is life
imprisonment. And our North America correspondent is David Willis and he joins
us now. David, just talk us through the prosecutor's case and the key evidence.
Well the prosecution claimed, Jackie, that Alex Murdoch murdered his wife Maggie
and his 22-year-old son Paul in order to conceal evidence of financial crimes
basically. The court heard that Alex Murdoch embezzled millions of dollars from
his clients over the years in order to feed an addiction to a prescription pain
killing drugs. And Mr Murdoch admitted a number of crimes on the stand including
fraud, embezzlement, even a faked assassination attempt, but he denied killing
his wife and son in June 2021 and even in the absence of a murder weapon or
indeed any evidence of blood on his clothing or anything like that that was
recovered, it took the jury less than three hours at the end of this six-week
trial to convict Alex Murdoch on all the charges that he was facing and
sentencing has been deferred until tomorrow, Jackie, and Alex Murdoch faces the
possibility of life imprisonment. He had pleaded not guilty. What did he say
happened? That's right and for decades the Murdoch family had made an ally out
of juries, of course, walking out of courtrooms with the judgments that built
their fortunes, that cemented their influence if you like in that community, in
that part of South Carolina and his decision to take the stand to testify in
front of the jury was unusual. It was also something of a legal risk, perhaps a
testament as well to the sort of enduring self-belief and the confidence in his
own ability to sway people in quite the way that he'd done with juries over the
years. Now outside the court, the prosecutor in this case, Crichton Walters,
told reporters it doesn't matter who your family is, it doesn't matter how much
money you have or how prominent you are, if you do wrong, if you break the law,
justice will be done in South Carolina. David, thank you, that was David Willis,
our North America correspondent. President Putin has described an alleged attack
by a Ukrainian sabotage group in a Russian region that borders Ukraine as a
terrorist attack. Yet what's interesting is that evidence of the attack is hard
to find. Russian state media say many people were taken hostage in an incursion
in the Biansk region but that afterwards the commandos were forced back into
Ukraine where they were subjected to a massive artillery strike. BBC
Monitoring's Russia editor is Vitaly Shevchenko and he explained it's all very
odd. It's unusual because nothing like it had happened before and it's strange
for several reasons. One is that it all started with a torrent of reports by
pro-war, pro-Kremlin accounts on social media, reports depicting a shocking
atrocity. Up to 50 Ukrainian saboteurs were supposedly rampaging through two
Russian villages, taking hostages, attacking innocent civilians, cars, a school
bus even. But then the narrative changed. It was just one car that was
supposedly shot at. Two people killed and one boy aged 10 wounded and he's now
being depicted as a hero. The most incredible thing about what happened is that
there are still no photographs or videos in Russian state-controlled media
showing the actual attack or its aftermath. It's top news on Russian state TV
this evening and what they're showing are maps of the area or various officials
commenting or people that are described as eyewitnesses but you can't see the
eyewitnesses. For some reason, they all speak over the phone. So it's not clear
what happened. Then there's this group, the Russian opposition group known as
the Russian Volunteer Corps. They posted a video of their leader supposedly in
one of those two villages in Bryansk region saying it was them. They were not
there to kill Russians but to inspire Russians to rebel against the government.
You described it Vitaly as unusual and strange. How significant a moment is it?
There are two ways of looking at it. On the one hand, for more than a year,
Russia and Kremlin-controlled media, they've been accusing Ukraine of every
atrocity imaginable, developing biological weapons, planning to use nuclear
weapons. So this fits this pattern of painting Ukraine black. But on the other
hand, at no point during this war has Ukraine been accused of sending a group of
paratroopers, paramilitaries, saboteurs this large into Russia. So it remains to
be seen whether this will lead up to anything. And the fact that President Putin
mentioned this incident, which he called a terrorist attack by neonatis, at a
meeting with teachers shows that he's clearly taking an interest. He may be
considering a response. It's just not clear what it may be, if there is a
response. That was Vitaly Shevchenko. Well, meanwhile, for the first time since
Russia's invasion of Ukraine, the top diplomats from Washington and Moscow have
spoken to each other face to face. The conversation between Antony Blinken and
Sergei Lavrov took place on the sidelines of the G20 meeting in India. But the
diplomats failed to agree a joint statement because of divisions over the war
that have hardened in the past year. Our correspondent Barbara Platasha reports
from New Delhi. It was a brief encounter that lasted less than 10 minutes. They
spoke on the move, said the Russian Foreign Ministry, downplaying the exchange.
Antony Blinken used it to repeat privately a message he'd been giving his
Russian counterpart Sergei Lavrov publicly. End this war of aggression. Engage
in meaningful diplomacy that can produce a just and durable peace. President
Zelensky has put forward a 10-point plan for a just and durable peace. President
Putin, however, has demonstrated zero interest in engaging unless and until
Ukraine accepts, and I quote, the new territorial realities. This was not a
diplomatic negotiation. And during the G20 meeting, Mr. Lavrov accused the West
of failing to send the same message to the Ukrainians. Instead, he said, it was
encouraging Kiev to continue the war. The deep divisions frustrated India, which
said it wanted to use its year as host of the G20 to focus on issues important
to developing nations, like tackling food and energy insecurity. In the end, the
foreign ministers did reach agreement on a number of such issues. But they
weren't able to find consensus on a joint statement because Russia and China
refused compromise language on the war that they had previously accepted. That
was Barbara Platasha. Still to come on this edition of the newsroom, we will be
looking back at the life and work of Wayne Shorter, who has died. Just though, a
reminder of our main news at the moment, the US Justice Department has said that
the former President Donald Trump should not have official immunity from
prosecution in civil lawsuits over his supporters' attack on Congress two years
ago. A coroner involved in the investigation into Tuesday's train crash in
Greece, its deadliest ever, has told the BBC that at least 57 people are now
known to have died. More than 350 passengers, mainly students returning from a
public holiday, were on board the service from Athens to Thessaloniki when it
collided with a freight train. From the site of the crash in central Greece,
Nick Beek reports. This is a tragedy which has played out in the foothills of
Mount Olympus, home to the gods in Greek mythology. Today's Greek government has
been quick to blame human error for the country's worst ever train disaster. But
the swift and simple explanation has caused rising anger. Plenty believe the
crash could have been avoided had decades of safety warnings been heeded. Today
rail workers across Greece walked out, affecting national services and the
subway in Athens. They claimed it was not safe for them to do their work. A
59-year-old station master in Larissa, the city nearest the crash site, appeared
in court charged with manslaughter by negligence. Visiting a hospital nearby
where relatives of the missing had gathered, Zoe Rapti, Greece's deputy minister
of health, told the BBC her government wasn't to blame for the crash. It was a
personal mistake. This has been written and of course we will wait for the
police investigation to give us answers on that. Of course things should have
been done during these years, but of course Greece has faced a big economic
crisis for more than 10 years, which means that many things went back. The
station master has denied any wrongdoing, blaming the collision on a technical
fault. But there are claims he may be scapegoated to mask long-standing systemic
failings. The Greek government has promised an independent investigation which
it insists will deliver justice for the victims and their families. That was
Nick Beek in Greece. Since the women, life, freedom protests in Iran erupted in
September last year, it's thought 500 protesters have died. Human rights
campaigners say around 20,000 young women and men have been detained by the
security forces and hundreds are still reported to be in jail. Among those
imprisoned was a 26-year-old boxer, Ashkan Moravati. He had been shot multiple
times during the protests. He was considered at risk of execution but somehow
managed to flee to a neighbouring country, from where our correspondent Giyar
Goul spoke to him. I know every moment I'm at risk. I escaped through the
mountainous border region in a very bad condition. I faced death every moment. I
lost lots of blood. My whole body was shivering. I'm a professional athlete, but
it was difficult to walk. I had shortage of breath. In late October last year,
the Kurdish city of Sanandaj in western Iran was one of the epicentres of
protests against the regime. In this video, Ashkan confronts the security
forces, but he was shot multiple times in close range and beaten up. I took off
my shirt. I shouted, shoot me. I have no fear of you. My goal was to keep the
women life freedom uprising alive. I went there to die. Ashkan ends up in an
intensive care unit in a hospital. To stop bleeding, Ashkan's medical team was
forced to operate on him multiple times. My legs main artery was torn apart. I
was bleeding heavily and my body was full of pellet balls. Some of the pellet
balls penetrated my lungs. One night, the security forces stormed the hospital
and took him from an intensive care unit room to a prison cell. Moving a patient
who is connected to an oxygen tank from an ICU unit to a prison cell, it means
death. It means murder. In prison, my wounds were infected. I was rubbing salt
on my open wounds to fight infections. The officials were worried. His death in
custody may spark another mass protest again in Iranian Kurdistan. I was
released on a heavy bail for 20 days to go to a hospital, treat my wounds and
then surrender myself to the prison officials. But instead of going to a
hospital, Ashkan escaped Iran. The prosecutor accused Ashkan of Muharaba, which
means waging a war against the God, a crime punishable by hanging in Iran. My
mom begged me to leave. She said if you stay, they execute you. I would never
forgive you. I hope to be alive and go back to that square where I was shot. I
want to chant again, woman, life, freedom, democracy and equality. She was
speaking to Ashkan Moravati. Wildlife species are rapidly disappearing around
the world, but occasionally a new one does get discovered. An international team
of researchers has just found a family of snakes that's completely new to
science. Anna Aslam reports. The evolutionary tree of snakes is complicated and
tangled. To try and make better sense of it, researchers conducted thousands of
DNA tests and examined the individual bones that make up snake skulls. After a
decade-long study, they realized that some snakes, which had mistakenly been
included in other families over the years, had a set of unique genetic
characteristics and made up a completely separate family. The researchers hailed
the discovery as a rare occurrence in modern science. It's believed the
Microlapidae family emerged from the evolutionary tree about 50 million years
ago. It consists of three species, which can be found in Kenya and Tanzania, as
well as parts of the Middle East, including Israel, the West Bank and Syria.
It's thought the snakes originated in East Africa and then, at some point in
history, made their way north through the Great Rift Valley. The snakes are
small and usually have glossy yellow and black stripes, so the researchers joked
that you'd definitely see them coming. That was Anna Aslam reporting. Now let's
get some sports news. Here's Paul Serres. The former England cricket captain
Michael Vaughan is expected to give evidence to the Discipline Commission
examining the racism scandal surrounding Yorkshire County Cricket Club later on
Friday. The BBC sports editor Dan Rowan has more. Michael Vaughan captained
England to ashes glory in 2005, but for the last two years his reputation and
his career as a BBC broadcaster have been in jeopardy after he was alleged to
have used racist language by a former Yorkshire teammate, Azeem Rafiq. A current
England star, Adeel Rashid, has corroborated Rafiq's allegation. Asked by
Vaughan's lawyer Christopher Stoner KC of his memory of the alleged incident,
Rashid claimed Vaughan had said, There's too many of you lot. We need to do
something about it. Mr Stoner suggested that Rashid did not have a clear memory
of events, which Rashid rejected, along with claims that he'd been pressured
into backing up Rafiq. However, he did say that he didn't believe Vaughan was a
racist and that he believed the comments were a poor attempt at humour. Vaughan
himself is set to give evidence on the third day of this hearing, the latest
episode in a saga that continues to cast a shadow over the game. The Formula One
season gets underway later on Friday with first practice at the Bahrain Grand
Prix ahead of Sunday's race. Britain's seven-time world champion Lewis Hamilton
says the struggles of last season put him in a better place this time round. I
would say I'm a lot more relaxed, a lot more, even after like the three days,
just knowing that we're not in this area fighting for pole, fighting for win
position just yet. After a difficult year last year, I feel we're best prepared
for whatever's thrown at us this year, good or bad. So I know who to go to in my
team. I know how to deal with the struggle and through it and through hard work,
we will get there. Football and FIFA could change the 2026 World Cup format back
to four team groups. After the excitement generated by last year's tournament in
Qatar, the expanded tournament of 48 teams was initially supposed to be 16
groups of three in the US, Mexico and Canada, but a rethink could be announced
as soon as this month. And in golf, the world number one John Rahm shot an
opening round 65 to lead the Arnold Palmer Invitational by two strokes. Paul,
thank you. That was Paul Serres. Now we are ending this edition of the newsroom
with a look at the life of one of America's greatest jazz saxophonists, Wayne
Shorter, who has died aged 89. He played with the likes of Miles Davis, Joni
Mitchell, Carlos Santana and Herbie Hancock, who in a tribute described him as
irreplaceable. Shorter most famously performed with the hugely successful 1970s
fusion group Weather Report. David Sillitoe's report on his life begins with one
of his best known hits, Birdland. In Weather Report, Wayne Shorter's soaring
tenor saxophone was part of the magic that turned the jazz fusion band into a
mainstream child success. Born in New Jersey, he was part of three of jazz's
most celebrated combos. Art Blakey's Jazz Messengers, Miles Davis's mid-60s
quintet with Herbie Hancock and in 1970, Weather Report. He also helped bring
jazz into rock, recording with Stilly Dan, Carlos Santana and here Joni
Mitchell, who considered him a poetic and good spirit. Eleven Grammys, a
lifetime achievement award. Wayne Shorter was jazz royalty. That was David
Sillitoe on the life of Wayne Shorter and let's finish this edition of the
programme with a little bit more of Birdland, itself a tribute to another jazz
great, Charlie Parker. This was the Newsroom. Thanks for listening. This is the
BBC World Service, where Natasha Loder is examining the challenges we face from
long COVID. COVID's trail of destruction to human health is only gradually
becoming fully apparent. At first, when I got COVID, I thought I'd be back after
10 days. Then it was a month. Then I started to think, three months. I'll be
hearing from scientists trying to unravel a condition with around 200 symptoms.
Long COVID is a health crisis. And finding out what the latest research on some
sufferers is showing. When we exercise participants and we walk them up and down
just for six minutes and we do blood tests at the end, their blood looks like
they've run the London Marathon. Depression, psychosis, sleep disturbances are
mostly reported by women. The long haul of long COVID. Tuesday at 9.30 and 20
GMT. I'm Manny Jazmi. On this week's World Football Journalist, Bora Isya joins
us from Istanbul to reflect on the resumption of the Turkish league. While
Be≈üikta≈ü fans showered the pitch with thousands of toys for child survivors of
the earthquakes, they and other fans also chanted for the government's
resignation. They're unhappy about what they see as an inadequate response to
the earthquakes. And we'll discuss Cremenesi's first win in Italy's top division
for 27 years. Join us in two minutes. BBC News with Gareth Barlow. The US
Justice Department says the former President Donald Trump should not be immune
from prosecution over civil lawsuits relating to the attack on the US Capitol
two years ago. Trump argued that he exceeded his presidential duties by inciting
people to violence. Clashes between protesters and the security forces outside
an oil field in southern Colombia have led to the deaths of a policeman and a
civilian. Residents in the province want a company that's exploring for oil in
the area to build a new road. The US Secretary of State has told Russia's
foreign minister that Washington is prepared to support Ukraine for as long as
necessary. Antony Blinken and Sergey Lavrov met briefly on the sidelines of the
G20 summit in India. A prominent lawyer in the United States has been found
guilty of killing his wife and son. Prosecutors said Alex Murdoch wanted to
distract attention from the theft of millions of dollars from his clients. A
court in Cambodia is expected to announce its verdict shortly in the treason
case of the opposition leader. Kem Sokha is accused of colluding with foreign
governments. Fifty-seven people are now known to have died in Tuesday's train
crash in Greece. Rail workers in Greece held a strike on Thursday, insisting
that they had repeatedly warned about lax standards. The head of Britain's
domestic intelligence service has made an unprecedented public apology for
failures to prevent a terrorist attack in Manchester in 2017. Ken McCullum
expressed deep regret. And a new study says fires in the boreal forests of North
America and Eurasia are a ticking time bomb, with greenhouse gas emissions
increasing over the last 20 years. The study says that in 2021, emissions from
fires in high-latitude forests were equivalent to double the carbon from the
global aviation industry. It warns there could be a vicious cycle. World News
from the BBC. My toddler slept awful and I am tired. Just screaming in the
middle of the night. Screaming. But yes, I'm a little, little, little tired,
boys, so. We've got lots of sympathy. All I had was 60,000 people screaming last
night around me, followed by a five-hour drive this morning. But apart from
that, everything's fine. Goal! Leading the conversation on the global game. This
is World Football on the BBC World Service. Hello and welcome to the programme.
I'm Manny Jasmi, with me the former Scotland international Pat Nevin and the
former USA international Heather O'Reilly. Pat, you were at Manchester United's
FA Cup match against West Ham on Wednesday, which they won at the death, thanks
to a winner from their young Argentinian international winger Alejandro
Garnacho. Unsurprisingly for an 18-year-old, he's had inconsistent performances
this season. But what do you think of him as a former winger and how difficult
is it to adapt and learn the position of winger? Well, you're interesting that
you mentioned about consistency because, or inconsistency. He's consistent in
one thing, just like Anthony. They do the same trick all the time, both of them.
It's the same trick. They pretend to get down the line and then they go in the
side. And it was driving me slightly mad, Garnacho, because he kept on doing the
same trick and all the defenders knew what he was going to do. And I kept on
thinking, well, come on, try something different. He didn't. He kept on doing
the same thing. And then in the 90th minute, he scored by doing exactly the same
thing. So well done him. He got it right. No, he was pretty good. There was
other very good performances from Manchester United. But I have to say the best
performance was by Ten Hag. He made some technical changes, tactical changes
when they went down 1-0, Benrama scored a cracker. He actually played better
than Anthony and Garnacho. But he changed the system from a 4-2-3-1 to a
4-1-4-1. Casemiro come on, controlled it, got their full backs to go forward.
And within minutes, the game was just about won. Do you think it is an
exaggeration to say that they're the closest they've been to the Sir Alex
Ferguson level when they won so many trophies? Because the reason I ask that is
because they have finished second twice since Sir Alex, once under Mourinho and
once under Solskjaer. Yes, but I don't think you get this over the full season.
I think you get this from the turn of the year and you look what they've done,
the run they've gone on. Obviously, Rashford's a big story in the midst of it.
However, it's more than that. And I don't think it is an exaggeration to say
when you look at the way they're playing, the way that that crowd was last
night, it was rammed for a midweek game in an FA Cup. They've just won another
cup. But the place was buzzing all the way from it. And the big moment that
jumped out to me is not just the belief, the swagger, the team spirit, which is
back to the old United feel, above all else, they are a group. But right at the
end, with five minutes to go, you mentioned that those last minute couple of
goals in Fergie time, as it were, you could feel it coming. And I've not felt
that for a long time at Manchester United. Heather, on the subject of learning
positions, how long did it take you to learn your position when you were
starting out? Well, I actually started as a centre forward, Manny, believe it or
not, in the good old days of a classic 4-4-2. I was the speedy striker that was
usually partner next to a large number nine. I guess I shouldn't say large.
That's probably a rude way to talk about a teammate. But bigger in stature. And
then I was sort of pushed out to outside, half back, right half back. And that
took me a little bit of time to learn, to be honest, because I think that you
have a lot more defensive responsibilities. I think from the mental side of
things, you're likely going to score less goals. And just dealing with that and
learning the craft of setting people up and assists and having a broader game
more than just pounding in goals. Yeah, it took a little bit of time mentally, I
think, to transition from. But Pia Soonhaga was really influential in that
transition for me in 2008. She said that she saw me as a winger. And at that
point, I just wanted to be on the pitch. So you sort of have to do what the
manager says if you want to play. It's taken us a long time. Four years is it,
Heather? That is exactly what we have in common. You know, I'd never played in
the wing before I went to Chelsea. And then I got stuck out there and I had to
learn this completely new position. There's lots of things you need to learn,
but people forget this most simple, basic thing, right? When you get the ball
and you're one of the two centre-forwards or a 10, one of the centre-forwards,
you get the ball, look up and you have got something like 180 degrees in front
of you to make your decisions and directions to go, right? See when you're in
the wing, it's 45 degrees. That's your angles. That's all you've got to work
with. It's such a simple thing, but it limits your abilities to do certain
things. Whereas in the central area, you've got all those other possibilities,
much more so you've got in the wings. Yeah, but you know what's so nice about
it, Pat, is having that sideline on your back, knowing that somebody's not
coming through you. I always thought that was a very comforting proposition.
Trust me, I've known a few full-backs. Yeah, just a little bit more security
behind you. So I didn't miss that getting rammed in the back from a big, angry
centre-defender. So that part I liked. Heather, just over four months to go
before the Women's World Cup and in certain corners of international football,
there seems to be a bit of a major problem happening. In the last week, Wendy
Renard, the French defender, multi-club medallist, decided to step away from the
France team. And as we speak, will be missing the World Cup, citing her mental
health after not getting on with the coach. Canada's players are threatening to
boycott their April training camp because of a lack of transparency and fair pay
from their federation, while most of Spain's best players haven't played for the
national team since September because they don't like the environment created by
their coach, Jorge Vilda. All of these are different stories, of course, but how
much do they dampen the excitement in the build-ups of the Women's World Cup,
which many say will be the biggest ever? I absolutely think it dampens it. I
think FIFA and I think all the federations that are having these conflicts have
only a couple of months to get to a point where they can put their best players
on the pitch. I think that there's a lot of people that need to roll up their
sleeves and say, how do we get to a point that these players can play? I mean,
half the Spanish team is choosing to sit it out. And of course, there's insane
depth in Spain, so they'll still roll out a decent squad and have a good
opportunity to win some games. But they're missing some of their top players.
It's just, yeah, it's just disappointing that these players are missing this
great tournament. I do know that Canada is sitting down and there's already been
some changes of leadership in Canada. I think I was just over at the Best Awards
in France, and I know that the French federation is having some serious
conversations too. So all these things are happening as we speak, and let's hope
that there's some positive momentum going forward. Can I quickly jump in and
say, look, it happened in the men's game as well, time and again. For different
reasons, some players haven't got any competition. Remember, Johan Cruyff, that
was for personal family reasons. He didn't go to a World Cup. That was back in
Argentina many years ago. But if you look through the problems that the French
squad had in the male game, the Dutch famously used to follow with each other
and the managers frequently as well. It is one of those things when you put a
lot of high-functioning, high-achieving people together, it can create problems.
We're going to continue our coverage of the aftermath of the earthquakes in
Turkey and Syria through the lens of football now. And it was marked by anti-
government protests by two of the big three clubs in Turkey when the league
resumed last weekend. That was Fenerbahce fans calling on the government to
resign for what they perceive as being an inadequate response to the earthquakes
last month that killed more than 51,000 people. The most noteworthy game was the
0-0 draw between Besiktas and Alanya Spor. After 4 minutes and 17 seconds in
memory of the time that the first earthquake struck at 4.17am, Besiktas fans
threw thousands of toys down from the stands for the children who have survived,
displaced or lost relatives. Besiktas fans then also took the opportunity to
chant against the government. Meanwhile the transfer window in Turkey is about
to close so you can add feverish speculation to all of the other emotions that
are swirling around. I've been speaking to our old friend, Turkish journalist
Bora Isiar from Istanbul and asked him to try and describe the current mood in
Turkish football. It's difficult to say there is one single mood. On the one
hand there is defiance. People are unhappy because of first the slow and
inadequate reaction given by the government to the earthquake and the rescue
efforts. And perhaps more angry at the fact that the government at a point came
close to accusing the protesters in the earthquake areas, people who have lost
everything, their families, they were pretty much all accused of being
terrorists or manipulated by foreign powers or working to undermine the
legitimacy of the state and the government because they were questioning the
approach, the rescue operations of the state, particularly in the first two
days. Fans know how to protest in an organized manner. They know how to do this.
This is why they are now thinking, well, we will do this on these people's
behalf. We will not let these people be silenced. They will continue to do so
because they see this government and the president, of course, as responsible
for failing the people, the victims of the earthquake. Has there been a response
to all of this from the authorities? The government issued indefinite banning
orders to some Fenerbahce fans because they engaged in inappropriate chanting.
This is usually reserved for racist, sometimes homophobic chants, but this was
for anti-government chanting. Fenerbahce fans, as a response, prepared this
massive banner immediately covering their faces in Balaklava. So, of course,
they went in front of the stadium, their own stadium, held up the banner that
said, we lose, we get back on our feet and try again. Dictators lose, that's the
end for them. This is going to go on. Fenerbahce and Be≈üikta≈ü fans, particularly
those two, will go on dissenting. Now this weekend, Fenerbahce is going away at
Kayseri and their fans will not be allowed for ostensibly security reasons, but
we know this is essentially a punishment. Next day, Be≈üikta≈ü will play in
Istanbul. We will hear louder protests, on the other hand, you have this another
massive group that opposes the protesters saying, no, this government is
possibly one of the best things that has happened to this republic in the last
100 years. These are not fans though, of course there are fans among them, but
mostly club owners or club presidents. For instance, Rizespor, an Anatolian
side, their president who has gotten tens of state contracts in the last few
years, called the protesters cesspool rats, agents of foreign powers. So there
will be fans who will be in support of the government, but no one is that
interested when they hear a bravo government chant in the stadiums, right? Like
no one cares if you hear something like that. So I think the mood will turn more
and more in favour of the dissenters and the defiants. The image that went
around the world, of course, from these weekends games in Turkey was that of
Be≈üikta≈ü fans throwing toys onto the pitch to be given to the surviving
children. It was actually a brilliant scene, like fantastic scenes. Of course,
everyone is already sending food, etc. other items to the earthquake hit
regions. Be≈üikta≈ü fans decided, well, why don't we do something different and
send toys to the children? They all threw those massive teddy bears and they
were all collected and sent to the region for the kids. But right after that,
the protests started. Toby Moore-More, many of the substitutes in the Be≈üikta≈ü
match gathered up the toys and some of them were in tears when they did it. Just
tell us about the reaction of the players at the weekend. One of Be≈üikta≈ü's
players, Cenk Tosun, who played for Everton as well for a short period of time,
he spent quite some time in Gaziantep as a player and Gaziantep was one of the
cities that was set. He kept actually crying during the game. He just couldn't
stop. There was a penalty at 90 plus seven and Cenk Tosun said, I want to take
it. I was watching the game and I thought, no, you're not in the psychological
state to be able to convert a penalty at 90 plus seven. There is no way. And he
missed it, which is fine. Like it really doesn't matter. But also as the toys
were being thrown, almost all players were in tears. They lost friends,
colleagues, fellow players. So I think this was one of the toughest weekends for
this generation of players at least. Have there been any repercussions for
Be≈üikta≈ü after their fans threw those toys onto the pitch? No, no. The
government was extremely happy with that. I think that would be such a red line
to cross. The government was essentially like, yes, this is a great deal. They
are sending toys because toys are interesting. They are not the absolute
necessary items to be sent to an earthquake area. So the government is saying,
well, yes, I'm taking care of health. I'm taking care of food or even money. And
this is a fantastic organization where fans are sending toys. But now the thing
is, there will be more chance. This time there won't be any toys being thrown.
There won't be any of these like really beautiful scenes. And I have a feeling
Be≈üikta≈ü will get loads and loads of indefinite bans and also an away ban I am
sure as well like Fenerbah√ße did. Bora Isciyar, always good to talk to you.
Thank you very much for joining us from Istanbul. Pat, how difficult must it
have been for the players to keep going and keep their focus with protests
inside the stadium about things that had absolutely nothing to do with the match
yet was still extremely relevant to them? As we've often said, Manny,
footballers are incredibly resilient. They have to be. There's no choice with
what goes on in the field. Some might not be able to cope. Some are obviously
very badly affected and maybe shouldn't play in those situations. Everyone is
affected to some degree with something as extreme as this. The only thing is
some are better at blocking it for the period of the game than others. That is
no more than that. Some players play with sadness, problems, even horrors in the
background, losing family members. But in the industry, you're expected to carry
on. Maybe a little less now, maybe there's a bit more understanding these days,
but you're expected just to carry on. You should be given the option obviously
not to play. I think these days most players are given that option if you're not
emotionally up to it. When you hear about Cenk Tosun's fragile emotional state
during that match, constantly crying and then missing that last minute penalty,
do you think that actually it was a bit too soon for football to resume in
Turkey? I do. I think that a lot of times as a player, we are almost bred to
carry on, to be resilient, to grin and bear it, to grit through. And so I think
it would take a lot for a player to, you know, they're doing it now, but to
stick their hand up and say, I don't feel capable of going to training this week
or this game. I think it just takes a lot. I almost feel like it's the
responsibility of the league or the team to take the players out of that
decision and just say, you know what, we are, we're protecting you guys. We're
protecting your mental health. We're going to make this tough decision and we're
going to, you know, cancel for an extended period of time and take this
difficult decision out of your hands and just give people some time to heal, to
regroup, to spend time with loved ones. I mean, if people are crying on the
pitch, they're not there yet. Heather, in Iran, female fans haven't been allowed
to watch football matches, well, for a very long time, but especially in the
last four or five months since the protests broke out there. In fact, male fans
weren't allowed to watch matches until recently because the authorities were
worried about what the fans would be doing and saying. So for women's football,
do you think that if women's football was used as an arena for that kind of
thing, do you think, would you welcome that? Or do you think that people would
be taking advantage, maybe sullying the reputation of what it is to go to a
women's football match? I would welcome it. I think the women's game has been a
platform to express a lot of human rights issues. I think that they've been on
the forefront of some, you know, protect trans kids or LGBT racism, please,
equal pay. A lot of issues have been actually in the center of women's sports.
So yeah, the question is, should it now be an environment where political
debates are held? Yeah. I think that the game has moved. It's more than a game
now. Most athletes agree that it's absolutely critical to use your platform for
more than just banging goals in or making tackles. The world has changed. And I
think most athletes, most players understand that they have value besides just
their X's and O's. Speaking of the women's game, Heather, you were in Paris this
week at the FIFA annual awards, known as the best and the best woman again was
Alexia Puteas. Despite missing the European Championship last year through
injury, do you think she was a good choice? Can you just think of how people
performed last year? Or do you think that people just, you know, don't really
pay much attention to women's football and just think, OK, well, she's good.
I've heard of her. Well, I think it was disappointing to a lot of people that
she was chosen, obviously, an incredible footballer. But what I think that FIFA
needs to do better is define the criteria, define the exact dates that, yeah,
the voting takes into account, because if it's a calendar year like a lot of
people think it was based on, Puteas should not be included in that. She was
injured, I think, for eight out of the 12 months. The dates actually go back
quite a bit. Her performances pre-injury were considered. So I think Beth Mead
obviously was a worthy choice to be the leader of your team in the country of
England for the European Championships. That would have been a great choice. And
of course, my teammate and friend Alex Morgan had a stunning year for club and
country as well. But I always take into account what these players are doing in
the big event. And so I think that Beth Mead missed out big time. Should a major
tournament be the deciding factor, Pat, in these things? Absolutely not. I'm
very much a purist in this one. You can be the best player in the world. You can
be playing every single week. You can be scoring more goals than everyone else.
And your national team's rubbish. So you don't get to an international
tournament or a major tournament. It sometimes happens like that. Now, I
understand you can be a brilliant player in an average team and you still don't
shine. But if you're a very, very good player in a great team, then everyone's
looking at you. I'm looking at the most technically gifted player, the player
who adds most to the game. But it is often not clear. All the national team
captains got a vote for their first, second and third choices. They were all
published. And Austria's David Alaba received racist abuse online for not
choosing his Real Madrid teammate Karim Benzema as his first choice. And he had
to actually issue a statement explaining that it was a collective decision by
the Austrian players. Cristiano Ronaldo wasn't nominated and didn't vote despite
being Portugal's captain, leaving Pepe to do the honours. And Pepe decided that
Ronaldo's long-time rival Lionel Messi wasn't worthy of his top three. Wouldn't
these awards be taken more seriously either if players didn't have a vote or if
their vote wasn't published? I love looking at who the captains vote for. I
think it's the most entertaining thing of the entire award ceremony to see do
they put their teammate first? Usually they do because they know that it's
looked at now, right? Like they know that it's published. They know that it's
public. They should be viewed and scrutinized. And I would hope that reporters
and journalists would go even farther and say, hey, I saw that he didn't make
your top three. Like will you just explain that a little bit? Or why did this
person make your top three and just put people on the hot seat and see if they
actually have a good response? I would again disagree. I think there's too much
politics involved in it. And as soon as you name who you're voting for and it's
put up there, then you have to make political decisions. If it was all done
secretly and you were able to vote who you thought the right person was, not
expecting any backlash from anyone, then you would have the opportunity to vote
for the right person. One of my favorite awards is always the best goal, because
you see goals from all levels. And this year's winner was a Polish amputee,
Marcin Oleksii. He stabilized himself by planting his left crutch in the ground
and then executed a stunning bicycle kick. But was his goal the best, Pat? His
goal was indeed the best. This wasn't political. It wasn't a kindness or indeed
a sympathy vote. It was simply 100% the best goal. I thought it was utterly and
completely brilliant. It added to the fact that he had to stabilize himself for
that overhead kick volley into the top corner with his crutch, which was
extraordinary. But even without it, it was probably still the best goal. So I
have to say I have no problem whatsoever. I'm so delighted with it. Finally this
week, Cremenesi, last heard on world football when they were promoted back to
the top division in Italy after 26 years in May, ended a 30-match winless run by
equaling the Italian record by beating Jose Mourinho's Roma 2-1 with a late
penalty. It was Cremenesi's first win in the top division for 27 years. Mourinho
incidentally ended up with his third red card of the season. But Pat, they're in
the relegation zone, they might go down. So wouldn't this record have been
something to hold on to? If they'd drawn, they would have held the record in
Italy for the longest winless run. I think Heather's just fainted in the
background at the idea of that question of not wanting to win. Yeah, I know.
You're all ex-footballers and it's all very different. We can't cope with the
concept. It is a stain on your character. It's a stain on your professional
history. There are no circumstances at all. Can you do that? And I'm going to
put my earplugs in to hear Heather's response now. My brain doesn't even compute
this, to be honest, because I don't even know what my longest winless streak
was. I can't think that I've gone past five or six games without a win. So Pat,
maybe you're better at answering this one than me. All right, fine, fine. Just
asking. Heather, the only team in Europe's top divisions now who haven't won
this season are Airbus UK, who play in the Welsh Premier. They're bottom,
obviously, of the league on minus two points. They've got a goal difference of
minus 53 and they're 22 points adrift of the team who are above them. What
upbeat Americanism can you offer to keep their spirits up for the rest of the
season? Well I'm going to quote a refrigerator magnet that I once had. And it's
that, boys, life isn't about waiting for the storm to pass. It's learning how to
dance in the rain. So continue dancing, boys. You'll get out of this cloud soon.
And if you don't, there's always next year. I never thought I'd ever hear anyone
say, well, I'm going to quote from a fridge magnet. Keep dancing in the storm,
everybody, until next week when we all meet again. Goodbye. Goodbye. World
Football is a BBC Sports production for the BBC World Service. This is the BBC
World Service and here's Harriet Gilbert to tell you about the next World Book
Club. It's the story of a lovely young woman who desperately in need of work
submits to the sexual demands of the director of a perfume company. Her body
gradually begins to change, growing more and more like the body of a pig. World
Book Club with Marie Dariossec. Saturday at 12 GMT. In 50 Minutes, Witness
History. With me, Rachel Naylor. Today I'm taking you back more than 30 years to
the opening of one of the world's most remote museums on a British island in the
South Atlantic. It remains open today and gets 15,000 visitors a year. Stay with
us. Weekly.