TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-06H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 their latest works. The US filmmaker Todd Field tells me about his movie Tar
starring Cate Blanchett and the Swedish auteur Ruben Ostlund talks about his
triangle of sadness. This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio station.
It's five o'clock in London. Hello and welcome to Newsday on the BBC World
Service with James Copnell and Riddhi Khabi. Our top story today, the UN
Secretary General Antonio Guterres heads to Ukraine with getting a vital food
supply grain out to the world, top of his agenda. We'll talk live to a Ukrainian
MP. We'll speak to our correspondent about an Israeli army raid in the occupied
West Bank in which six people were killed. We'll also examine why it took so
long to get help to people affected by the earthquakes in Syria. Our business
presenter will talk us through a remarkable Twitter spat between the world's
richest man Elon Musk, who owns Twitter, and one of his employees. And we'll
hear all about the latest rocket set for space. Rocket made by a 3D printer,
believe it or not. Sports coming up too, that's after the latest world news. BBC
News, hello, I'm Gareth Barlow. The UN Secretary General, Antonio Guterres, will
hold talks with President Zelensky and Kyiv today about the continued export of
Ukrainian grain. A deal brokered by the United Nations and Turkey to enable the
shipping of Ukrainian grain via the Black Sea was secured with Russia last year,
but is due for renewal. Russia has signalled that it wants more done to lift
curbs on its own agricultural exports before it agrees to an extension. James
Landell reports. Ukraine used to be one of the world's biggest exporters of
grain. So when Russia invaded and closed its ports last year, global food prices
soared and millions faced severe hunger. In July, a deal was brokered by the UN
and Turkey, under which Russia allowed some grain to be exported via the Black
Sea. But this deal has to be renewed every four months, and Russia has signalled
it might not allow an extension next week unless more is done to lift curbs on
its own agricultural exports. The United States and the European Union have
criticised a draft law in Georgia which would require companies which receive
more than 20% of their funding from abroad to register as foreign agents.
Demonstrators descended on Parliament in Tbilisi after the bill was backed by
MPs on its first reading. There are fears the legislation will be used to limit
the freedom of speech. The EU's foreign policy chief, Gis√®le Barrault, said it
was a very bad development for Georgia and could seriously affect ties. The
United States State Department spokesman, Ned Price, said Washington supported
the Georgian people's right to protest. Our message to the people of Georgia, to
the government of Georgia, to people and governments around the world, is that
the United States stands with all of those who are peacefully exercising what is
a universal right. It is a universal right to people around the world to
assemble, to have their voices heard, to speak freely, to hold their own
governments accountable. Four bankers go on trial in Switzerland today accused
of helping to hide millions of dollars that could belong to President Vladimir
Putin. They're all senior executives of the Zurich Bank of Gazprom Bank.
Prosecutors say the four did not carry out due diligence when opening an account
for the Russian cellist, Sergei Roldugin. From Geneva, Imogen Fowkes reports.
Sergei Roldugin is a cellist with a modest income. So how was he able to put
millions of dollars into a Swiss bank account? This is the question Zurich
prosecutors say the four accused should have asked. It was well known that
Roldugin was a close friend of Vladimir Putin's. He is even godfather to the
Russian president's daughter. Under Swiss law, banks are required to reject or
close accounts if they have doubts about the account holder or the source of the
money. Live from London, you're listening to the latest world news from the BBC.
Data from Myanmar shows that the number of students taking university entrance
exams has plunged 80% since the military coup in 2021. Almost one million
students sat the test in 2020, but fewer than 200,000 pupils took the exam this
year. The continuing civil war between the military and rebel groups is being
largely blamed for the drop, with thousands displaced, making schooling
difficult. Cyclone Freddie is expected to make landfall again in Mozambique
later this week, after it struck Madagascar for a second time on Monday,
bringing strong winds and torrential rain. Madagascar's government says eight
people were killed and more than 1,000 homes destroyed. The chief executive of
Twitter, Elon Musk, has apologised over an exchange he had on the platform with
an employee, Haluthur Leifson. From San Francisco, our technology correspondent,
James Clayton, has more details. Haluthur Leifson couldn't work out whether he'd
been fired or not. Eventually, he resorted to Twitter, asking Elon Musk
directly. Elon Musk quizzed him about what he did at the company. Mr Musk later
tweeted and then deleted a post, calling him the worst. But after former
colleagues weighed in, vouching for Mr Leifson, Elon Musk says he spoke to him.
Twitter's CEO said he wanted to apologise for his misunderstanding of the
situation. Mr Leifson is considering remaining at Twitter, he added. The strange
situation speaks to the chaotic way Elon Musk has handled redundancies at the
company. Scientists here in Britain have found that bumblebees learn to solve
puzzles by watching their more experienced peers. The researchers reined a set
of bees to open a puzzle box containing a sugar award. These bees then passed on
the knowledge to others in their colonies. The scientists said their studies
showed that the insects were intelligent and not only instinct, but also social
learning played a large role in the society of bees, ants and wasps. The broader
conclusion is that innovations can spread like social media memes through insect
colonies. BBC News. Thanks for the news. Hello again. Welcome to Newsday on the
BBC World Service with James N Reedy. So on the programme today, we'll head to
Ukraine, the occupied West Bank, Syria, the Twittersphere and even space,
courtesy of a rocket made by a 3D printer. Well, if that sounds like an
adventure that appeals to you, do stay in touch with us. We welcome your
messages and your reactions on unconventional rockets or anything you hear. Our
text number plus 4477 8786 2050 85. Great to have you with us this morning.
Let's start in Ukraine, where the United Nations Secretary General, Antonio
Guterres, is expected to meet President Volodymyr Zelensky today. Mr. Guterres
is in Kyiv to discuss extending a deal with Moscow that permits the export of
grain from Ukraine through the Black Sea to global markets. Ukraine is a major
global grain grower and exporter, but its exports have been hit by Russia's
invasion. And that's something that's had huge consequences, not just in
Ukraine, but around the world. Well, we can speak now to Kyra Rudik, member of
the Ukrainian parliament and the leader of the Golos party there. Welcome to the
programme. How important is the ability to export grain to Ukraine? Good
morning, James. Thank you so much for having me. The grain programme that was
started last year and allowed us to export our grains to the countries of Africa
and Asia and help to keep their food security in like low, but still acceptable
rate. At some point, it was stopped by Russia that stopped allowing Ukrainian
ships out of the ports. It is critical that for this year, there would be either
a new agreement or General Guterres will push for a different or expanded
agreement on that. Not only because it is important for Ukraine, but because it
is important to the United Nations and all the countries that depend on us in
terms of their food security. This agreement, and I would like to remind
everybody, it was an agreement between Ukraine, United Nations, Russia and
Turkey on figuring out a safe way of Ukrainian ships with the grains to go out
of occupied Ukrainian ports. This agreement was supposed to be a tryout if you
can set up any peace deal in future. It was supposed to be a step one. Even
here, you see that it did not work. It worked maybe for first month really well.
After that, Russia started decreasing an amount of ships that was going out. In
the end, it was stale. This is something that we are explaining to the whole
world that we have gone through that for the last nine years since Russia
occupied Crimea. Even when you have an agreement with them, at some point, they
would not honor it and there is no political or international pressure that they
accept. Russia is signaling now that it might not allow an extension to this
deal unless some restrictions on its own agricultural exports are lifted. As
you're saying, you simply don't trust Russia to fulfill its own obligations.
Yet, you're also saying that a deal is vital. It's a difficult line to walk,
isn't it? It is indeed. During the war, there is nothing that is easy.
Especially at the time when, on one hand, Russia is committing all kinds of war
crimes at the east and the south of our country. We know how many people in the
whole world also depend on our grain. This is something that is a task, a very
complicated political task. We understand that. We were willing to execute from
our side with all honesty and on every single step of the way. The question that
everybody is trying to figure out now, and it's a bigger question, is how do you
make Russia to honor the agreement? How can you be sure that when they say
something in two months, they would not change their mind? This is what we have
seen. Putin pulling off a nuclear deal, saying, yeah, well, we changed our mind
and we are not a part of the deal anymore. He did not officially pull off the
grain deal, but they just stopped allowing the ships out of their ports. We are
talking right now not only political way, we are talking about business. It is
also a part of business that's being done that cannot rely on Russia allowing or
not allowing the ships tomorrow. They have to have at least minimal certainty so
the ships would go in and out. Again, when we are talking about future and the
war ending, the world, the United Nations, NATO, European Union, all those
fantastic organizations, they did not figure out a way of how to make sure that
Russia would honor any deal. Honestly, we did not do it as well. We just know
our way that we need to fight them because they're killing us every single day.
But how to have security guarantees, it's unclear right now. Big questions.
Yeah. Kyra Rydyk, thank you so much, member of the Ukrainian parliament there.
We cross now to the Middle East where six Palestinians were killed in an Israeli
army raid in the Jenin refugee camp in the occupied West Bank on Tuesday. The
Israeli military says one of the dead is a militant suspected of killing two
Jewish settlers in Huara last week. Shortly afterwards, the Israeli Prime
Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, praised the military. The soldiers of the Israeli
Defense Force today eliminated the abominable terrorist who murdered in cold
blood the brothers Halal and Yagiel Yaniv. Whoever hurts us, his blood is on his
head. The killing of the Israelis in Huara last week prompted a violent attack
on the Palestinian town by Jewish settlers. Well, for more, we can speak now to
our correspondent in Gaza, Rushdie Abu Aluf. Welcome to the program. Rushdie,
Palestinian officials have condemned this raid that we've just heard the Israeli
Prime Minister praising. Tell us what they are saying. Yeah, indeed. Wide
condemnation, not only from Palestinians, but Egypt, Qatar, Jordan, Saudi
Arabia, many countries, Turkey overnight issued a statement saying that this
circular violence has to be stopped in some way. But in the ground, those
countries also, they are paying a lot of attention to this story. They are
sending delegations. We have the Qatari ambassador in Gaza talking to Hamas,
Islamic Jihad, trying to find a way to deescalate the situation. Egypt is
working, but on the ground, what we have seen since the beginning of this year
is the highest number of people died since 20 years within the first three
months of the year. We are talking about 70 Palestinians and about 14 Israelis
were killed. What happened in Jenin is that the militants group Hamas overnight
issued a statement. They said, yes, the guy who was killed in Jenin, 49 years
old, he is a fighter from Al Qassam Brigades, the armed group of Hamas. And they
said he was behind the attack in Huwara, where the two Israeli Jewish brothers
were killed by this attack. This was a very significant attack there because it
followed by hundreds of settlers attacking a village near Huwara and there have
been houses, but in the background, the Israelis were working intelligently to
try to find him. Okay, so now it seems as if Israel has got its man and you've
just mentioned that even in Palestine, that has been in Gaza, that has been
confirmed. But are we likely to see then escalation of the violence? We've seen
this tit for tat that you've kind of described that's been going on over the
last couple of months. What is likely to happen now? Yeah, already big, big
demonstrations last night and even overnight in different countries. It's a
general strike in Jenin and in some cities in the West Bank. They're angry, the
escalation is mounting everywhere. In Gaza, we have seen a small group this
morning try to fire rockets into Israel. Well, the rocket was falling down in
Gaza, didn't reach Israel, but that's give you signals and indication how angry
the Palestinians everywhere after the Jenin attack. And also, even if the
mediators, international community succeed to talk to these big groups like
Hamas, Islamic Jihad and find a way to deescalate is always individual. We have
seen individual like pulling guns and shooting, attacking, ramming. So it's very
hard to stop this action and to control individual from both sides. We have seen
settlers attacking Palestinians. We have seen Palestinians, angry, even young
people attacking the Israelis. So this cycle of revenge and hatred and violence
is, seems to be unstoppable. Correspondent in Gaza, Rushdie Abualov, thank you.
Now, the world's richest man, Elon Musk has apologised to a former Twitter
employee over a public exchange they had on the platform. Harold Thorleifson had
tweeted Mr Musk to find out whether he'd been let go by Twitter, leading to a
long and well, frankly, rather bizarre set of interactions between him and his
boss, former boss. Let's cross to Singapore, where our business presenter, Nick
Marsh, has been following the story. Mr Musk is no stranger to controversy,
doesn't always apologise though. What happened? Yeah, more chaos at Twitter,
James. Normally such a peaceful place. I won't repeat the whole thing verbatim.
Listeners can go and check it out for themselves if they haven't seen it
already, but I'll just run you through it quickly. An employee or now former
employee, Hally Thorleifson, quite senior guy by all accounts, he tweeted Elon
Musk and he said, look, I haven't been able to log on to my accounts for nine
days. Have I been fired? I think I've been fired, but no one's given me an
answer. HR's not saying anything. And Elon Musk, as it turns out, as he so often
does, replied. He said, what do you do? Who are you? He even gave him permission
to break confidentiality agreements. And then it all kind of descended into
something quite unpleasant. Elon Musk starts posting memes, crying, laughing
emojis. And he called him the worst as well in a tweet, which he then later
deleted. He was obviously criticised for this. And Elon Musk replied by saying,
look, the reality is this guy did no actual work. He claimed it as an excuse, a
disability that prevented him from typing. And here he is tweeting up a storm. I
don't have any respect for that. It turns out that Mr Thorleifson has muscular
dystrophy. So, you know, quite a serious disease. He uses a wheelchair. It was
quite a crass thing for Elon Musk to say. And now he's apologised. He said,
sorry, I misunderstood the situation. I was told things that weren't true. And
maybe, you know, Mr Thorleifson can stay as an employee after all. What do you
think prompted the apology then? Well, it could be that Elon Musk was genuinely
contrite. You know, he thought he'd overstepped the mark and fronted up a less
charitable reading, I suppose would be that an advisor or two might have tapped
him on the shoulder and said, look, Mr Musk, you know, we could be looking at a
pretty hefty lawsuit if this man's fired so publicly in front of everyone. Mr
Thorleifson himself actually spoke to the BBC. He thinks he was fired by
mistake. You know, a lot of people are losing their jobs at Twitter. Don't
forget that would involve a very big payout indeed, especially for someone of
his seniority. So he thinks that Twitter are going to try and backtrack on this
either by keeping him on as Elon Musk hinted, or by finding a reason to fire
him. So I suppose we'll have to wait and see what happens. Yeah, follow it all
on Twitter. Nick Marsh, our business presenter. Thank you very much indeed. Give
you a couple of our headlines on Newsday. There's been international concern
about Georgia's plan to pass legislation forcing companies to receive some of
their funding from abroad to register as foreign agents. And four bankers are
due to go on trial in Switzerland that could shed light on President Putin's
undisclosed wealth. This is Newsday on the BBC World Service. And that's our cue
to interrupt the BBC World Service and warm up Radio 4 for the new day. Good
morning. This is Jane Steel. What do you do when your partner spots a rare bird
but you miss out? If you're the actor Samuel West, you go out again until you
can tick it off yourself. He'll tell us about that particular moment in our
Tweet of the Day just before the top of the hour. Before that, we have all of
our usual fare starting with the Shipping Bulletin and News Briefing. And here's
what's on the way at 9am. The Patch on BBC Radio 4. One producer. What was
amazing to me as an outsider was how normal all this was. One random generated
postcode. So I've got to press that? Press that button and a story unfolding
there you wouldn't otherwise know about. What do you sell then? Everything and
anything. Unheard stories from across the UK. What do you do after being a
prison officer? The Patch on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds on Wednesday mornings at 9.
Now here's Chris Fawkes. Thanks Jane. Good morning and now the Shipping Forecast
issued by the Met Office on behalf of the Maritime and Coast Guard Agency at
0505 on Wednesday 8th March 2023. There are warnings of gales in Portland,
Plymouth, Biscay, Fitzroy, Soule, Lundy, Fastnet, Shannon, Rockall, Bailey and
South East Iceland. The general snopsis at midnight. New low expected Lundy 990
by midnight tonight. The area forecast for the next 24 hours. Viking, North
Utsera, South Utsera, Forties, Cromarty, 4th. Variable 4 becoming northerly or
northwesterly 3 to 5. Snow showers, good occasionally very poor. Tyne, dogger,
north or northeast 2 to 4. Snow showers, good occasionally very poor. Fisher,
German Bight, Humber. Variable 4 becoming west 3 to 5 in Fisher and east 3 to 5
elsewhere. Snow showers, good occasionally very poor. Thames, Dover, east 5 to 7
becoming cyclonic 3 to 5, rain or sleet, good occasionally poor. White, cyclonic
5 to 7, rain, good occasionally poor. Portland, Plymouth, cyclonic becoming
south-west 4 to 6, increasing 6 to gale 8 for a time, rain, good occasionally
poor. Biscay, south-west 6 to gale 8, decreasing 4 to 6 later, rain, good
occasionally poor. Fitzroy, Soule, south-west 4 to 6 at first in Soule,
otherwise 6 to gale 8, rain or showers, perhaps thundery, good occasionally
poor. Lundy, Fastnet, cyclonic 6 to gale 8, decreasing 4 to 6, rain, good
occasionally poor. Irish Sea, east 4 to 6, rain or sleet in south, moderate or
good occasionally poor in south. Shannon, east becoming cyclonic 6 to gale 8,
occasionally severe gale 9 later, rain, good occasionally poor. Rockhall,
easterly 4 to 6, increasing 6 to gale 8 later in south, snow showers, good
occasionally very poor. Malin, Hebrides, east or northeast 3 to 5, occasionally
6 later, occasionally 6 later, snow showers, good occasionally very poor.
Bailey, north-easterly 4 to 6 but 6 to gale 8 in north-west, occasionally severe
gale 9 later in far north-west, snow showers, good occasionally very poor. Fair
Isle, Faroes, north or northeast 4 to 6, occasionally 7 in Faroes, snow showers,
good occasionally very poor. South-east Iceland, north-easterly 6 to gale 8,
increasing severe gale 9 for a time, then decreasing 4 to 6 later, snow showers,
good occasionally very poor, light icing. And the weather reports from the
coastal stations for 0400. Tauri Automatic, east by north 3, 27 miles, 997
falling. Stornoway, north by west 4, heavy rain and snow, 2 miles, 998 now
rising. Lerwick, north 4, more than 38 miles, 995 now rising. Lukers, west 2,
more than 38 miles, 997 falling slowly. Bridlington, north by west 2, 996
falling. Sundetty Light Vessel Automatic, east by south 6, 2 miles, 993.
Greenwich Light Vessel Automatic, east 6, 2 miles, 990. Jersey, west south-west
4, recent drizzle, 4 miles, 988 now rising. Channel Light Vessel Automatic,
south-east 4, 985. Silly Automatic, south-west by west 6, missed, 2 miles, 985
now rising. Valencia, north-east by east 4, 27 miles, 987 falling. Ronaldsway,
north-east by north 3, 994 falling. Mulling Head, north-east 3, 19 miles, 995
falling. Weather Forecast Here is the weather forecast for the inshore waters of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland valid for the following 24 hours and issued
by the Met Office at Hove 500. General Situation A band of rain will be slow
moving over the English Channel and southern coast before temporarily moving
north-eastwards through the second half of Wednesday and again through Thursday,
bringing some sleet or snow on its northern edge. Further north, a cold and
unstable northerly airflow will continue throughout the forecast period with
snow showers and hail feeding into northern and north-eastern coasts. Cape Wrath
to Rhytory Head including Orkney. Northerly or north-westly veering northerly or
north-eastly 3 to 5, occasionally 6 in north. Snow or hail showers, good,
occasionally very poor. Rhytory Head to Berwick-upon-Tweed. North-west veering
north-east for a time, 3 to 5. Snow showers, good, occasionally very poor.
Berwick-upon-Tweed to Whitby. Variable, mainly north, 2 to 4. Snow showers,
good, occasionally very poor. Whitby to Gibraltar Point. Variable 4 or less,
becoming east 3 to 5 for a time. Snow showers, then occasional rain with sleet
or snow for a time, good, occasionally very poor. Gibraltar Point to North
Forland. Easterly 4 to 6, backing north-easterly 2 to 4 later. Eastly 2 to 4
later. Snow showers in north, occasional rain with sleet or snow in south.
Moderate or good, occasionally very poor. North Forland to Celsibyl. Eastly 4 to
6, becoming cyclonic 5 to 7, then north-eastly 2 to 4 later. Rain or sleet at
times, moderate or good, occasionally poor. Celsibyl to Lyme Regis. North-east 5
or 6, becoming cyclonic 5 to 7, then north-east 2 to 4 later. Rain, moderate or
good, occasionally poor. Lyme Regis to Lanzend, including the Isles of Scilly.
Cyclonic, mainly south-westerly, 5 to 7, increasing gale 8 for a time. Rain,
moderate or good, occasionally poor. Lanzend to St David's Head, including the
Bristol Channel. Cyclonic 4 to 6, occasionally 7 at first. Rain or sleet,
moderate or good, occasionally poor. St David's Head to Great Ormhead, including
St George's Channel. Eastly 3 to 5, occasionally 6 until later. Rain or sleet,
moderate or good, occasionally poor. Great Ormhead to the Mull of Galloway. East
3 to 5, occasionally 6 at first. Snow showers, then occasional rain or sleet.
Good, occasionally very poor, then poor. Isle of Man. Eastly or north-eastly 3
or 4, increasing 4 or 5, occasionally 6 in south. Mainly fair, mainly good. Loch
Foll to Collingford Loch. East 3 to 5, snow showers, good, occasionally very
poor. Mull of Galloway to Mull of Kintyre, including the Firth of Clyde and the
North Channel. Eastly or north-eastly 3 or 4, increasing 5 for a time. Snow
showers, good, occasionally very poor. Mull of Kintyre to Ardenhamercombe Point.
Eastly or north-eastly 3 or 4, occasionally 5 in west. Snow showers, good,
occasionally very poor. Ardenhamercombe Point to Cape Wrath. North-east 3 to 5,
becoming variable 4 or less for a time. Snow or hail showers, good, occasionally
very poor. Shetland Isles. North 4 to 6, snow or hail showers, then snow
showers. Snow or hail showers, good, occasionally very poor. And that completes
the Shipping Bulletin. I'll be back with the German weather forecast in a few
minutes' time, but for now, I'll hand you back to Jane. Thank you, Chris. This
is BBC Radio 4. It's half past five on Wednesday 8th March. Good morning. This
is News Briefing with Jane Steel. The UN Refugee Agency says the government's
plan to stop migrants arriving in small boats is against international law. A
weekly injection that helps people lose weight is to become available on the NHS
in England. In business, two old coal power stations have been switched on again
because of the cold weather. And in sport, Chelsea are through to the quarter-
finals of the Champions League after beating Borussia Dortmund. The Prime
Minister has said he is up for the fight with those opposed to the new
legislation designed to stop people claiming asylum in the UK if they arrive
illegally. Labour says the new system will be unworkable. Those arriving in
small boats across the Channel will be barred from claiming asylum. The UN
Refugee Agency's representative to the UK, Vicky Tennant, says the government's
announcement is a clear breach of the International Refugee Convention. We are
very concerned. This is effectively closing off access to asylum for people
arriving irregularly. Even people with very compelling claims will simply not
have the opportunity to put these forward. We believe there are other ways to
address this. Get the asylum system working, get fair, efficient, faster asylum
processing happening. If people aren't entitled to asylum, send them back to
their own countries, and if they are, then allow them to integrate. Train
companies have renewed calls for their latest pay offer to be put to members of
the RMT Union, who are scheduled to stage four strikes in the next three weeks.
It comes after the union announced it had suspended walkouts at Network Rail to
allow a vote by its members on a new pay offer. The RMT says it will give
updates in the coming days. The NHS in England has approved the use of weekly
injections that help people lose up to a tenth of their body weight. The drug,
semaglutide, marketed as WeGoV, has gained popularity in the US because it has
been promoted by celebrities and social media influencers. The National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence says it will be available only through
specialist services and for a maximum of two years. Helen Knight is a programme
director of medicines evaluation at NICE. It needs to be given alongside reduced
calorie diets and increased physical activity. So it really needs to be managed
as part of these weight management specialist centres. We also need to be
mindful that this treatment does have potential side effects, such as nausea and
vomiting. Not all patients will experience that, and of course those potential
side effects need to be carefully monitored as well. Five women have sued the
state of Texas, saying they were denied abortions even though their lives were
in danger. The lawsuit follows a US Supreme Court ruling last year that removed
constitutional protection for abortion rights. The women want the state to
clarify that doctors can provide abortions in cases where continuing the
pregnancy is unsafe, or if the foetus is unlikely to survive. A BBC
investigation has found that the number of dog attacks recorded by police in
England and Wales has risen by more than a third in the past five years. Data
obtained through Freedom of Information requests shows that last year there were
nearly 22,000 cases of out-of-control dogs causing injury. In 2018, there were
just over 16,000. The UK's dog population is estimated to have risen by only 15%
in that time. A dog legislation officer with South Yorkshire Police, Paul Daly,
says owners should train their puppies. There's certainly been an irresponsible
portion of the community who have basically not socialised the dog, not
considered how to bring a responsible dog up. If people have a dog which they
know is aggressive towards other dogs, if it's aggressive towards waterfowl, if
it's aggressive towards sheep, then please walk the dog on a lead, walk it on a
muzzle. The Botanical Society of Britain and Ireland says its latest survey of
plants in both countries shows a catastrophic decline in native species which
have been outnumbered by invasive flora for the first time. The scientists say
intensive farming and climate change are reducing the range of many of the
nation's well-known plants, like heather, while invasive species planted in
gardens are escaping and spreading, threatening native plants. Now, Chris Fawkes
is back with today's weather. Thanks a lot, Jane. And we'll start with the
tricky bit of the forecast, which is a band of rain and a few storms. Which is a
band of rain in southern parts of the UK that's pushing into cold air and
bringing some snowfalls. So, across southern counters of England this morning,
around the south coast itself, we've just got outbreaks of rain. But inland,
particularly across some of our hillier areas, the Downs, the Cotswolds, the
Salisbury Plain area into South Wales too, we are looking at some snow and the
potential for some disruption around this morning with several centimetres of
snow building up in places. So, some tricky travelling conditions around. For
London itself, well, the winds are coming up from the Thames Estuary, so there's
a little bit more of a mix of rain and sleet and a bit of snow mixed in. So,
impacts probably a little bit more limited. But that said, some of the London
airports will have to operate with de-icing operations for airplane safety. And
so, we may well see some delays and some cancellations for some of the airports.
It's worth checking before travelling. And now, later on in this morning, we are
going to see some mild air push in from the southwest. So, rain becomes much
more extensive across southwest England and across the rest of southeast England
through the course of the afternoon. But as a band of precipitation turns
heavier, well, we may well see a spell of much heavier snow work across parts of
Wales, particularly over the hills and into the Midlands as well. That's really
through the afternoon and evening time. But I think over the hills of southern
Wales, it's quite possible that we could see well in excess of 10 centimetres of
snow. So, there is certainly a risk of some disruption arriving here, especially
this afternoon and this evening time as well. So, just watch for any updates to
the weather forecast later on today. Further north, the weather is a bit more
straightforward. For Scotland, for Northern Ireland, for Northern England,
there's a widespread frost around. We are looking at sunny skies for the most
part, but we will have some frequent snow showers bringing further disruption to
Northern Scotland and a few snow showers also pushing into eastern Scotland and
northeast England at times. It will be a cold day for all of us. Temperatures
for most around 3 to 4 degrees Celsius, but up to 10 in the southwest of England
with milder air working in. Jane. Chris Fawkes, thank you. Time now for a look
at the papers. On their front pages, the Daily Telegraph and the Daily Mail say
the BBC is under pressure to take action against Gary Lineker after he said on
social media that ministers' rhetoric about migrants was not dissimilar to that
used by Germany in the 1930s. According to the Mail, he'll be rebuked. The
Telegraph says BBC management is furious after Lineker was told expressly last
year to stay away from politics. The Conservative MP Craig McKinley told the
paper that Gary Lineker should be sacked. The BBC said its staff were aware of
their responsibilities relating to social media. In an editorial, The Sun
supports the government's new plan to stop migrant boats, describing it as the
only game in town. The paper criticises Labour's response to the measures,
saying the opposition offered plenty of abuse but no solutions. The Daily
Express columnist Leo McKinstry also argues that the plan must be backed. He
says the measures recognise the central factor encouraging the illicit
crossings, that anyone who reaches our shores is likely to be allowed to stay.
But The Guardian's parliamentary sketch writer John Crace says the latest
attempt to stop the boats looks hopelessly flawed and completely pointless. He
believes that no-one will be deported for years because most cases will get held
up in the court system. According to the Daily Mirror, a deal to settle the pay
dispute in the NHS could be reached by tomorrow. The paper says there's optimism
that the government will come up with an offer which unions will be happy to
take back to their members. The Times highlights the assessment by US
intelligence that Ukrainians and Russians opposed to President Putin's war are
the most likely people to have organised attacks on the Nord Stream gas
pipelines under the Baltic Sea last September. However, Washington thinks Kiev
is unlikely to have been directly responsible. The latest revelations in The
Telegraph from WhatsApp messages exchanged between senior ministers and
officials during the Covid pandemic focus on efforts to test vaccines in the
first half of 2020. Separately, a report in The Times predicts that the most
senior civil servant, the Cabinet Secretary Simon Case, could be forced to
resign when some of his WhatsApp messages are revealed in the coronavirus public
inquiry. A source told the paper that Mr Case was the most indiscreet man in
government and some of his comments would be impossible to defend. And the
Financial Times says EU regulators have told Elon Musk, who owns Twitter, that
he must hire more human moderators and fact-checkers to prevent spread of
harmful material. Since buying Twitter, he's sacked more than half of its staff,
including the entire trust and safety teams in some offices. That's the papers.
Two old coal-fired power plants have been generating electricity again since
last night to help the grid cope with high demand because of extremely cold
weather. Here's Nick Marsh with a Business Roundup. The two plants in West
Burton in Nottinghamshire first began operating in the 1960s and were due to
close last September, but they've been kept open by the government for an extra
six months in case of shortfalls. The National Grid says the emergency use of
coal, which made up two percent of the country's electricity last year, is down
to the cold weather, as well as a shortage of wind and solar power. The chairman
of the US Federal Reserve, Jerome Powell, has told senators that interest rates
may need to be raised higher and faster than previously thought. Facing some
sharp questioning, the central bank chief said that inflation hadn't come down
as much as he'd hoped and that a final decision would hinge on new data
published in the coming week. Sri Lanka looks set to get approval on a long-
awaited $2.9 billion bailout from the International Monetary Fund. Crucial to
the deal was China, a major creditor to Sri Lanka, agreeing to restructure the
bankrupt country's debts. The IMF said this paved the way for a rescue package
as Sri Lanka faces its worst economic crisis since independence. And the White
House has said that President Biden supports a new bill that's being debated in
the Senate that would give him the power to impose an all-out ban on the social
media app TikTok on national security grounds. TikTok, which is owned by a
Chinese technology company, insists the data that it collects would never be
transferred to the Chinese government, but US federal employees have already
been told to delete the app from their devices. Time for the markets now, and
those comments from Jerome Powell on interest rates have sent shares tumbling.
In the US, the Dow Jones on Wall Street closed nearly 575 points lower, that's
around 1.7%. The FTSE was fractionally down in London by about 10 points, and in
Hong Kong a little earlier, the Hang Seng index was also down by around 2.5%. On
the currency markets, the pound's trading at $1.18 against the euro, sterling's
at 1.12. That makes 1 euro worth 89 pence. In football, Chelsea are through to
the quarterfinals of the Champions League after beating Borussia Dortmund. With
more on that and the rest of the sport, here's Paul Sarris. Chelsea beat
Borussia Dortmund 2-0 in the second leg of their last 16 tie to secure a 2-1
aggregate victory. Raheem Sterling and Kai Havertz got the goals as Chelsea
scored twice in a match for the first time since December. Tottenham Hotspur are
in action tonight. They welcome Milan, who were 1-0 ahead from the first leg.
Sheffield United were 1-0 winners away at Reading to move seven points clear of
third-place Middlesbrough in the championship. Meanwhile, West Bromwich Albion
moved within four points of the play-off places with a 1-0 victory over Wigan, a
result that sends the Latics back to the bottom of the table. Chris Wilder has
been named as the new manager of Watford, replacing the sacked Slavon Bilic. And
Emma Raducanu has pulled out of the Eisenhower Cup, in which she was due to play
mixed doubles with Cameron Norrie ahead of her scheduled match against Danka
Kovinic in the first round at Indian Wells tomorrow. Finally, a glance back at
some of the stories that were making news on this date in the past. A year ago,
Western Countries announced a series of coordinated economic sanctions against
Russia in response to the invasion of Ukraine. The UK, the US and the European
Union imposed bans or substantial cuts on imports of Russian oil and gas. It's
nine years since Malaysian Airlines flight MH370 vanished en route from Kuala
Lumpur to Beijing. 239 people were on board. Despite an extensive search, the
wreckage hasn't been found, although debris has washed up on beaches along the
Indian Ocean. Iraq's new constitution was signed by the country's governing
council in 2004, following the invasion by US-led forces the previous year. In
1971, the boxer Joe Fraser became the first person to beat Muhammad Ali at New
York's Madison Square Garden. And in 1917, Russia's February Revolution began
with rioting and strikes in St. Petersburg. It was called the February
Revolution because of Russia's use of the old-style calendar. And that's our
news briefing. On Radio 4, it's time for Prayer for the Day with Rachel
Redeemed. Good morning. I have the chronic inability to keep anything more
extravagant than a cactus alive. No matter how many reminders I set, I just
can't seem to remember to water my plants. However, it was a devastating
realisation when one day I saw that I had neglected a beautiful orchid given to
me by my mum in memory of our first child, Pax. His name means peace. Who we
lost to miscarriage. Reducing that orchid to a dry stick felt like a crushing
reminder that I'd also failed to keep Pax alive. For months, the dead plant sat
in a corner, and I tried to ignore the spectre of its skeleton. But then, a few
days ago, I found something unbelievable. Hidden behind the stick that filled me
with guilt, I could see a stem, with actual buds on it. This moved me to tears.
I didn't dare believe that in such bleak circumstances, my orchid could ever
grow again. You may sense where this is going. No, I don't have a baby in my
arms. But I do believe in someone who went into the grave dead, and came out
alive. Jesus. I know that even if I give up on myself, God will not give up on
me. There is always hope. Because if Jesus came out of the grave, so can I. We
might think that our life is wrecked beyond repair. But I hold out my fragility
to a God who can do so much more than I could ask or imagine. All-knowing God,
please use our frailty and weakness, our brokenness and crushed spirits, and
bring new life where we feel hopeless. Show us how you are using our brokenness
to bring healing to others. Amen. That was Prayer for the Day with Rachel
Redeemed. Details of help and support with pregnancy-related issues are
available at bbc.co.uk forward slash action line. Now, farming today with Anna
Hill. Good morning. Poultry producers join glasshouse growers in appealing for
help to meet their high energy bills. If producers are not able to harbour all
these costs and not see any return from the marketplace or relief from the
government, we will have no option but to close the doors and cease production
until things improve. We'll have more about that later. First, this week we're
talking about dairy farming. One of the industry's biggest challenges is
managing pollution from methane gas from the animals and river pollution from
the rivers. And we're talking about the impact of climate change on the
environment. The EPA report concluded that dairy farmers were taking a
calculated business risk not to invest to stop pollution because the chances of
being fined for polluting the environment are far less than those of the
government. The EPA report also found that dairy farmers were taking a
calculated business risk not to invest to stop pollution because the chances of
being fined for polluting the environment are far less than those of the
government. Just lately, a dairy crest site at Davistow in Cornwall is under
investigation over pollution complaints less than a year after its owner was
fined more than ¬£1.5 million for polluting. The Environment Agency has committed
to introducing a system of environmental permits for dairy and beef farms to
clamp down on pollution incidents. Beatrice Fenton went to meet Peter Alvis from
the Royal Association of British Dairy Farmers and Cheesemaker in Somerset. So
here we are at the moment looking at a manure storage tank. Once the passageways
that are in the cow houses are scraped down through, the manure then gets pumped
into the tank and it's stored in that tank until it's used as a fertilizer on
the fields to help grow the grass or the crops. And what sort of things can go
wrong? Well, there's a lot of things can go wrong with slurry being stored like
this. The catastrophic failure is that a tank would break or split or something
like that and then obviously as with any tank then it's on the floor, it's where
it's not meant to be and it needs to be cleared up. From there really, it's
about handling it properly as it's spread to make sure that pollution doesn't
occur. And the types of pollution, it can get into rivers and also air? Yeah,
again a worst case scenario of entering a water course and causing damage that
way. But we've got the unseen pollutions as well such as volatilisation of gases
going into the atmosphere from the stored manures and that sort of stuff. And
that's something that the government is looking to address with the clean air
strategy that they are proposing and potentially environmental permitting for
dairy and intensive beef animals. So environmental permitting, if it does
actually stop pollution events happening, if it ensures that every dairy farm
that's operating is meeting a certain set of standards, surely that's a good
thing. But we need something that actually works for all the different types of
farms that we have in the UK. Operating a system whereby we can risk assess and
menu choose the best changes that a farm can make to help reduce pollution might
actually give a better overall industry result than going down a hard permitting
route that is in its own right very expensive for farmers with potentially
¬£8,000 a permit initially and then potentially ¬£3,000 a year ongoing. You know,
a big cost on farms as well as having to potentially pay for covers for slurry
stores to reduce the emissions. But currently, we don't have the data to say
what happens to that trapped gas in the slurry store when that slurry is
actually spread on the ground. Environmental campaigners and river campaigners
would argue that currently the Environment Agency just doesn't have the
resources, doesn't have the budget to inspect farms regularly enough and these
permits would actually bring in decent revenue so that they could do that. We're
looking at 20,000 permits potentially for dairy and beef. You know, we're
talking about a massive amount of work and stuff like that and I don't believe
in all honesty that by the time we've gone down that route and made a bespoke
permit for each farm that it'll actually deliver anything more. I think
permitting, if it was applied across all farms, the cost of the permitting
itself could be enormous for those farms and they may find that in actual fact
it's the straw that breaks the camel's back. They give up, you know, and we lose
the small farming operations that are the backbone of the countryside that we
have today. And yet pollution events are still happening, too many pollution
events are still happening. There was a recent report by the Environment Agency
that showed that two-thirds of farms inspected in one region in England, in
Devon, were polluting. Your own farm, Lycross Farm, was fined for polluting a
local river back in 2021. There is obviously a problem in the industry, you're
not alone, something does need to change. Without a doubt we can't continue
having events where accidents happen and slowly ends up polluting rivers and
that sort of thing, no one's arguing that. But permitting isn't necessarily the
answer because if at the end of the day the cost of permitting is so expensive
that we can't actually tackle the key sources because we're spending money in
areas that are not as effective, then that actually isn't going to deliver for
the farmer, for the environment or for the community as a whole. Dairy farmer
Peter Alvis. Now while Scotland and Northern England are battling with the snow,
farmers in East Anglia and the South West are still hoping for more rain. East
Anglia in particular had the driest February since 1959 and the third driest on
record. And for a region where three-quarters of the land produces grain and
vegetables, lack of rain can have a serious impact nationwide. I've been to the
Euston estate near Thetford and met up with farm manager Andrew Blenckhuyen to
hear how low water levels have changed what they're going to grow on the estate.
Well you can tell by our footsteps that we're walking in wet mud which is great
because I've come to report on a drought, it rained. I'm with Andrew Blenckhuyen
at his reservoir and you did have a bit of rain last night didn't you? We had
six mil of rain last night which was almost the same amount that we had during
February. It's the end of the winter and normally this reservoir in front of us
would be full? Yes this is our wash pits reservoir, one of two that we have here
at Euston and its capacity is 80 million gallons and it's about 40 percent full.
And we can see the sides, the water is is halfway down, so what sort of
difference does that make to what you decide to do on the farm? We expected this
when we sort of sat down and did our planning at the end of November. We decided
to reduce the irrigated cropped area here, so that's crops of potatoes, carrots,
parsnips and onions from 1,150 acres down to about 850. That's probably 4,000
tons worth of commodity that's not going to be produced on this farm. What have
you put in instead? We're planning to over the next couple of weeks to plant
sugar beet to replace those crops. It's considerably less of a risk not to have
the water for the sugar beets. We've just jumped out of the car so we're going
to go and see the borehole now. If we come in we've just got these big pipes
coming out of the ground. So these pumps are sat at about 20 odd meters down
into the ground. That has the ability to hold water very successfully and can be
utilized by farmers and indeed for the public water supply companies. So the
water that we use from here is usually in the summer direct from the borehole.
Have the aquifers filled up since the very hot dry summer last year? We're sort
of sat in the middle between an aquifer that has recharged reasonably well and
an aquifer that hasn't. It's just one of those potential risks that we may face
some form of restrictions. The key criteria is just making sure that farmers get
their fair share of the water. If we don't get water for food all we're going to
do is offshore our production and we'll be importing other people's water in
effect. And indeed we're not necessarily certain that those crops are produced
to the highest of environmental standards that we have to adhere to here. Andrew
Blenkirn on the Euston estate. Poultry farmers are appealing to government to
include them on a list of industries which would get help paying their energy
costs. The energy bill relief scheme is being replaced by the energy and trade
intensive industry scheme, but agricultural producers are not included in
either. Poultry production has declined recently, partly due to avian flu, but
also because of the huge rise in the cost of heating, ventilating and feeding
indoor chickens for meat. The indoor vegetable industry is also asking the
government for help with energy costs. I asked James Motteshead, head of the
NFU's poultry board, to describe the energy needs on his own broiler chicken
farm, which produces nearly 1.5 million birds a year. Growing broiler chickens
is very energy intensive. You start off by heating your sheds up to 32 or 33
degrees, ready for the chicks to come in. As the birds get older, they start to
produce body heat themselves and so you have to start to cool those birds as
well. So your reliance on gas reduces, but your reliance on electric to
ventilate and control birds climate increases. So essentially you're using a lot
of electric and gas. So some farms, and I know your one farm that does this,
uses energy on the farm. We have a small wind turbine on our farm, we have solar
panels, but essentially we use more electric than what we can generate. We also
have a combined heat and power unit on our farm, but that in itself doesn't
power the farm enough. Now some farmers I know use chicken manure for fuel. If
all farmers did more of that, do you think they would still need government
help? Yes, because your heating element is only part of the energy problem. Your
next big problem is your electric costs, because they are bigger than what the
heating costs are. Going back to a chicken litter boiler, they are very
effective. They're also very expensive. You're looking at an outlay of 2
million, 2.5 plus you've got a shed to house it as well. And there is no sort
of, you know, you can't just put a shed in the house, as well. And there is no
sort of renewable heat incentive like there used to be. So you've got to be able
to fully fund that. And it's probably still cheaper to use gas than what it is
to burn chicken manure, just because of the infrastructure costs. Traditionally,
poultry has not had government support. Why should you get it now? We haven't,
and we're quite proud for that. The challenge at the moment is we are in
different times. There's a war going on in Ukraine. And the reality is, is the
retailers are refusing to play ball. And so therefore, we've then got to step in
and ask the government. You're sat with a situation where you can't afford to
produce these products anymore. If producers are expected to harbour all these
costs and not see any return from the marketplace or relief from the government,
we will have no option but to close the doors and cease production until things
improve. If no help is forthcoming, what proportion of chicken producers do you
think might actually go out of production? We're already seeing a 7 to 10%
reduction just in January alone in broiler placings. And I think it's possible
that you could see a further 10% to 15% at least going forward until the spring.
And then we'll just have to see where things sit from there on. What do you want
to see from the government then? So we would like to see in the budget next
week, the government move the poultry sector into the energy trade intensive
industry scheme to allow the producers to have the confidence to keep producing
poultry products to keep cheap, nutritious protein on the shelves for consumers
to buy. James Mottershead from the NFU. A government spokesperson told us, we've
taken significant action to support the sector, including introducing the energy
bill relief scheme, which food producers are eligible for. They also mentioned
the government's energy intensive industries exemption scheme, which is
available for poultry meat processing, but not for farmers growing chickens.
That's all we've got time for today. I'm Anna Hill. The studio manager is Susie
Robbins and the producer in Bristol is Rebecca Rooney. Now the actor Samuel West
describes the turkey like Capercaillie. My encounters with Capercaillie, the
large black grouse confined to Scotland, have been limited to two brief
sightings at the Highland Reserve of Loch Garton, early one May morning, eight
years ago. They're rare and shy and notoriously hard to see. And my partner and
I spent a frosty few hours one day when she'd caught sight of one and I hadn't
yet. We got up very early the next morning and I had more luck catching this
ivory bill and proud black head of a huge turkey thing walking slowly through
the undergrowth. I've never heard the song live and it's so odd that it's gone
to the top of my birding bucket list. The call of the male Capercaillie is
unlike anything else. It sounds like a snooker ball accelerating down a marble
run before settling in its pocket and somehow triggering a small champagne cork
followed by a grinding hiss as the champagne spills out. I can't imagine it
being attractive to females but then here we are discussing it and I'd have to
colour myself interested.