TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-10H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at 9 o'clock. President Zelensky has reflected on what he called a
year of pain, sorrow, faith and unity, as Ukraine marks the first anniversary of
Russia's full-scale invasion. He said Ukraine had remained invincible and
pledged to do everything to defeat Russia this year. Ceremonies are taking place
across the country to remember those who have been killed or forced to flee.
Ukraine's Culture Minister Oleksandr Tuchenko told Today both the Russian
government and public need to be punished for the war. These people elected this
president. These people are waving flags two days ago, greeting his speech about
war in Ukraine. It's also the responsibility of those who are not publicly
claiming against war, against Putin. So, for us, there doesn't exist good
Russians. The Archbishop of Canterbury has warned that Russia must not be
treated like Germany after the First World War once the conflict in Ukraine is
over. Writing in the Daily Telegraph, Justin Welby said Russia must be able to
recover and be secure without being allowed to repeat its aggression. A fourth
man has been arrested in connection with the shooting of an off-duty police
officer in Oma. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell is in a critical but
stable condition after the attack on Wednesday. Police say they're focusing
their investigation on the dissident Republican group, the new IRA. Candidates
vying to replace Nicola Sturgeon as leader of the SNP and Scotland's first
minister have until noon to garner enough support to get their names on the
ballot paper. The winner of the contest will be announced at the end of next
month. And archaeologists have expressed concern that troves of ancient
artefacts are gathering dust in warehouses because museums in England are
running out of space. The objects range from fine Roman metal work to Bronze Age
pottery unearthed during construction work. The government agency Historic
England says a solution needs to be found soon before the stores are full. BBC
News. On this first anniversary of the invasion of Ukraine, Woman's Hour talks
to Dame Melinda Simmons, the UK ambassador there at ten this morning. Or if
you're in the mood for some music, head to BBC Sounds for a brand new classical
mix tape where you can bathe in the shimmering strings of Richard Strauss, tap
your toes to Oscar Peterson's take on Gershwin or enjoy Haydn's keyboard
concerto in F major. The classical mix tape available now on BBC Sounds. This is
Radio 4 and now it's Desert Island Discs with Lauren Laverne. My cast away this
week is Jenny Bevan. She's a triple Oscar winning costume designer and has spent
40 years building characters and weaving narratives for the big screen through
clothes. Her eye for detail and knack for authenticity are the stuff of legend
in the film industry and they serve her well whichever world she steps into. The
exquisite period costumes of The King's Speech, Gorsford Park and Sense and
Sensibility feel absolutely true to their settings but then so do the post-
apocalyptic steampunk of Mad Max Fury Road and the 70s fashion banquet of
Disney's Cruella. She grew up in a creative household and dreamed of becoming a
set designer until a lucky break set her on an altogether different path. She
describes her job as storytelling through clothes. So what story do her own
choices reveal? Perhaps that she's someone who likes to push the boundaries and
mix things up? After all, she did make headlines around the world when she
rocked up to collect her second Oscar in an M&S leather jacket. She says, I love
dressing others and I know how to make them look beautiful on screen but I've
never been interested in that kind of look for myself. Jenny Bevan, welcome to
Desert Island Discs. Jenny Thank you, Lauren. It's a real honour to be here.
Lauren Oh, we're delighted to have you. So Jenny, you must have the most
wonderful imagination to keep being able to visualise so many different worlds
and characters over all of the decades that you've been working. I wonder what
the starting point is for you once you've got a new commission? Jenny The script
and the director's vision. So normally I'm sent the script and if I like it then
there's a meeting with the director arranged unless of course it's someone I've
worked with before. From that moment I sort of live in that world and that's
what I really love is becoming part of the world of whatever story it is. Lauren
So as you're reading it, is it coming to life for you can visualise it quite
early on? Jenny It normally does on the first reading. I do have a huge
imagination which served me slightly worryingly when I was very small because I
used to have terrible nightmares and imagine all sorts of horrors under the bed
and whatever. Lauren I wonder what qualities you most enjoy in the actors that
you work with? What are you hoping for when you set out to start your fittings?
Jenny I think the thing I'm looking for and when it happens it just makes it
sheerly joyous is when the actor turns and says, now I know who I am. Lauren
Jenny of course you're sharing your tracks with us today, the music that matters
to you. How important is music to you when you're working? Do you use it to help
you create an atmosphere when you're fitting or working with an actor or to
create a world? Jenny I do it at home. I don't use music in the fitting room but
in my own life music is probably the most important of all the arts. I was
brought up in a family of classical musicians and that was absolutely what we
heard and lived with all the time and it's still, in fact in my next life I will
share this with you, I'm going to be a conductor. I'm going to practice, which I
didn't do this time around. So yeah. Lauren Oh well good to know what your
future plans are. Well before we get there, let's get to your music, this first
disc today. What's it going to be Jenny? Jenny It's from the St Matthew Passion
which is probably the piece of music I first took in and really listened to
because both my parents were classical musicians and it was very badly played in
the 50s. So when they were both in something I was often taken along to
rehearsal and I have this incredible memory of, I think it must have been a
rehearsal room in somewhere like the Royal College of Music because it's a big
Victorian room. I'm sitting on a bentwood chair, my feet don't touch the ground
and they've rehearsed and I've heard it and then they're putting their
instruments away and my mother's wrapping her viola in a scarf and my father has
a rather nice yellow duster which goes round his cello neck and I just can see
it as if it was yesterday and the music's just crept into my soul at this point.
I must have been about six, seven. Lauren I love that they were dressing their
instruments. Jenny Yes, well to put them away yes and also when you use rosin on
a bow it gets powdery and so you need something to just gently dust it off. I
have a delicious chili resort down the Side door is up down the road and you can
get Geduld, geduld, wenn mich falsche Zungen stechen. Falsche Zungen stechen.
Geduld, geduld, wenn mich falsche Zungen stechen. Falsche Zungen stechen. Bleib
ich wieder meine Schuld. Bleib ich wieder meine Schuld. Geduld, geduld, wenn
mich falsche Zungen stechen. Let's go back to the beginning then, Jenny. You
chose that piece, as you said, to remind you of your parents, your dad, Peter in
particular, playing the cello. Tell me a little bit more about him. He was a
remarkable man, I think, and I think a cellist from a very young age and came up
to London at age 16 to go to the Royal Academy of Music and met my mother, who
was actually from the Royal College of Music, on a Boyd-Neal orchestral tour
later on. He always had projects. Letterpress printing he was extremely good at.
He was always making things DIY. That wasn't always quite so successful. And
then we got this whole hi-fi thing going, and I think it was pretty medium-fi,
actually, but he brought all the separate components and put them together. Oh,
and photography, that was another thing. I do remember standing next to him in
the dark of this little almost cupboard at the back of our flat in Kensington
and watching the photograph come up in the bath of Hypo, I think it was called.
Oh, yes. He used to take beautiful photographs and then develop them and print
them. So I was just brought up in a very creative sort of way, I think. It does
sound like it was 24-7 creativity in your house. What about your mum, Molly? She
was a viola player, as you said. She was a fantastic viola player and a
wonderful mother, but she stopped playing to look after us. And I always think
that was a mistake. I mean, she should have kept playing more. I always thought
she was so good. She should have kept going more and not worried about us. We'd
have been fine. But in the room downstairs in the flat, she left a wall so that
we could draw on it. I will never forget that. It was such a brilliant thing to
do, just let them go free on the wall. It sounds like a very joyful household,
the way that you describe it. This kind of active, interested, expressive
household. It was. And she also sent us to a friable school rather than a
regular primary because she loved that German system of play. And through the
play, you learn actually an enormous amount, which I absolutely loved. So they
must have been very progressive because this would have been the 50s. Yeah. So
with both of your parents being professional players, Jenny, did you and Hilary
follow in their footsteps and take music lessons? Did you do it informally just
as part of family life? We absolutely did take lessons. And Hil was much better
than me, as she is at most things, and played the piano. I played the cello,
which I did enjoy, but I just was hopeless at practising. And I just wanted to
be able to do it. But I did learn it up until I was about 15 or 16 and can still
just about do it. And we have this terrible family quartet. It's called the
Plughole Quartet. I've heard about this. Now, the Plughole Quartet, talk me
through the repertoire. What have you got? Oh, not a lot. So we formed because I
had a huge bathroom project at my house and to celebrate the finishing of the
building works, we played a piece written by my friend Julian Marshall, which
was called the Bathroom Suite. And I'd said to him expressly, it has to be in
4-4 time in C major. But oh, no, no, we were in three sharps and all over the
place. Anyway, we got through it wearing, of course, bath hats and bath robes.
Speaking of music, time for your second disc. What are we going to hear next?
We're going to hear the Stately Homes of England, performed by Noel Coward,
which I mean, we didn't just stick to classical music at home. And we had some
really wonderful, funny records like Planters and Swan and this fabulous Noel
Coward. And we used to listen to them in the evenings with a cup of tea. This is
the days of this hi-fi, marvellous hi-fi thing that my dad made. We lived in
Putney in a very normal Edwardian house, not huge. And my mother, I think she
died by this moment, she died very young. And this fabulous aunt came to look
after us. And it would be whoever was around. Plus there was normally at least
three or four people sort of tucked into corners, you know, waifs and strays and
cousins and what have you. We'd put on an LP and listen to it. And I just have
these wonderful memories. The Stately Homes of England we proudly represent. We
only keep them up for Americans to rent. Though the pipes that supply the
bathroom burst and the lavatory makes you fear the worst, it was used by Charles
I quite informally and later by George IV. On the journey north, the State
Departments keep their historical renown. It's wiser not to sleep there in case
they tumble down. But still if they ever catch on fire, which with any luck they
might, we'll fight for the Stately Homes of England. The Stately Homes of
England, though rather in the lurch, provide a lot of chances for psychical
research. There's the ghost of a crazy younger son who murdered in 1350 one an
extremely rowdy nun who resented it. The people who come to call meet her in the
hall. The baby in the guest wing who crouches by the grate was walled up in the
West Wing in 1428. If anyone spots the Queen of Scots in a hand-embroidered
shroud, we're proud of the Stately Homes of England. The Stately Homes of
England, written and performed by Noel Coward. So Jenny, when you were young in
this rather bohemian home, were you always making things, putting on plays, that
kind of thing? It was more doll's houses in those early days. And then I had
this wonderful grandfather who used to give us sixpence if we could tell him
where a quote from Shakespeare came from. And he decided he wanted to take me to
see my first Shakespeare. And he took me to see Dorothy Tootin in Twelfth Night.
I must have been 10 or 11 I think. And I'd never seen anything like it. What
kind of production was it? It was probably quite a straightforward production.
But I was just entranced with the acting, the look of it, the storytelling. I
knew at that point I needed to be some part of it. I don't think I ever wanted
to act. But I knew there was something about being part of that world that
really, really was going to be important. Now, as you mentioned, Jenny, you lost
your mum when you were very young. You were just 14 when she died. How clear are
your memories of that time? What do you remember about it? She was ill for quite
a long time. It was cancer and possibly these days would have been cured. And
I'm funny about death. I don't know. I've always had just an inevitability about
it. So it's sad, but it's not anything that isn't in a funny way normal. And
then this fabulous Aunt Paul, who is a distant relation, not I think a fourth
cousin or something, said if we wanted her to, if the girls wanted me, I will
come and look up. And she brought her two children, Rod and Claire. So we
actually expanded as a family and we're still incredibly fond of each other. But
you had that emotional support from extended family and friends. Tremendous,
yes, absolutely. I know that your sister said you stepped in to help with the
practicalities and support her and look after her. I tried really hard, I must
say. Although, you know, the washing, oh dear. I can remember one of the very
early things I bought after that experience when I first earned a bit of money.
It was an automatic washing machine. That's true liberation. It was obviously a
few years later. So what was it, twin tub before that? Oh, twin tub, yes,
absolutely. And a lot of hauling of stuff between the two. No, absolutely. But
that must have been quite a lot of responsibility to take on as a teenager.
Yeah, I think it was. It's time to go to the music. Disc number three. What are
we going to hear? Disc number three is the Flower Song from Carmen, which I
designed for Covent Garden at a ridiculously early age, doing a sort of rescue
mission due to people not being available. Why must fate bring me to this? La
fleur que tu m'avais jetée, The Flower You Threw At Me, sung by Placido Domingo
with the London Philharmonic Orchestra, conducted by Sir George Shulte. So
Jenny, you're going to have to talk me through this. You ended up designing not
only the sets, but also the costumes for Carmen at the Royal Opera House. You
were just 21. You described it as a rescue mission, quite the debut. How did you
get the gig? I'd been sent to the Welsh Theatre Company as an Arts Council
Trainee Assistant Designer, which was a fantastic scheme that ran then and you
would be put in a theatre. It was at that time run by Michael Jelliot, who also
ran Welsh National Opera. He'd been asked to do Carmen at Covent Garden and had
actually asked my Head of Department when I was at Central School of Art and
Design, Ralph Coltai, to do the sets. Ralph was very modern in his design style.
He did really extremely beautiful sculptural sets, but the conductor, Sir Gael
Shulte, who was coming back for his first gig after he'd left the Opera House
and was coming back as a guest conductor, didn't want a modern interpretation.
So suddenly Ralph decided it wasn't right for him and they were left without a
designer and Michael turned to me. I'd done two incredibly small shows for him
at the Welsh Theatre Company, which was an 80-seater in splot. I said, what did
I think of Carmen? And I said, well, of course I know a bit of it, but I've
never really. So he said, well, listen to it and see what you come up with Act
One. As I was an Arts Council training assistant, I thought, oh, well, that's
just him asking me to do something. So I designed a set for Act One, which is
the Piazza. And he took a look at it and he said, we're going on a plane
tomorrow. Have you got a passport? I said, yes, we're going to Frankfurt. We're
going to see Sir Gael Shulte. I want you to show this to him to do Carmen. So I
packed up the model and off we went to Frankfurt and Shulte said, I'd just like
to see what you do for Act Two. So I came back and designed Act Two and he liked
it. So that's how I got the gig. And then happily in the house, this is a house
in Putney, my friend David Fielding was living there. We were at college
together and he'd come back. So I got him involved. So we actually ended up
doing it together. And then he took on the props because I was suddenly the
nasty of the costume. How did that come about? So at first it was just the sets.
And then what happened? Well, nobody wanted to do costumes for a 21 year old
designer set. So it was like, you will do it. So how many are we talking? About
400. But at the Opera House, everybody was incredibly helpful to me. I think
they realised if they weren't, it could all go horribly pear shaped. And the
more help I got, the more likely we were to end up with a good production. It
was never going to be earth shattering or fabulously modern, but it was a good
solid rendition of Carmen with nice sets. I was proud of the sets actually. So
it went well. And after a few years working in theatre, you helped an old family
friend out. They'd asked you to work on Dame Peggy Ashcroft's costumes. And that
took you into designing for Merchant Ivory. So Nick rings me and says, could I
just go and help her get together a wardrobe of clothes for this eccentric
English dealer who's going to be travelling overland with her female companion
and then no money involved. So I looked through my wardrobe and I had some quite
odd pieces and I went over and we had a wonderful day. And then I went back and
she said to me, she said, my dear, we're getting on quite well. Now, I've never
been to India before. This is pre Jewel in the Crown or Pasadena. I'm a little
concerned about going. And she said they offered me a first class air ticket. If
I change it for two economies, will you come with me? So I end up in this palace
in Jodhpur, Rajasthan. And I just get involved with everything. I do crowd
collecting. I do props. I do costumes. I help with continuity. I, you know,
basically just. And after that, I was simply part of the Merchant Ivory family
and they saw me as a costume designer. Didn't you go travelling together? After
the film, which was in Rajasthan, we went down to Goa and we had an incredible
time. We were both on a Lambretta scooter, you know, and it was a lovely end to
what's really my first film. It's time for some more music. Jenny Bevan, what's
your fourth piece today and why are you taking it with you to the island? It's O
Mio Bambino Caro from A Room with a View. It was the film I did with Merchant
Ivory and John Bright. And I was so surprised because obviously when we make a
film, you have no idea what the music is going to be. You're making the pieces
of the jigsaw, which are then slotted together by someone else and then
varnished over and all that. And so I remember sitting in the cinema for the
cast and crew screening and absolutely being blown away by the choice of this
music, which I had no idea was going to be on the film. O Mio Bambino Caro from
A Room with a View si voglio andare e se la passo in arno andrò sul ponte
vecchio ma per buttarmi in arno mi struggo e mi tormento al dio vorrei morir O
mio bambino caro by Puccini sung by Kiri Takanoa with the London Philharmonic
Orchestra from the soundtrack to A Room with a View. Jenny, it's not just about
getting the visual look of a film right. It's also about understanding its
social context, isn't it? I know that when you worked on the film The King's
Speech, you made sure Geoffrey Rush's character didn't have too many clothes.
Yeah, well, we didn't then. They're obviously a bit earlier, but only a little
bit. But I remember having very few clothes in the early 50s and you mended them
and you polished your shoes and you only had three pairs, your indoor, your
outdoor and your daps, possibly a pair of wellingtons. But absolutely nobody did
and they wore them round and round as indeed in Jane Austen's day, they didn't
necessarily have many clothes, but had a lot of accessories that sort of gave
things a really different look. And that's one of the fun things. And if you're
on a small budget, that really saves you. You enjoyed so much success, Jenny,
with some incredible period costumes. But then in 2015, there was a complete
change of gear. You were asked to work on something totally different, Mad Max
Fury Road. So how did you go about imagining costumes for this post-apocalyptic
world? I mean, it's a graphic novel to start with. So I guess you've got the
comics to help you, the visual references. But what sort of design criteria did
you have? It's exactly the same as if you're doing Jane Austen or modern or
King's Speech. It's a story of these characters and what their backgrounds are
and where they've come from. And this happens in the post-apocalyptic world.
They're surviving with very little. They're in a world without much water there.
And it's a whole different set of rules, rules of survival. And a lot of them
are only kept alive by the curious contraptions they wear, like the mask on the
Immortan Joe and the breathing thing on his back or Rictus erectus with his
breathing thing. Appendices. You know, and that because the war boys have
nowhere to put anything, pockets would be really handy. So, you know, they would
keep whatever they owned in pockets. And that gave them a much sort of more
solid look, but real teamwork thing, actually, as it should be. It's time for
your fifth choice, Jenny. What have you got for us? My fifth choice is my
daughter, Caitlin, singing Scream. So she did toy with the idea of being a
musician. She went to a wonderful school and they had a great drama department
and they did The Fall of the House of Usher as their A-level set piece. And she
wrote this song Scream when she was thinking of music and with Jim Bell. And I
just think it's really clever. She did a whole CD and it's having my daughter
with me, probably the most important person in my life. Me. You try to hide. I
will take you down. Can you hear me? Scream by Caitlin Albury Bevan. So, Jenny
Bevan, your costumes for Mad Max Fury Road were hugely successful. You won both
an Oscar and a BAFTA for your work on that film. Now, when you went to collect
your BAFTA, the host for the award ceremony, Stephen Fry, did joke only one of
the greats of cinematic costume design would come to an award ceremony dressed
as a bag lady. And it created a few newspaper headlines at the time. What's your
recollection of events? Well, I didn't hear it because I was already backstage.
And I love Stephen and I love the fact he said that. Of course I did. I had my
shirt ties hanging out. I thought it was just an absolutely fine thing to say
and I don't think it did me anything but good, really. But obviously this kind
of hubbub around it, how long did it take to die down? And did that kind of
creep into your real life at all? Were there people outside the house and things
like that? Yeah, we had a bit of that. But what was interesting was actually
understanding what film stars go through. Just having a moment of learning what
it feels like to be recognised and the street and all that died down very
quickly. It was all fine. There was a tabloid journalist in your hedge though.
There was indeed, yes, he leapt up, but my neighbour across the road. It was
funny because he said, come over and have a drink. And literally, I mean, we're
talking over the road. When I got ready to come back to my house, he said, I'm
going to walk you across. I said, Stuart, don't be ridiculous. It's over the
road. I'm walking you back. And there he was when this woman literally jumped
out of the hedge. So I was very glad he had. So you won another Oscar for your
work on Cruella, the 2021 film with Emma Stone and Dame Emma Thompson. Now,
anyone who's seen it, as I have numerous times, will understand why it is an
absolute tour de force, a banquet of 70s fashion, both stars wearing a stunning
parade of outfits. And one of Emma Stone's involves a white cape that actually
literally burns off to reveal a red dress. So she sets it on fire. There are
multiple fashion shows, there are balls, there are punk rock performances. I
mean, you know, there are a lot of extras and everybody's costume matters in
this film. I'm imagining that must have been really rewarding, but a challenging
film to work on. How long did you have to prepare? It was very quick. Another
sort of rescue mission, really. We actually had 10 weeks. It's not like theatre
where you have to have it already from first night. You're going in schedule
order always. But even so, it was massive because the schedule was all over the
place with stuff coming up front. But Emma Stone, bless her, slipped at a, I
think, a Spice Girls concert and broke her collarbone for which she was so
mortified. And I just said, as long as you're not in too much pain, we are so
grateful because they actually gave us another six weeks. And we've been going
at such a speed that we just kept the thing up and really, really helped, I
think, put a lot of the detail in that would have been a bit tricky otherwise.
But I also have the most phenomenal team on that. Jenny, it's time for some more
music. Your sixth piece today. What is it? Well, this isn't music. This is Joe
Lycett doing the parking fine. And Joe is a tremendous friend. And I'm not sure
I'm going to like this island. I'll be very, very honest. I like my home
comforts. I'm not going to like being bitten by bugs and not having a proper
mattress and various things. And this makes me laugh and has made me laugh from
the minute I saw it. And Joe, in a funny way, is sort of the epitome of the
house I live in in London now, which is also full of people and artists and
musicians, sort of part time, whatever. And I do really love that kind of life,
which I sort of had through my life, is just really fun people living at the
house. So Joe came to lodge with you. He's a friend of your daughter, Caitlin.
Yes, they met at Manchester University and his dad bought him a flat. And Joe
said, you know, if you want to leave your stuff up over the summer break, do.
And I thought, oh, that's brilliant. I don't have to drive all the way up to
Manchester and back. And I said, that's really kind. You know, Joe needs a room.
Do tell him he's welcome. 12 years ago. I mean, he's got his own house. He
doesn't, you know, he lives in Birmingham and is a proud Brummie. But yeah, he's
around. I feel like we should talk about parking fines. Some recognition in the
room. This is a bit of helpful advice. I know we're in London and parking's a
nightmare here. There's a thing called a subject access request. It's part of
the Data Protection Act 1998. You can request any and all information that a
company or an institution has on you. And it's such a fabulous waste of their
time. I don't want any extra admin. If you give them some, they hate it. They
normally go away. This is an ongoing one, which isn't a parking fine, actually.
This is, I was driving in the wrong lane and they gave me a fine for that. I
know, bloody squares. Now, I'm not sure what I can say legally as to where this
is. So what I'll do is I'll do a version for the DVD. This was in London. I did
a subject access request to them. They didn't reply within 30 days, so they're
breaking the law. And as you know, I love the law. So I sent them an email that
included this sentence, just to give you an idea of the tone of the things I
write. Might I add that if I fail to observe your deadlines, you have the power
to hand out additional fines, whereas I have only diminished powers, such as
sending emails like this and just generally making myself a slight nuisance.
However, I will be judged merely by your human laws, whereas you will be judged
at the gates of hell. Joe Lycett, on the perils of parking and driving in
London. So Jenny, you've just been nominated for another Oscar for your work on
Mrs Harris Goes to Paris. In a nutshell, Mrs Harris, played by Leslie Manville,
is a cleaner. In the late 1950s, she sets her heart on owning a Dior dress. Was
there much collaboration between yourself and Dior? I understood when I took on
the job that Dior would be doing the Dior part. I hadn't really thought it
through, to be honest, because obviously that is not how an haute couture house
works. But anyway, I went to the archives and had the most wonderful time. They
were so helpful, so wonderful. I saw what they had from the 50s, which curiously
is not a lot, because in those days, they didn't see the need to keep pieces.
They made their collection, they sold it, they moved on. And then I realised, of
course, as we were talking, looking at them with our white gloves on, there was
no way that we would be using these frocks that still existed. And so I remember
sitting around the table at the end of the day and thanked them so much for a
fabulous time and how much I'd learned and how wonderful it was we were going to
be working together. And four faces looked at me in horror from the other side
and went, no. And I thought, oh, interesting. So I said, well, I do know people
who can recreate Dior, recreate Dior, certainly for a film, but it will be very
expensive. And that's what we did. John Bright and Jane Law made the most
beautiful Dior recreations, which are worn in the film, which was obviously a
lot more than I quite understood when I took it on. So these are haute couture
dresses. I mean, how on earth do you go about recreating something that takes so
many hundreds of hours of work? You do it with a film costume house who are used
to making things overnight, if necessary, but we didn't have to make it
overnight. The real problem with Covid, we were in full on Covid. This is one of
the first films that was made. And we went to Budapest because it was still
relatively open. Obviously, getting fabric was tricky and you need fabric with a
real sculptural sense to it to make the dresses we were trying to make. But it
all had to be done to measurement. We couldn't bring people for fittings. I'm
very, very thrilled with what we did manage to recreate. Jenny, you have said
before, I think I'll stop designing when I stop being terrified, because that
would be no good at all. It's just about knowing how to approach the problems
and how to deal with them and how to solve them. It's one of the only things
that gets better with age. What do you mean by being terrified and how does that
fuel your creativity? Oh, I think there's always a point when you think, I don't
know what they should look like. I mean, you've seen it in your head when you
read it. But the truth is that you actually haven't a clue. And you slowly work
your way in, in bite-sized chunks. And I sort of love that. And then I love the
moment when you stop being terrified because you've actually found it. Or your
version of it and everyone seems happy. But yeah, I am still like, I don't know
what to do. I really don't know what this should look like. Which is happening.
I've got a possible project for later this year. Very different again. I can't
say what it is, but already I'm happily terrified. All right, it's time for your
seventh disc, Jenny. What are we going to hear next? I'm really sorry about
this, Lauren. I don't think I'm going to like this island. I do love a home
comfort. Any bug will bite me. So I would like Gloria Gaynor singing I Will
Survive. And I have actually sung along to the record at moments of my life. And
I just think it'd be brilliant. I will blast this out on this desert island. No
one will hear me. So in moments of stress, this is the song that you sing? This
is one of the ones, yes. Definitely. Such a good tip. Such a good tip. And I've
got all my love to give and I'll survive. I will survive. Hey, hey. Only the
Lord can give me strength not to fall apart. Gloria Gaynor, I Will Survive.
Jenny, it's almost time to cast you away. What about the practicalities? Will
you be able to fend for yourself on the island? I think I'll have to, won't I?
Is that or give in? So I mean, I will have to. I don't know how that'll work
out, but we'll see. My imagination, of course, goes to all the worst things, you
know, the bugs and prickles and scratches and... Let's accentuate the positive.
What sort of island are you hoping for? Well, with little chalets and it could
be deserted, but still got some rudiments of houses there and maybe cooking pots
and some fresh water supply and maybe a little pool. That would be nice. What
about your own costume? If you had to design a costume for desert island
survival? Probably be a full on mosquito, you know, which we wore in Alaska, you
know, really mosquito. A kind of beekeeper type scenario. Yes, I think that
would be the way forward. Got it. Well, one more disc before you take the
journey there. It's your final choice. What's it going to be? The final choice
is, actually was one of many. I had real trouble choosing this one and it's
nothing to do with anything. It's the sort of music I go to when I need
uplifting, I need some kind of spiritual moment, which I find music is very good
for. And it hits those strings in you that just... And when she starts singing,
I mean, it's a bit like the Bach at the beginning, that also does it, but it
just hits a sort of chord and it's Ombra Cara de mi Esposa from Handel's
Radamisto. Ombra Cara de mi Esposa Te riposo Te riposo e te t'aspetta la
vendetta La vendetta che mi farò, Ombra Cara Ombra Cara de mi Esposa Te riposo e
te t'aspetta la vendetta Ombra Cara de mi Esposa, Beloved Shadow of My Bride
from Handel's opera Radamisto. We heard Emma K. Borat singing with the Ensemble
Artisercé, conducted by Philippe Zarosky. So Jenny, it's time. I'm going to send
you away to the island. I will give you the Bible and the complete works of
Shakespeare to read. You can also have another book of your selection. What
would you like? I'm afraid it's going to be the complete works of Jane Austen,
if I'm allowed, because I find her so re-readable and I needed something that I
can re-read and re-read and re-read and she's always got something terribly
pertinent to say. I can absolutely give you the complete works, but do you have
a favourite book of hers? Probably not actually, no. I just go round and round
really. You can also have a luxury item. What would you like? I've thought about
this deeply and from, you know, endless mosquito repellent, I think a cello
because it's the instrument I did learn when I was younger and I would obviously
need some music and I would have a real go at it and try and do it properly. So
when I get off the island, which I obviously will, I can actually join in the
family quartet, the plughole quartet, you know, being a bit better. The plughole
quartet are going to be seriously sharp by the time you get back. Seriously
sharp. It's yours. And finally, which track of The Eight that you shared with us
today would you rush to save from the waves? The most difficult question to
last. You're wincing. I went back and forwards, but I think it has to be the St.
Matthew Passion. The Bach it is. Jenny Bevan, thank you very much for letting us
hear your Desert Island Discs. It's been an absolute pleasure, if rather
tortuous, choosing only eight, but thank you, Laura. Desert Island Discs was
created by Roy Plumley. The producer was Sarah Taylor. Exclusive performances by
much loved artists. Together with the BBC Concert Orchestra. From classic tracks
to brand new covers. Radio 2's Piano. Watch on iPlayer, listen on BBC Sounds. On
Radio 4 Longwave, the daily service. Here on Radio 4 FM, Catherine Rundell's
biography of the infinity merchant John Dunne concludes. His illicit marriage
has destroyed his financial prospects and he turns to the priesthood. Blake
Ritson reads Super Infinite. Dunne's marriage to Anne without the blessing of
her father ended all possible preferment at court. Losing his employment with
Sir Thomas Edgerton, they began married life in a small cottage near Woking in
Surrey, provided by a young cousin of Anne's. Money was tight. Dunne had no
obvious employment and though children quickly followed, several died in
infancy. In 1612, he was befriended by Sir Robert Drury after writing a funeral
elegy for his daughter and was installed in a house in Drury Lane. Dunne was now
in the very heart of London, no longer having to make the long journey on
horseback to and from his family, and it was alive with bite and noise and
possibility. More children came. Little Nicholas arrived in 1613. Money grew
tighter. Dunne had to give up his horse and beg or borrow one whenever he needed
a mount. His friend and biographer, Walton, paints Dunne in these days as caught
between two desires. He had been living for so long in expectation of estate
employment that the hope was ingrained, but in him other, different desires were
growing strong. A pull at him to work for God's glory in holy orders. Dunne was
urgently aware, always, of the fleeing time. From 1607 to 1615, he hesitated.
His hairline began to recede, and he knew himself to be stepping into middle
age. A decision had to be made. Slowly, in both doubt and hope, Dunne's eyes
turned towards the church. One reading of Dunne's turn to the priesthood is that
it was an expediency, a second best. Many people looking over his life have
believed that his heart and ambition lay always with the court. The church was a
compromise, a road to public respectability and reliable money, and a way to
finally scrub out the stain of what Walton called the remarkable error of his
marriage. And there must have been some truth in that. He had always known
himself to be rare, and he wanted his talents to be recognized. But the idea
that Dunne chose the church only because his ambition had failed elsewhere
allides one fact. Dunne had to fight to get there. There was a tenacity in his
desire to reach the church, though it was not straightforward. It had grit in
it. What changed and pushed Dunne to navigate the last steps to the pulpit? In
part, the deaths of two of his children, Mary aged three in May 1614, and
Francis aged seven, aged seven, in November acted as a knife and a spur all at
once. They galvanized him into both misery and more urgent action. On the 3rd of
December, we find Dunne on his way to Newmarket to discuss his purpose with the
King in person. There he met with as good allowance and encouragement as he
could have longed for. He promptly began to prepare for priesthood. In the bleak
middle of winter, 23rd January 1615, Dunne went quietly to St. Paul's Cathedral
to be ordained. He was forty-two. Very swiftly he was appointed to be a
chaplain-in-ordinary to the King. James was, in comparison to Queen Elizabeth,
an addict of the pulpit, and had doubled the number of sermons the monarch heard
preached every week. Renaissance sermons were long, often upwards of an hour,
some up to three, but they were heard hungrily. They had breaking news in them,
politics, entertainment, theatre. People gossiped about them and picked over
them in the week that followed. Dunne preached without a text in front of him.
He would write the sermon out in full, take notes, and memorize it. For the
first time, Dunne unleashed his charisma upon live, reactive audiences who could
eat in full and demand more. His fame spread fast. In the summer of 1616 he was
made priest in charge of Sevenoaks in Kent, a synagogue worth perhaps eighty
pounds. Within a year of his ordination he was offered fourteen different
clerical positions. At last his prosperity was growing fast enough to meet the
needs of his family. But as his fortunes rose, tragedy rose alongside. Anne
died, and it was a baby that killed her. On the 10th of August, 1617, she gave
birth to a stillborn child. The labour, her twelfth, was too long and too hard.
She survived less than a week before mother and child were buried in the same
grave. They lie in the graveyard of St Clement Dane's amid the rush of buses
going down the strand towards the West End's theatres. Seven of her children
lived to mourn her, aged from fourteen-year-old Constance to little Elizabeth
just reaching her first birthday. It was for Dunne an irreversible end. He would
not take another lover. She was his last. He wrote in a poem, "'My good is
dead.' If pain takes the precise shape of the love you have for the dead, then
his heart in those days must have been complicated and terrible." Finally, in
1621, the King sent for the forty-nine-year-old Dunne, and asked him to arrive
at dinner-time the next day. According to Walton, "'When his Majesty sat down,
before he had eat any meat, he said after his pleasant manner, "'Doctor Dunne, I
have invited you to dinner, and though you sit not down with me, yet I will
carve to you of a dish that I know you love well, for knowing you love London, I
do therefore make you Dean of St Paul's.'" The deanship was a heavy
responsibility, carrying with it the imperative to stir the hearts and mind the
souls of the whole of London, but it was also a fantastic piñata of a job. Hit
it, and perks and favours and new connections came pouring out. The installation
took place on 22 November 1621. Dunne was ushered into St Paul's like a bride,
presented to the Bishop, and processed up into the Cathedral and to the altar, a
Te Deum was sung under the high echoing ceiling. Dunne prostrated himself upon
the stone ground, he kissed the altar, and rose to stand in the church that was
now his own. Technically, Dunne was bound to preach only three times a year,
Christmas, Easter, and Ascension Day, but he was a man who preached like others
eat meat—hungrily. To read the full text of a Dunne sermon is a little like
mounting a horse, only to discover that it is an elephant, large and unfamiliar.
To modern ears, they are winding, elongated, perambulating things, a pleasure
that is also work. If you are a scholar, they offer notes to an A to Z of
Renaissance religious flashpoints. Aquinas, bishops, casuistry, divine right of
kings, Arastianism, Gnostics, heresy, incarnation—but they can also be mined by
those reading for other, less erudite and more unpindownable reasons. You could
turn to Dunne's sermons for meditations on the Gospel as the bedrock of faith.
It's John, the man who trafficked in powerful metaphors, Christ as true light,
Christ as the word, whom Dunne loves best. That, and wholly unsurprisingly, the
Psalms. The whole frame of the poem, he wrote of one, is akin to a beating out
of a piece of gold. You can also find him in the sermons at his most
authoritarian. There are places where he is harsh, where his audience would have
expected joy. At the wedding of Lucy Goodyear to the supremely handsome diplomat
Francis Nithersole, he declared, He declared, Marriage is but a continual
fornication sealed with an oath. Sex, he bemoaned, had overtaken all else in
marriage. We rise poorer, ignobler, weaker, for every night's sin than we lay
down. We sin and sin and sin. It's a long way from the gleeful rakery of his
youth. Anne was dead, he was older and in physical pain, and his thinking about
sex had taken on a flinty quality. What Lucy and Francis thought of being sent
in such funereal tones to their marriage bed is not, alas, recorded. But Dunne
is at his most remarkable when he speaks about how very hard it is to seek God
at all. More than anyone else, he acknowledged the way that the human heart
darts about like a rat. His body, he found so readily present in desire for
other humans, betrayed him when he sought the same intensity in prayer. I throw
myself down in my chamber, and I call in and invite God and his angels thither.
And when they are there, I ignore God and his angels for the noise of a fly, for
the rattling of a coach, for the whining of a door. I talk on, I talk on.
Sometimes I find that I forgot what I was about, but when I began to forget it,
I cannot tell. A memory of yesterday's pleasures, a fear of tomorrow's dangers,
a straw under my knee, a noise in my ear, a light in my eye, and anything and
nothing, a fancy, a chimera in my brain, troubles me in my prayer. It is his
lifelong quest and lifelong disappointment that we cannot be struck daily by
lightning. This is the same Dunne who, in the Holy Sonnets, seeks a force so
great that it will sweep away doubt, exhaustion, distraction, and leave
something stripped back and certain. Batter my heart, three-personed God, for
you, as yet but knock, breathe, shine, and seek to mend, that I may rise and
stand, overthrow me and bend your force to break, blow, burn, and make me new.
It's not possible, of course. It doesn't happen for him. He remains relentlessly
embodied and therefore relentlessly distractible, and for all his bitterness and
furies he was insistent on joy. When David danced and leaped and shouted before
the Ark, if he laughed too, it misbecame him not. Not to show that joy is an
argument against thankfulness of the heart. That is a stupidity. This is a
contempt. The idea resonated through his life. He had written years before to
Henry Goodyear, Our nature is meteoric. We respect, because we partake so, both
earth and heaven. For as our bodies glorified shall be capable of spiritual joy,
so our souls, demerged into those bodies, are allowed to partake earthly
pleasure. We do wrong if we deliberately bury ourselves in dull monastic
sadness. Later he wrote, Heaven is expressed by singing, hell by weeping. He
knew, as Dante did, that there is a special place in hell for those who, when
they could laugh, chose instead to sigh. It's in his sermons, as it was in all
his work, Dunn was able to hold two conflicting truths ever in front of him, a
kind of duck-rabbit of the human condition. Humanity, as he saw it, was rotten
with corruption and weakness and failure, and even so it was the great light of
the universe. He gloried in mankind. If the inner world of each human was
extended outwards, he wrote, man would be the giant and the world the dwarf. Few
people would turn to Dunn's poetry or prose with its twisting logic and
deliberate difficulty for solace, but you might turn to him to be reminded that,
for all its horror, the human animal is worth your attention, your awe, your
love. Blake Ritson was reading the final episode of Super Infinite by Catherine
Rondell. The abridger was Richard Hamilton. The producer was Allegra McElroy.
You can literally go anywhere at the snap of your fingers. For 100 years the BBC
has been making groundbreaking radio drama. Of course a tired woman, but you
have to ask yourself what I'm tired of. The radio plays are... We are making
changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third-party services and
platforms and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will stop working by
mid-2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this
message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile,
this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds. What do you do when something
amazing happens to you while your sibling or best friend is going through
something?