TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-11H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 sibling or best friend is going through something terrible. Twins Chloe and
Lydia share their story with Hayley Hassel. BBC News at 10 o'clock. President
Volodymyr Zelensky has said Ukraine will do everything to achieve a victory this
year as he marked the first anniversary of the full-scale Russian invasion of
his country. Mr Zelensky used a special address to say Ukraine had inspired and
unified the world in its resistance and would not stop until those he called
Russian murderers had faced punishment. He said the war, so far, had been hard
on Ukrainians. We will defeat all threats, shelling, bombs, missiles, kamikaze
drones, blackouts, cold. We are stronger than all of this. Russia's former
President Dmitry Medvedev, who is now the deputy chairman of Russia's Security
Council, has suggested the only way for Moscow to ensure a lasting peace with
Ukraine was to expand its own borders as far as possible. Police in Northern
Ireland have arrested a fourth man in connection with the shooting of an off-
duty police officer in Oma on Wednesday. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell
suffered life-changing injuries in the attack and remains in hospital. The owner
of British Airways, IAG, has returned to profit for the first time since the
pandemic. The company made an operating profit of £1.1 billion last year,
compared with a loss of more than £2.6 billion in 2021. Criminals convicted of
serious crimes could be given longer jail terms if they refuse to appear in
court for sentencing. The Justice Secretary Dominic Raab said victims and their
families deserve to see the perpetrators in the dock. Mr Raab made the comments
while meeting the family of Zahra Alina, whose killer chose not to appear for
his sentencing. The poet laureate Simon Armitage has written a poem to celebrate
the centenary of the first journey made by the steam locomotive Flying Scotsman.
It went on to become the first of its kind to travel non-stop from London to
Edinburgh and the first to record a speed of 100 miles an hour. BBC News Later
this morning, is psychiatry working? Some people in difficulty, their families,
psychologists, even psychiatrists themselves say there are serious questions
about the way psychiatry understands and treats some people. More for you at 11
this morning. Now on Radio 4, it's Woman's Hour with Hayley Hassel. Hello and
welcome to the programme. It's a year since Russian forces invaded Ukraine and
you'll be hearing across the BBC and other outlets today just what that year has
been like for many Ukrainians who have been displaced, families have been torn
apart and those who are grieving the loss of loved ones. But here on Woman's
Hour, we want to take a moment to delve into the effects this war has had on the
women of Ukraine. Those who are now refugees or those who have marched on the
front lines as part of the Ukraine armed forces that is made up of 22% of women.
And those women who are helping support the war effort from a national level,
like my guest, Dame Melinda Simmons, who is the UK's ambassador to Ukraine, and
who will be giving Woman's Hour her only UK interview on this anniversary. I'll
be talking to her in just a moment. But yesterday we talked about siblings and
many of you contacted the programme with stories of amazing support and comfort
that you just couldn't get from anyone else but your brother or sister. But what
do you do when something amazing happens to you whilst your closest ally is
going through something terrible? When my next guest, Chloe, was days away from
giving birth, her twin sister had a miscarriage and they'll be joining me today
to talk about how that tested their bond to the absolute limit. And as Woman's
Hour is all about hearing your stories, I'd love you to join in this
conversation. If you've had to cope with something tragic whilst witnessing the
joy of your nearest and dearest, maybe like my guest, you've had to support your
friend through their pregnancy while you were unable to conceive. Or maybe
you've had to attend the wedding of a friend after you've just gone through a
break-up. Or were you the one wracked with guilt for celebrating when you knew
that your sibling or your friend was hurting inside? Well, you can text the
programme. The number is 84844. Text will be charged at your standard message
rate. On social media, we're at Woman's Hour and you can email us through our
website. Or you can send a WhatsApp message or voice note using the number 03700
100 444. Data discharges may apply depending on your provider, so you might want
to use Wi-Fi if you can. And terms and conditions can be found on our website.
And here on Woman's Hour, we often battle against the idea of women's work as a
classification. But today I'll be joined by an art historian and textile artist
who is going to tell me all about the work of quilting and how historically it
has been seen as women's art, but is now making a resurgence in feminist
circles. But first to our top story today. The Russian invasion of Ukraine on
February the 24th, 2022 has created Europe's largest refugee crisis since World
War Two. The war has severely impacted on social cohesion, community security,
and the resilience of local communities, especially women and girls.
Approximately 4.5 million people have been displaced inside Ukraine, with 8
million people registered as refugees across Europe. Now, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights recently verified more than
7000 civilian deaths, but they say that the real numbers could be much higher.
Now, currently best in Kiev, Dame Melinda Simmons has been the British
ambassador for Ukraine since September 2019. She joins me now. Welcome, Madam
Ambassador. Thank you for coming on the show. Thank you for having me this
morning. Now before I start, I just wanted to play you a clip from Woman's Hour
almost a year ago now, when just two weeks before you had had to temporarily
leave Ukraine. I wanted to play you this clip because the description of what
you saw on your journey that day is extremely powerful. Here it is. Well, I
think all of us who had to make the very tough decision to move from Lviv to the
Polish border couldn't be otherwise than speechlessly shocked, really, because
you never expect, nobody expects, not Ukrainians or us or anyone, to be part of
such a human exodus out of a country that has lived peacefully to another
country in such a kind of basic sort of wartime way. We passed thousands of
people, many of whom had left their cars because the queues were so long and
were walking and it was bitterly cold. And of course, this is the case with many
borders, it's quite exposed. And so people were wrapping things around them that
they had in their backpacks. And we were watching this long, long line of people
make their way to the border. And it was incredibly hard to process. We spent
some time talking about it together as a group after we crossed the border
because we felt the need to put words to what we had seen. And most of us talked
of it as things that we remembered reading about or hearing about from World War
Two, that the extent of that exodus, that was the clearest picture we could come
up with. So Damilyn, there's such a powerful image there. And I think you went
on to say you held hands with your colleague and you actually cried seeing that.
What does it feel like almost a year to be reminded of those first days of the
war? Thank you for asking. It's genuinely really horrible to think back to this
time last year. It was such a traumatic time for everybody. For me, for my
staff, those of us who were evacuated and particularly my Ukrainian colleagues
who found themselves fleeing. Actually this morning I had a really lovely
session with my staff in which we encouraged each other to talk about what we
were reflecting on today. And most of us talked about how hard it was to think
of that time. But we also talked about the strength that we took from it, how we
coped, what we had learned, and most importantly of all, how differently we all
felt now that we were back. And I've characterized this myself as this time last
year being consumed with uncertainty. And I was certainly afraid. All of us were
afraid at that time. It was so impossible to tell what might happen,
particularly to Kiev, to the capital. And this time we think of ourselves as
people who are determined, who feel like we're making a real contribution and
that's not just actually staff at the British Embassy in Kiev. That's people all
over the recently deoccupied free places. Of course, Kiev classifies itself as
being deoccupied. Russians having tried to get into Kiev, people going about
their work and opening up businesses and finding ways to contribute to the
economy and build their lives. All of that is characterized as a positive way to
contribute towards the defense of Ukraine. So how I feel now is really different
from how I felt a year ago. That difference I can tell in a lot of the things
you tweet about and a lot of the interviews you've done and that travel from
fear to determination. I mean, you've mentioned that you are now the eyes and
ears of Ukraine so that we and the rest of the world can really understand what
it's like that. But that must be incredibly difficult position for you. When you
took this job, you never imagined you'd be in the middle of a war zone. How is
daily life for you now and how are you and your colleagues coping with that?
Well, actually, the ambassador job is always busy. So being busy isn't
different. The difference leading an embassy through wartime is that the job
stops being a job and it becomes a life because war isn't a five day a week
thing. And Russians don't stop shelling Kiev at the weekends so they can go and
have a rest. So the uncertainty about how your daily life is going to be is a
24-7 thing. And also talking with ministers, with officials, or frankly with
survivors or witnesses or activists or people delivering humanitarian aid is
also a round the clock thing. So I think the biggest difference for me in terms
of the work I do is of course, it's all geared towards the UK effort to support
Ukraine to defend itself, but it's relentless. And the pressure of keeping a
resilience going through that relentlessness where you may not get the chance
for the downtime. And of course, I'm separated from my family because they can't
live with me here while this war is going on. Those probably are my main sources
of pressure. And of course, 90% of those who have fled the fighting are women
and children. What is daily life like for those women who have stayed? I know
you go out and meet them often. How are they coping? Well, of course, if they're
in places like Kiev or Lviv, largely if they're in the west of Ukraine, they may
have more carer responsibilities. And certainly for many of them whose partners
have been mobilized, they're now the main person in the household keeping things
together. That's like your daily life amplified with more uncertainty about your
family. If you're in a recently deoccupied place in Ukraine, if for example,
you're in Sumy or Kharkiv or even Kherson, which is currently being shelled
relentlessly, then it's more about survival because there's so much less
available to you, less in terms of products that you can buy and obviously less
in terms of work that would generate income. If you are a woman who's living
inside an occupied part of Ukraine, from all that I'm able to hear, because of
course I can't go into Russian occupied parts of Ukraine, it is a nightmare, a
nightmare that will only be told through survivor testimony after those places
are deoccupied. And of course, you mentioned the fact that there's no work,
there's no supplies, but what about the health care for women? I think it's
something like 265,000 Ukrainian women were pregnant as the war broke out. And
obviously hospitals have been damaged along the way. What access to health
support remains for women in Ukraine? Well it's important to remember that
Ukraine is the second largest country in Europe with a population of 40 million
people. So wherever they were displaced, whether they left for Poland or they
were displaced elsewhere in the country, the scale of the need in terms of how
you had to look after women who are pregnant has just risen exponentially. So
that even for a functioning government, which we have to remember Ukraine has,
with its departments functioning and its ministers turning up for work and its
officials doing everything they can, this is overwhelming for anyone. So of
course this is an area that has needed international support. And it's one of
the areas that we've prioritized for our humanitarian support. The UK has always
been really active here in helping women and girls and health care is one of the
areas where we've been active through the UN. Dignity kits to help them keep
clean, for example, and working with local clinics and centers to enable access.
But I think the secondary thing that maybe we don't see so much is the effect of
the stress on women who are pregnant. So we do hear stories, inevitably horrible
stories of women finding themselves giving birth in shelters, for example, bomb
shelters. But the other statistic that is distressing that the Department of
Health has been talking about recently is the increasing numbers of women giving
birth prematurely. And those premature births are of course due to the
heightened stress of being displaced, of not having your family around you, of
maybe not coming from your flat anymore because it's been bombed. And the effect
that has on your physical health and your ability to be able to care for your
child. So it isn't even just the fundamental things of being able to take care
of yourself medically, and where I said the international community in the UK is
helping, it's also about this longer term trauma that we have to keep our eye on
and extend our support to as the war goes on. It's pretty distressing. It is
extremely sort of difficult to hear as well. And I want to move on to one of the
most disturbing events of this war. You tweeted last April, that rape is a
weapon of war. And there have been what has been referred to as an alarming
increase in gender based violence and transactional sex for food and survival.
I'm just going to read one of your tweets. And you said, rape is a weapon of
war, though we don't yet know the full extent of its use in Ukraine. It's
already clear it was part of Russian arsenal. Women raped in front of their
kids, girls in front of their families, as a deliberate act of subjugation. Rape
is a war crime. Now, it's very difficult for me to read that. And it must be
horrendous for you to be made aware of. But I know it's a big concern for you.
It's also an issue I've been passionate about for most of my career. So I've
done a lot of work that the UK has been a leader on preventing sexual violence.
I ran that conference 10 years ago, another one last year to keep the issue of
sexual violence in war on the agenda. And it's been heartbreaking to be in a
country where the sheer scale of it is still unknown, of course, because there
are still occupied parts of Ukraine. That it's really clear how rape is being
used as part of this hybrid war to subjugate people. And I put that tweet out
after the liberation of places like Butcher and Bravari, where we saw all of us
have now seen all visitors to Ukraine, have gone to these places and seen what
Russian troops have done there. But the invisible thing, so they have seen mass
executions, murder of people, shooting people in their cars as they try to
escape. It's appalling stuff. But the invisible side of this, which and why I
put my tweet out, was what happened to people who were trapped, who couldn't
escape. And that included widespread sexual violence. It's incredibly important
to me personally, but it's certainly an important part of UK policy that we talk
about this, and we support it. And it's one of the areas that we are giving our
support to. And one of the areas that First Lady of Ukraine has stepped up to,
to speak about and give some championship to. Because this is a country among
many countries where people don't talk about this kind of thing. It's quite
taboo. Women don't talk about sexual violence. They didn't use to talk about
domestic violence very much. So you've got a journey really to enable women to
feel that if this has happened to them, they can acknowledge it as a thing that
has happened to them. But how? You talk about raising awareness about it, but
how are the authorities attempting to combat the violence against women? It's
actually, I think they're doing a pretty good job. Again, they've got an issue
of scale, like all parts of government do. But you have the Ministry of Social
Policy making sure that their law enforcement and their social services are
appropriately trained, and the Ministry of Interior working together with them
to make sure that services are integrated. Which means that if you're a woman to
whom something like this has happened, there is a place that you can go to where
you can speak to social services, to healthcare, you can give your story to a
lawyer and have it recorded, and that goes to the Director of Public
Prosecutions. You can work out what care that you need and get it. You can speak
to police about security in your area, you can stay at a shelter. This was
already evolving before the war. So actually, this is something that Ukraine
knows how to do, but it is the scale of it that is the challenge to try to make
that available to that many more women. And again, funding shelters and this
sort of care, and funding for the recording of crimes is another area that the
UK is active in here. And I know that women are playing an active part in the
war effort as well. While registering for military service is compulsory for
men, women can choose to volunteer, can't they? And in fact, aren't they making
22% up of Ukraine's armed forces? So what role are women playing on the front
line? Well, so they are fighting now. So in the early years of women joining up,
they tended to be assigned to administrative roles, but now they are able to
take combat roles, and they are doing that. And I'm sorry to say that women are
also dying on the battlefield alongside men. And it's all incredibly hard, but
that too is incredibly hard. They face some administrative issues that we've
also given publicity to, to make sure that they're not forgotten. For example,
making sure they have access to the right size uniform is a thing, the right
size medical care, which of course has to be bespoke for women. And that has
been a journey, but a journey which the Ministry of Defence here is making good
progress on. But it's important to remember that there are so many different
ways to be defending your country. You can be fighting on the front line, but
there are also a rising number here of women de-miners. This is on its way to
being the most mined country in the world. The landmass of mines in this country
is equivalent to the size of Britain at this stage. The challenge is enormous.
So you need women as well as men stepping up to help clean areas of land so that
people can work and so that fights can proceed. And that is one example of many
areas where women are stepping up and choosing those sorts of areas of work, A,
so they have work and B, so that they can contribute. And this sort of gender
equality is something I know you're really passionate about. It's been really
high on your agenda with your work in Ukraine. What do you see is the impact of
women's involvement in the war long term? Because some are saying that many
women involved in this war will chip away at traditional sexist attitudes and it
will perhaps create a more equal society afterwards. What do you make of that? I
think it's perfectly possible. One thing that I do think has happened here is
that, as in probably, you know, situations of war elsewhere, it throws up many
different kinds of hero. So people have many more pictures of what constitutes
bravery in their country. So of course, there is frontline bravery and military
bravery, but there's also community bravery and there is family bravery and
people are talking about this at all different levels. It's also becoming clear
how many women have been agile in setting up businesses and moving them online
so that they can trade, they can make stuff and sell it. And this too is being
recognized. So I definitely think that has a long trail after the war ends. The
question I have and the area where we were all going to have to get involved is
what happens after Ukraine wins this, which I firmly believe they can and will.
And you've got over 300,000 troops who are not all going to be required to
fight, even as Ukraine will need stronger security in coming years. Those men,
many of those men will come back and want to do jobs. So then what happens to
the skills that the women have accumulated in that time who have had to be
running those, doing those jobs and running their communities? And if Ukraine
gets this right in their recovery and reconstruction and they factor in the
whole of the country, then they can power their country through to a position
where it can rebuild. But there is a real risk, and particularly in a country
like Ukraine that can be quite patriarchal, that they forget that. If they
forget that, then you lose a generation of acquired skills that women have
brought to bear during this time. It's good to hear of you talking about the
hope for the future and it must be something that keeps people going actually.
But if we can reflect on the last year, because last time you spoke to Women's
Hour, you just had to leave Ukraine. You're now back in Kyiv. And I wondered,
you talked earlier about initially having that fear, but now having that sort of
acceptance in a way. Just earlier this week, you tweeted that sirens were
sounding in Kyiv and there's been a lot of those in the last few days. So you've
had to move away from the windows, pick up a book and carry on. It sounds so
matter of fact, it's commonplace, which is sad in itself, but it sounds like the
fear is lesson two. How is it for you and your team there at the moment? Yes, I
think all of us are in a place where we are alive to it. We often talk with each
other actually about how sirens can make your hand shake, they can make your
heartbeat faster. They can actually, sounds that aren't sirens that you think
might be, like just the sound of a motorbike or something on the road can make
you start as if something is happening. But none of us talk about it as an
active fear. And all of us talk about not being complacent. Nobody ignores an
air raid siren, but we factor it in to the daily work and we are deliberate in
carrying on, in keeping calm and carrying on. And if we have to continue our
work away from windows, then that's what we do. I've lost count of the number of
times I have moved my laptop down into the basement of this house and carried on
my work, or I've moved from sleeping in my bedroom to sleeping in a teeny room
next door that's got no windows. It's just become a thing. I never, ever wanted
to feel normal, but I never, never want to let it overwhelm me. Also this week,
Putin made his annual speech and President Biden arrived as well. How
significant a visit was that? Massively significant. I think that all foreign
visits to Ukraine are significant. So when our Prime Minister, when Rishi Sunak
came here, it was a fantastic moment. And when President Biden came here,
Ukrainians really took heart, not least because in contrast, of course, to the
UK, this was the first visit by a US President in many years. President Biden
had been before, but when he had the foreign affairs brief, not as President. So
a President of the United States coming to Ukraine was taken as such a message
of hope for their future, a message of confidence in Ukraine that Ukraine could
be stood by and was capable of winning and would have US backing, or in the case
of when our Prime Minister came, UK backing, or the backing of the EU or of any
foreign leaders who have come. This is part of what keeps Ukrainian morale high,
that they see and feel and hear that support from ally countries. And the UK
have led this in a way, I remember Boris Johnson being the first world leader to
visit Ukraine after the conflict. But do you think that the international
community is doing enough to support Ukraine? I think that, and certainly this
is the case in the UK, we work really closely alongside the Ukrainian
authorities. We speak with them about the course of this invasion, which of
course isn't a linear thing, it's twists and turns, it goes backwards and
forwards, it ebbs and flows. And I know that our ministers have conversations
whereby they calibrate what they're providing according to what the Ukrainians
are asking for. The international community has come together in a way that has
never come together before, politically, but also around the supply of weapons.
So the Ukrainians make that ask, and then the international community has to
work out who's got it, how they can supply it, and then they get on and do that.
So the UK may, well, you know that we have supplied weapons. We have also worked
with others to source weapons and parts for weapons and transport for weapons.
It is a fantastic common effort, but it is led by what the Ukrainians ask for.
And that is great support. But realistically, I mean, I don't know whether you
can answer this question, but in your opinion, do you think there's any chance
of peace in the next six months or even in the next year? What is the mood like
there? And what is the hope for the future? The thing for Ukraine is they have
this now quite often used phrase, if Russia stops fighting, you know, the war
stops and they go home. If Ukraine stops fighting, they lose their country. So
this isn't a question of whether it takes internationally provided weaponry or
not for Ukrainians to keep fighting. Ukrainians will keep fighting, and they
will keep running their communities and doing what they can to shore up their
economy and working by candlelight in the evening because they've got no choice.
So they'll continue to do that. And what President Zelensky has said more than
once is if they're not provided with the right or enough capacity to do that,
they'll continue going, but it may take them longer to get there. Dame Melinda
Simmons, thank you. Thank you for your interview. Thank you for your time. And
thank you for what you're doing. I think the people of Ukraine and those like
yourself working tirelessly through this war are all in our hearts, not just
today, but especially today. So thank you for taking the time to come and talk
to us on Woman's Hour. Thanks so much. Now this morning marks a landmark moment
for the Church of England. Leicester Cathedral is celebrating having a fully
female clergy team in what it believes might be a first for England. The team
consists of five women, including the Reverend Canon Karen Rooms, the Canon
Reverend Canon Emma Davis, the Canon Pastor Reverend Canon Alison Adams, and
curates Reverend Manuela Schmuecke and Julia Bradshaw. Well, joining me now is
the Canon Pastor Reverend Canon Alison Adams at Leicester Cathedral. Alison,
thank you so much for coming to speak to us today. A pleasure. Now, I know you
grew up in the 1960s when you said there were no female role models in the
church. And so it was it was never a career you expected, I believe. So so what
changed that? What changed? That was when the vote went through and I realized
that it was a possibility. The were female role models, but it was very
hierarchical when I was growing up. So I grew up in a church where there were
youngsters and there was a lot going on. And I had two very dear friends. We did
a lot of youth stuff together. They went on to be ordained and I didn't because
they were male and I was female. What changed, as I say, was that was the vote
went through and it was a real light bulb moment for me. And I realized that,
you know, that was where my life was heading, should have been heading. And
yeah, the rest is history, really. Because you were a teacher at the time,
weren't you? So it was a proper a proper change. It was a proper change. Yes.
And I think I'm like quite a lot of women who went off and did other exciting
things, possibly knowingly, possibly not knowingly. I think it's quite
interesting that we we're in a position now where young women, young adult women
are in a church where the leadership is a mix of of of male and female and and
diverse beyond that. And they they can see that and therefore that they can they
can enter into the church workplace more easily, perhaps than people like myself
did. Some of our senior women have come from really, really interesting careers
outside. And that's good, too, as it indeed it is with men. Now I know that you
are now in a team of five women leading Leicester Cathedral. What what has
brought this about? What brought this about was when Karen became the acting
dean. When the dean moved on to be dean of Canterbury, Karen became acting dean.
And we looked at ourselves and we said, oh, we're all women. So it was another
one of those liable moments when you suddenly it happened and you realised there
was well, we're here, we've got to this place. How did it feel at that moment?
It felt exciting. It felt good. I mean, Leicester does have a history in that
Leicester was the first cathedral to have a woman running the cathedral. That
was the now Bishop of Bristol, who took the role up in the year 2000. So we do
have a history. I believe it was the first to admit girls into a choir as well.
Exactly. We were the first to have a complete girls' choir, not just admit
girls, but actually have a girls' choir. And we have a very integrated and very
lovely system of choir now, which is is entirely mixed. Girls' choir, boys'
mixed, you know, everything in different combinations, which is as it should be.
So how well represented are women in leadership roles throughout the Church of
England then? Well, we're nowhere near 50% in terms of women in ministry roles
yet. In this, on our patch, we're about a third women in ministry roles and very
much less in leadership roles. So it is about leadership, really. I think women
can come into ministry, as I said, and the pathway is there, but it is much more
difficult for them. And I think we need to be as a church more intentional about
helping women into leadership roles. Yeah, there's still a lot more way to go,
isn't there? Yeah, well, I think we, I mean, the church faces, same as many
workplace faces, issues around work patterns, childcare, all of that sort of
thing. Sexism, you know, casual sexism, all that sort of thing is there in the
church, as indeed it is in many institutions and workplaces. We're no different.
So there is a need to address culture. And I do rejoice at our male colleagues
who, you know, really do support and champion this. You need people who aren't
just women championing changes, really. Yeah, I just want to pick up on that
sexism you talk about, because it is a culture that, as you say, still exists.
In what way have you experienced that and has that held you back in the past?
Well, I never expected to be in church leadership ever. When I was ordained,
I've been ordained 25 years. When I was ordained, I felt I had to be very much
the pseudo male in order to elbow my way into the room. So you kind of took on a
male persona? I think I probably did. Yes, I did, to be quite honest. And I'm
not, I, you'd have to ask my younger colleagues how it feels to them. But it's,
yeah, it's the same kind of sexism that you can get in many an established
structure, isn't it? Is that left out of things, overlooked, not listened to,
not promoted? What was that like for you? Or for others that you know of, even,
that are also going through those struggles, who perhaps aren't where you are
now? I think it's about not being listened to at times. I think it's assumptions
about competence, assumptions about perceived gender behaviour, or not, as the
case may be. And it's about language sometimes, too. I don't like being called
dear, for instance, which can still happen, sadly. Within what is essentially
your workplace, you can often be called dear. Yes, exactly. That would infuriate
me, too. I'm glad to hear it. And I know this is something you feel quite
passionately about. You say you now want to help other women realise their
potential. How are you planning to do that? Well, I think every time we can
highlight something like this, every time, celebrating that, not putting down
the fact that it's a woman and not a man or not a person of any other gender
diversity. But I think we do have to be intentional. And I think we have to look
at how we make it easier for women, particularly young women with children,
particularly women who perhaps feel themselves to be less able to enter
ministry, to be positive towards them. And that is not denigrating the current
ministry of men in any way, shape or form. And are women applying for
ministerial roles? Is that happening? Are there women out there who need help to
reach that stage? Oh, there are women applying for ministerial roles. It's just,
it's a slow climb. It's not there yet. I know you're currently recruiting for
the Dean of Leicester. Now, the first woman to hold the role as Dean of
Leicester was 2002. And the current acting Dean is the Reverend Karen Rooms, of
course. Have there been women who have held this role since? And would you be
open to a woman next? We would certainly be open to a woman next. We would be
open to the right person of whatever gender and whatever cultural background. It
is about picking the right person for this role at this moment in time. So no,
the person that followed Viv was a man and that was fine too. And we've had a
grand time. He's gone on to Canterbury. We are up to whoever God calls to that
position in this place. And the fact there's five of you now must be a really
trailblazing moment for other women who are coming into church and then into the
cathedral to be able to see that. I mean, I can't believe it's taken so long for
this to be the first time it's happened, but there we are. How do you think it
will impact women who are coming and being part of the congregation? Not even
part, you know, they don't even want to be a minister themselves, but they just
want to come and enjoy the service. Well there is good research from the United
States and anecdotally I think we know it as well, that when women are leading
churches, young women are far more likely to engage with their spirituality and
perhaps go into ministry, perhaps not. And it certainly doesn't impact
negatively on young men at all. So it is a positive. That's great. Thank you so
much, Alison. It's been lovely to have you on the programme and good luck with
the job and good luck with working together. You're talking to someone who's on
an all women's team here today, so you're in a good place, but thank you for
joining us. Well, the spokesperson for the Church of England has told us that
the national ministry team for the Church of England has long worked to
encourage women to consider vocations to ordained ministry. We know that we
still have some way to go, but we thank God for the witness and work of those
women we see bringing their gifts and experiences to serve God and the church.
Now lots of you have been getting in touch about a situation you've been in, a
relationship you've been in where you've been through a tricky time when someone
perhaps is going, is celebrating themselves. Here we have a message that says, I
had a stillbirth in June and had a nine hour labour to deliver her. Then my
sister gave birth in September to a baby girl. I couldn't acknowledge the baby
at all. It was the manifestation of what I'd lost. I found it very difficult and
so did my sister. Another one here says, I became pregnant quickly after getting
married whilst my sister had been trying to start her family for some time
already and was undergoing difficult and expensive treatment. Happily, she went
on to have three children, but I remember that time as being very upsetting for
us both. And I can read many more, but please keep those coming in because we
will be speaking to twin sisters, Lydia and Chloe shortly about their experience
of that. But first of all, did you get married when you were 16 or 17? Was it a
success or a decision you came to regret? Are you still in that relationship or
did it end quickly? We're asking this because on Monday, the Marriage and Civil
Partnership, the minimum age act comes into effect. The act will raise the age
of marriage and civil partnership to 18 in England and Wales, which means 16 to
17 year olds will no longer be able to marry or enter a civil partnership under
any circumstances, including with parental consent. So we want to know your
experience and hear your stories. You can text Women's Hour on 84844, text will
be charged at your standard message rate, or on social media, it's BBC Women's
Hour, and you can still email us through our website as well. So were you one of
those 16 and 17 year olds who got married? We'd love to know how it's turned
out. Now on the programme yesterday, we were discussing the important
relationship between siblings, especially when you are both going through
difficult times. But what do you do when something amazing happens to you? While
someone you love is going through something terrible? A sibling, a best friend,
or even a twin? This is what happened to my next guests, their twin sisters,
Chloe and Lydia. When Chloe was days away from giving birth, Lydia experienced
her second miscarriage, and it tested their bond to the limit. They join me now
to tell me their story. Chloe and Lydia Hamilton, welcome to Women's Hour. Hi.
Hi, Lydia, I'm going to start with you. Why did you decide that you wanted to
share your experience? I know it was Chloe who wrote the article, but Lydia, it
was you who wanted to tell your story. Can you talk me through that decision and
why you came to that moment? Yeah, definitely. I think having gone through
pregnancy loss twice, I both times felt like there wasn't loads of, I suppose,
loads of support out there for people that were going through something similar,
particularly in the circumstances that we were in, with a twin or someone who
was very close to us going through the thing that was being taken away from you.
I felt like it was something that needed to be spoken about and shared on a
wider platform than just me telling my friends and stuff. I knew that Chloe had
such a thing. She was someone who could write that story from the heart and
really do it justice. I approached her and we discussed how it might look and
how it might work. We were very careful to make sure that it was a story told, I
suppose, in our words. Chloe used a lot of the texts and WhatsApp messages from
that time rather than actually interviewing me. I think it really captured the
feelings that we went through in that moment. I hoped it would, I suppose, raise
awareness to something that is so challenging and unfortunately so common.
Lydia, that must have been so difficult for you to talk about it, but also to go
through I'm really, really sorry for your loss. It must have been an incredibly
difficult time. Talk to me about that and how having your sister pregnant at the
time really conflicted with that. Yeah, definitely. I think the first time was,
I would say the first time was the hardest because it was unknown territory and
it was difficult to navigate our relationship through something that neither of
us had been through and experienced before. Not only that, but I think for
friends and family trying to work out how to support both of us, Chloe in the
early stages of her pregnancy and me going through my recent loss, I know that
was challenging for them. Then the second time, we almost felt, when I fell
pregnant the second time, that goodness, this wouldn't happen again. This was
our moment. This was going to be great. I think there was, Chloe talks about in
her piece, in her article, that there was a few weeks, a month or so where we
both thought, God, this is great. This weight had been lifted from her shoulders
and then it came crashing down again. Yeah, there really are no words to explain
that feeling. I think, and Chloe I'm sure would agree, I hope, would agree that
actually I think it brought us closer together. We've always been incredibly
close as sisters and now I feel even closer because we have this real shared
understanding of what each other's been through. I felt guilty because I wanted
Chloe and I wanted my friends and family to celebrate such an exciting time, but
it was bookended by one of the most difficult experiences of my life. So yeah,
it was very, very conflicting and incredibly difficult. You said something that
really struck me. You said not only had you lost a baby, you felt you'd lost
your sister in that time. But I'm so pleased to hear that you've got your
relationship back and you're back together stronger. Chloe, could I come to you?
Are you able to tell me about your experiences because you were obviously going
through a wonderful celebration, a time of joy in your life when Lydia faced
such sadness? Chloe, are you there? We may have lost Chloe for a moment, but
Lydia, we've got you. I can speak on behalf of her. Well, they do say that twins
have that special connection when you know what each other's thinking. So maybe
I can just ask you all the questions for now. But how difficult was it for you
to deal with your own grief whilst also feeling happy for your sister? Because
Chloe was going through this amazing moment. She was pregnant. She was obviously
expecting your nephew, as you now know, Fabian. So how was it for you to deal
with grief whilst also feeling a kind of happiness? Yeah, it was a really
strange feeling. And there was moments where I felt just pure joy, especially
once I'd met Fabian and he was here because he was completely innocent. I mean,
we all were, but he really had no idea, I suppose, about the heartache that had
gone before him. So actually, and I think Chloe speaks in the article that as
soon as he was born, I found the whole thing a little bit easier because he was
there and he was such an amazing, he's such an amazing child. And I love that
relationship that we have. And it's incredibly special. One is a twin auntie. I
think it's a really special relationship. We're very similar. We look similar.
We have the same sort of personality. Me and this 15 month old, it's quite nice
to know that we are that close. But I think it was, I had sort of, there was
times where I had to put my sort of own feelings aside and be there to support
Chloe and be happy for Chloe, even though I know deep down I was really
struggling. So I had an amazing support network around me and my husband was
incredibly supportive, knowing that he got me kind of, I suppose, the raw Lydia
in those moments, whereas on the surface, maybe to my friends and family, I was
trying to be more positive. So I think just having the friends and family around
you is incredibly helpful. Gosh, that must have been so difficult for you. I
know that Chloe wrote in her article, actually, if jealousy is felt easily by
twins, so is grief. There must have been moments when you felt jealous, but
there must have been moments when Chloe felt your grief too. Could you feel
those opposite feelings and experiences from opposite directions? I know it's a
really tricky question to ask, but in a way you're feeling both emotions, aren't
you? Yeah, 100%. And then you feel guilt as well for feeling the grief and not
being able to support Chloe. And definitely in those, with the first pregnancy,
the first miscarriage in Chloe's pregnancy, initially it was hard because it
was, I mean, it was within a matter of weeks that I was, you know, that it was
all happening. And I found it so hard to feel happy for Chloe's news. But I also
think because I'd gone through this loss, Chloe was incredibly anxious in the
first few weeks and months of her pregnancy, having experienced someone close to
her go through a miscarriage. And I felt like I couldn't support her through
that because when she wanted reassurance, I couldn't give that to her because my
experience had been lost. So I felt then guilt that I couldn't be the sister
that I would have wanted to be in those days. And likewise, in the second
miscarriage, when I went into the hospital to see Chloe after having Fabian, I
was still miscarrying. So just physically, I felt very distant from her. And I
felt like I needed her when Fabian needed her. And that was incredibly hard. And
I felt guilty for feeling like that as well. So there's a whole load of
emotions, guilt, grief, but also happiness for Chloe. It's a real cocktail of
emotions that it's very hard to unpack. But yeah, I think it's made both of us
stronger for it. Gosh, it sounds incredibly hard. And I think we may have Chloe
on the line now. Chloe, are you there? No, we can't hear you, Chloe. Sorry. Have
you pressed the old unmute button? Don't worry, not at all. We'll hopefully hear
from you a bit later, Chloe. But Lydia, how did your different experiences
change your relationship? Because I know you've said you're stronger now, but
you must have had to go through some times when you felt very distant. How did
you manage to build a strong relationship? And for anyone, there's lots of
people texting about this actually saying that they've gone through similar
things. How do you not fall apart? Yeah, I think that it's a really good
question. I think it's, you know, just in terms of practical advice of how to
kind of withstand something like this. You know, I think we had to be very open
with each other about what was too much and what was too difficult. So
definitely in those early days of, you know, the first when Chloe found out that
she was pregnant and I just miscarried and then the second time when I
miscarried and Chloe was about to give birth. And when she just, when she did
give birth, I had to sort of be really open and say, you know, on a family chat,
if it's, there's too much chat around pregnancy or birth or the baby, I would
need to step away. And I would advise anyone going through something similar,
know your own limits and know what, what, you know, protects your own heart
because it's more important to do that. You'll be stronger on the, on the other
side if you do do that, rather than putting yourself in a situation where you're
going to find it hard. So I would step away. I would, you know, I would go make
a cup of tea for everyone whilst they queued over Fabian or I would mute a
couple of Facebook, Facebook chats or WhatsApp chats just so I could kind of
have my own time to breathe and process. And actually I think one of the things
I've really wanted to do in the two years, having been through this, it's two
years last week since the first miscarriage, but I really wanted to try and, you
know, support other people going through it and offer advice that I can do. And,
and, you know, friends and family who maybe go through something similar, I've
always tried to be an ear to help them and give them advice. So knowing, knowing
your limits is really important. Know when to step away is, is really important.
Yeah. And it's funny you chat about the whole family actually, because what
about your other family members? I imagine your parents who are now grandparents
have also grieving with you at the same time. So how have they dealt with the
situation? Yeah, they've been incredible. I think all the family have been
amazing. And, you know, I think it was incredibly difficult for my mum who, you
know, was celebrating having her first grandchild, but also grieving the loss of
two other grandchildren that she never got to meet. And, you know, I think
we've, we've, we've worked out sort of how and how and when we talk about it and
work with it. But it was, you know, I can't, I can't imagine how hard that would
have been for her. She's been an incredible support throughout the whole
experience and journey. So, yeah, there's actually, I reached out to a couple of
charities whilst I was going through it and there's a charity called Petals and
they actually also offer support for grandparents, which I think is incredibly
important and maybe not often thought about. So she also reached out to sort of
grandparents going through bereavement, through a pregnancy loss on a Facebook
group. And I think that was a huge support for her as well, which is great.
That's great. Petals are a fantastic charity actually to help with that. I
believe Chloe is on the line now. Chloe, are you there? Hi, I'm here. Wonderful
to hear you. Lydia's done a very good job of telling your side of the story, but
I know you originally wrote this article. It was difficult for you going through
your pregnancy while your sister was, was, was grieving. And I think it's not,
it's not an uncommon situation, actually. We've had lots of people contacting
the programme, talking about their situations. But I know a friend of mine
wasn't able to speak to me at all while I was pregnant because she'd suffered
the loss of a child. And I know a friend who had to move house when she found
out her neighbour was pregnant because she just couldn't face seeing them every
day when she had miscarried. It is great that you've opened up and talked about
it because so many people must be in a similar situation. Why was it you felt
you had to write about it, Chloe? Well, firstly, apologies for the tech issue. I
think actually, Lydia sharing her story first is really, was really important in
a way, because it is her story. Ultimately, I felt like I was the sort of the
medium through which she did that. But ultimately, it was her tale. But I think
it was important, well put, important for our relationship, really to be as open
with each other as possible. We always have been, but actually, when I was
writing it, it sort of forced us in a way to lay all of these feelings bare and
maybe even to say things to each other that we hadn't said before. You know, I
didn't know that Lydia was still bleeding when she came to the hospital to see
Fabian. That was something that we discussed. It was what forced us in a way to
be so open with each other, which I think was really important. I feel really
reluctant to say that it was difficult for me because I don't feel like I have
the right to that difficulty that Lydia's experienced. But actually, there were
elements that were and are and continue to be hard. You know, having a baby is a
huge deal. Having a baby is a difficult thing. I think sometimes I feel like I
need to be enjoying and making the most of every single moment, no matter how
difficult, because I'm so lucky to be here. But the reality is that, you know,
sleep with nights are difficult. The loss of freedom sometimes is difficult.
Occasionally, I'll look at Lydia's freedom at the moment and think, oh, do you
know what, I'd really like to have a night's sleep or, you know, go out with a
friend without having to think of finding a babysitter. So, yeah, I think it's,
I'm really reluctant to say it was hard for me because of course, in comparison,
it wasn't. I know it's difficult for both of you and I'm getting lots of texts
that I just want to read a couple to you because people are feeling the same.
This one says, I had an incredibly blessed healthy pregnancy last year, but my
sister lost two babies at the same time. The guilt I carry for this is something
I don't feel I can express to anyone. And another one, it was incredibly painful
to endure a fairly late miscarriage of a baby that was due on the same day as my
best friend's. So very challenging to watch her pregnancy advancing day by day
as I mourned the loss of mine. I don't know whether you two have any advice for
people who are feeling the same thing that you've been through. Lydia? Yeah, I
think my advice is to be really open with your friend or your sibling who is
going through something like that. So from my perspective, I needed to say to
friends who maybe were announcing pregnancies or going through a pregnancy at
the time I was going through these losses, you know, I might feel a little bit
distant right now and that's what I'm going to have to do to preserve our
friendship. And actually, you know, I have some incredible friends, loads of
incredible friends, and they all really respected that and knew that if I needed
to step away and be a little bit distant, it wasn't through any fault of their
own. It was just what we needed to do to help for me to help myself get through
the situation. And I always say for anyone who's maybe experienced, you know,
found out they're pregnant and they know that their friend or sibling has
experienced losses, is a really important way, I think, to approach that
conversation with them. And I always say, you know, why not tell them in person
because their reaction might not be how you expect it to be and actually texting
someone to say, I've got this news to share with you and this is the, you know,
and I understand this might be difficult for you, is actually one of the best
things that you can do, letting someone process that news in their own time and
deal with it how they need to deal with it is one of the best, the kindest
things that you can do. And it might feel, you know, it might feel kind of rude
to text someone that, but actually it's that time and space to reflect on. Thank
you so much for that advice. It's been lovely to speak to you both, Lydia and
Chloe. Thank you so much for coming on the programme. Now, the New Bend is the
name of an exhibition running at the Hauser and Wirth Gallery in Somerset. It
showcases the work of 12 contemporary artists and quilters whose work pays
homage to the enduring legacy of the women of the Gee's Bend, Alabama quilters,
who were quilting as early as the 19th century in the Alabama black belt in
America. Well, joining me now is Faryn Gibson, an art historian and textile
artist whose work features in this exhibition. Faryn, you've got some of your
work with in the studio now. It's beautiful. The colours are so vibrant. It's
amazing. Talk to me through what this represents. What is it all about? Yeah,
this is a textile work I've created. I've been working on a kind of series of
works I call culminations, where I'm experimenting with materials and kind of
the idea of, oh, could a quilt be painterly? And so doing a lot of
investigating, a lot of failing in that process. Well, it looks wonderful. I
wouldn't say there's any failure. Yeah, I feel happy with where it is now. Yeah,
it's experimentation. And it's originated from your interest in the Gee's Bend,
Alabama quilters. Who were they? Can you explain who they are and what they're
about? Well, so my connection to the Gee's Bend quilters is the show that's
going on at Hauser and Wirth Somerset right now, which is called the New Bend.
It's curated by Legacy Russell. And she's basically gotten together this group
of 12 artists whose work in some way engages with the legacy or the practice of
quilting or the Gee's Bend quilters. And I'm sorry to say I've never heard of
them before. Are they quite a small group? Where do they come from? Kind of
small. Yeah. So they come from a place that's called Gee's Bend in Alabama. It's
really the town of Boykin. And they descend from a group of people who were
brought to the area by a plantation owner in 1816. He established this
plantation and brought these enslaved people there. And generations of people
began to, women particularly, make quilts and pass down this skill for quite
functional reasons to start with, you know, to keep warm. And make using scraps
and materials that were available to them. But they have such an incredible
aesthetic, really abstract, gorgeous works that are quite unique. Yeah, it's
beautiful. But tell me about your personal relationship to quilting, because I
believe your grandmother and her mother as well were both quilters. Yes. Tell me
about that. How did you discover that? And how did you get into it? Well, it's
kind of a thing you grow up with, or I say you, but like my experience, I grew
up with it, saw the quilts and didn't necessarily think that much about them.
And then I wrote the book Women's Work, which talks about textile and ceramic
artists. And it gave me a whole new appreciation for these mediums, how
difficult they are, how special they are, and how these can become kind of
heirloom goods, but also kind of beautiful art objects. And as I was writing the
book, I felt a real, I don't know, drive, this pull to engage with the medium
myself, especially as so many women artists who've worked in these mediums have
learned their skills from women in their families or their connections to women
in their communities. And is it always women? Talk me through how that sort of
group of women work together. So the Gee's Bend quilters. So it's kind of a
collective, they still work today, descended from the same generations of
people. And sometimes they get together and help each other out. I know with my
grandmothers, it might be that one woman makes a quilt top, and then they layer
the sandwich together, the quilt sandwich. So the top, the batting in the middle
and the bottom, and then maybe a group of women get together and help stitch it
all together. So you can see the stitching on my quilt. I did that myself, but
sometimes groups will get together. It's like a production line. Yeah, well,
yeah, it helps the work go a lot faster because you can imagine with a big
quilt, it would take ages to hand quilt that. Of course. And I understand since
you've started quilting, your son has taken an interest and you've sort of shown
him a bit about it. Do you think you may pass it on to a new generation and a
male at that? Yeah, yeah. Anyone can quilt. Absolutely. He's seven. So I worry a
little bit about the needles. He does ask. He's like, oh, mom, I want to quilt.
And I want to teach him definitely. Yeah. And how long does it take you to take?
Because as you say, it's usually a whole sort of group, tribe of people. So how
long does it take you personally to invest? Well, it can be really different.
You know, quilting historically, it can be a collective thing to do, but also
very individual. It depends on how complex the pattern is on the top, how many
how you're gathering materials. There's a lot of steps to it, washing them,
materials, ironing them, cutting the little pieces, sewing it together. So it
can really vary in the length. And I know that you released a book called
Women's Work from Feminine Arts to Feminist Art. What do you mean by that title?
It got me quite intrigued because quilting is traditionally a women's work, but
seeing it as a feminist art, how how does that come into play? Well, the book
covers a lot of different types of textile work, weaving as well, and soft
sculpture, ceramics, things like that. Basically, there's been this kind of
historical attitude that certain kinds of art forms were the work that women did
or domestic pursuits and that it was for some reason separate to fine art in
quotations, which is nonsense, of course. And so especially in the 20th century,
we can see so many incredible women artists who use these mediums specifically
to engage with and challenge that idea. But they're also talking about personal
identity and love and nature and so many topics. So it's a signpost for them,
really. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you for your work. Your work is beautiful. And I know
that it's going to be at the New Bend exhibition created by Legacy Russell. And
it's open at Hauser and Worth Somerset until the 8th of May. So make sure you
take a look at that. Thank you so much for coming on the programme. And thank
you for joining in the discussions today. It's been lovely to have your
comments. I just want to read a few more here about people coping with things
while life is tricky. Interesting to hear the twins talking about going through
difficult times. Well, my identical twin has cerebral palsy. So we do this on a
permanent basis. Watching my twin struggle is very difficult. And for her
watching me have an easier life is very difficult. Well, that's all from the
programme today. But we will be back with weekend's Woman's Hour tomorrow.
Woman's Hour is presented by Hayley Hassel, produced by Louise Cawley. The
studio engineer was Bob Nettles. On Radio 4. Our Father, who art in heaven,
Hallowed be thy name. The Lord's Prayer is shared by Christians around the
world. On earth as it is in heaven, In this year's Lent Talks, six people
reflect on the words of this prayer, As we forgive those who trespass against
us. sharing stories of forgiveness, fatherhood and finding heaven on earth. For
thine is the kingdom. Lent Talks on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Begins next
Wednesday evening at 8.45. Amen. This afternoon, Matthew Syed traces the origins
and evolution of a term that's become synonymous with our era of art.