TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-17H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Rethinking music on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds starts on Tuesday morning at 11.30.
BBC News at four o'clock. The inquiry into the Manchester Arena bombing has
found that MI5 missed a significant opportunity to take action that might have
prevented the attack. 22 people were killed in the blast after a concert by the
singer Ariana Grande in 2017. The report also found that the bomber, Salman
Abedi, probably received assistance in the plot from someone in Libya, a finding
which contradicts an assessment made by the security service. Caroline Currie's
19-year-old son Liam died in the attack. MI5 to the associates of the attacker,
we will always believe that you all played a part in the murder of our children.
We will spend the rest of our lives trying to protect our boys because as we
found out through this process, once you leave the safety of your home, you are
on your own. Officers who recovered the body of a baby in woodland in Brighton
yesterday say they believe the newborn may have been dead for some time. A post-
mortem examination has yet to be carried out. The parents, Constance Martin and
Martin Gordon, are being held on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter.
Boris Johnson has warned he will find it very difficult to vote for Rishi
Sunak's new Brexit deal because, in his words, this is not about the UK taking
back control. Delivering a speech in central London, the former Prime Minister
said there was no point withdrawing from the EU unless things were done
differently. The former Health Secretary, Matt Hancock, has accused a journalist
of a massive betrayal and breach of trust after she leaked texts he sent during
the Covid pandemic. The journalist, Isabel Oakeshott, confirmed she'd broken a
non-disclosure agreement she signed before helping Mr Hancock write a memoir but
said had acted in the national interest. The pulp bassist, Steve Mackey, has
died in hospital at the age of 56. The musician from Sheffield played on hits
including Common People and Disco 2000 after joining the band in 1989. His wife
Katie described him as her brilliant beautiful husband and said she was
devastated to have to say goodbye. BBC News. The leak of a number of Matt
Hancock's WhatsApp messages has raised questions over decisions around Covid
testing in care homes. In half an hour we'll hear from one science writer who's
followed the relationship between government and its scientific advisors
throughout the pandemic and he'll tell us why he believes there needs to be more
transparency and openness around the advice offered to government. This and more
in BBC Inside Science at 4.30. But now Radio 4, creepy crawly time, we're
heading down under for the last time with the Infinite Monkey Cage. Hello I'm
Brian Cox. I'm Robin Ince. And this is the Infinite Monkey Web, our final
Australian show for now. Actually, it might be our final show ever because
there's a high chance things will go horribly wrong. There's not a high chance,
right, this is fantastic, it's my favourite thing of actually seeing Brian
scared of something. Because he's not normally scared, right, as you know Brian
is an adventurer, he's the kind of person, you know, who likes going fast, he
likes flying high, likes getting drunk in South American Amazonian jungles with
pirates and you probably know a lot of that was not kept in the show for various
reasons. It was edited out that bit. Yeah, alcohol, criminality and then it went
really crazy didn't it when you started putting on that eye patch. But anyway,
so we have now found that there is one Achilles heel that Brian has and of
course it's a lovely Achilles heel I should say, it's much smoother than mine,
it's a beautiful heel. He works that heel out, it is a muscular heel but
nevertheless it is his Achilles heel and that heel is the Achilles heel of
spiders. I'm not a fan. Today we are exploring the reality of spiders. Should we
be scared of spiders or should they be scared of us? How many species of spiders
are there? How do they behave in the wild and how do we study spiders in their
natural habitat? And of course most importantly, will a bite from an irradiated
spider really give you superpowers but at the same time lead to thwarted teenage
love? We're not doing that. We should do that. I think now the Infinite Monkey
Cage has reached the point where it needs to be part of the Marvel Universe.
Benedict Cumberbatch can play you, he'd be good, Benedict Cumberbatch would be a
good you and I could be played by a piece of sponge. In a cardigan. Today we're
joined by three humans and several spiders. We'll let the spiders introduce
themselves later on but our humans are a professor of ecology, a professor of
ecological behaviour and a cake expert who has studied the psychology of Kylie
Minogue. And they are? Oh, hello, hi. I'm Mariella Herberstein, I am a
behavioural ecologist, evolutionary biologist at Macquarie University. I have
personal fears and professional fears. My personal fear, swimming in the sea in
Sydney is of course sharks. Professionally I think I have to watch out in
fieldwork, particularly for snakes and crocodiles when we go up north and it is
often a difficult job to explain to my colleagues and also my students that the
crocodiles are really everywhere and they have to watch out. I'm Dieter
Hockelaar from the University of Sydney, I'm an ecologist. I study insects and
spiders and bats and birds and plants and humans in cities. I'm interested in
how nature survives and even thrives in cities. In terms of animals I'm scared
of, I'm actually â€“ the saltwater crocodiles are the things that probably scare
me the most. You know, they're one of those few animals that if they kill you
they're actually doing it deliberately because they think you're food. They
actually look at us and say, yeah, yeah, I could eat that. And yeah, so
saltwater crocodiles, it's very hard to go near a puddle after you've been up in
the top end for a while. I'm Claire Hooper, I'm a comedian and as of about ten
seconds ago my most feared animal is a crocodile. Never occurred to me before
but I'll be taking that home with me tonight. And this is our panel. Now what
worries me is that you said, you know, they look at us and they see food. My
anxiety would not be that I would be eaten by a saltwater crocodile but it would
reject me. Send you back? Yeah. No, there's another swimmer over there whose
legs look more delicious. Your eczema's rather put me off. The eczema's made of
36 different herbs and spices. Anyway. Yeah, it's funny you should say that.
There's a crocwise program in the top end of the Northern Territory and the
basic advice to locals, you know, is basically try not to look like crocodile
food. Stay away from the water, put your fish or clean your fish near the water.
It's actually reasonably straightforward to avoid being eaten. Is there a way
of, I mean, when you say don't look like crocodile food, is there also some
cosplay that we can do? You can but it won't help with the crocodile thing. I
can bring it back to her. Mariella, how many species of spiders are there? So
right now we've probably identified about 50,000 worldwide. 50? 50, yes. So
they're quite diverse, lots of them. Australia is magnificent for spiders.
There's lots of them. They're colourful, they're large, they're everywhere. It's
a dream. What are the smallest spiders? What are the largest spiders? Most
venomous spiders? Okay. Alright, spider Olympics. All spiders are venomous. The
question is how does the venom affect you, your species, humans, and you
personally? So the bad news is we all individually could have anaphylactic shock
to the protein, so similar to bees, so some of us would react really badly to a
spider bite. In Australia, there are really only two species that are associated
with death, the funnel-web spider, and there you really have to go and get a
vaccine. But the last death was in 1978 or something like this. Since then we
have anti-vaccines everywhere. And the good thing is you won't miss it, the
bite. It's very, very painful, so you won't overlook. You won't go, oh, I missed
that and I'm going to die. But... It's nothing nice to hear a scientist say, the
good news is it's agony from the outset. It really is. Very, very painful. And
the second one is redback spiders, and that's not absolutely deadly. The venom
is a chemical that interferes with heart rate and breathing. People that have
problems with the heart or small kids or very old people, they may get into
trouble. But healthy people, young people, it's a bit like COVID, isn't it? They
are also very, very painful, yes, painful. But redback spiders are lovely. They
really are lovely, lovely, lovely spiders, very gentle. You said you were bitten
in thumb by what spider was that? Can you tell us a little bit about the
experience? For the radio viewers, Heather is demonstrating her thumb. So I was
in the field and I was looking at a spider that's toiled a leaf in the web. And
Sydneysiders may have seen this is a web and in the middle is a toiled leaf. And
I was looking for males that cohabit with female in the leaf. And so I was
breaking open the leaf. So there was a female in there, but not the male. And I
looked away and then the females, very upset with me, jumped on my left thumb
and bit my thumb. And it was an immediate pain, like a bee sting. And then I
could feel the venom move up my arm, this painful pull up my arm to about my
armpit. And then it stopped. And so, you know, I did the usual field adult
report for the university. That's not the medical advice if you get bitten by a
spider. It's not the first thing you do, is it? Fill out the report. I still
have, and I'm happy to show everyone who's interested, a scar on my thumb from
this bite from many, many years ago. And it was the only bite I've ever had
throughout my entire career working with spiders. See, now we've opened up this
scene from Jaws. Dieter, it's your chance to say what scar you've got. Mine are
mainly emotional, but I think, you know, when Mariella mentioned that, I thought
the chill that went down my spine was the paperwork. There's always been, I
think since Billy Connolly particularly did a routine about funnel webs, that
seemed to make him, but there was this, when people come here for the first
time, this perpetual sense of kind of anxiety around. Does any of that actually
exist when you live here? Robin, foreigners coming here are so afraid of the
deadly spiders. The people that live here are just afraid of foreigners coming
here. I don't know if this is everyone's experience, but growing up, my father
made sure we weren't afraid of spiders by, you know, if there was a huntsman in
the corner of our bedroom, he would get rid of it, but he put it on his arm and
he'd let us look close up. We didn't generally accept it on our own arms, but I
really appreciate that he did that because now in my household, I'm the person
that takes the spider out. There has to be one in every house. You don't always
want the job, but if no one else will do it. So yeah, I'm not afraid of spiders.
Somehow though, I haven't been able to pass that onto my own kids. I now have
two little kids who are terrified of spiders, which either means I have not
shown them enough or I've shown them too many. I'm not sure. Oh, Dita, I just, I
mean, I may regret asking you this, but we're inside right now in a big venue
with like a couple of hundred people. How many spiders are close to us right
now? People have actually tried to estimate how many spiders exist per square
metre in the wild. I mean, this is Googling I did. It was on Wikipedia, so I
think it's true. People are talking about in the wild, you've got hundreds of
spiders per square metre because you know, they're not all big and there's a lot
of them that are living in vertical as well, but there's probably about 80 per
row. I'm just kidding. I made that up. Do you know what? Right. You're allowed
to. Claire was saying that due to the spider bravery gene being possibly a
recessive one, her children don't have it. And I just wondered, what do we know
about why people seem to have, I would say it is an irrational fear because it's
very rarely because someone has actually got a story of, you know, and that's
how I lost my arm or whatever, you know, because in the UK there aren't deadly
spiders. And yet if a spider, you know, is in a bath or something like that,
there will always be people who are kind of screaming or jumping up on chairs.
So I think there's sort of two types of explanations. Probably sort of the in
between. One is there is an evolutionary basis for it. The fear of spiders and
snakes because they can be dangerous for humans. And the other one is really a
social hypothesis where, Claire, you try really hard with your kids to be calm,
but they may have observed other children, other adults freaking out about
spiders and they just pick it up like this and just perpetuate it. So I can't
dismiss the fact that there could be a selective benefit and evolutionary basis
that it is good to be a bit startled by snakes and by spiders. But I think that
most of the behaviour we see is really copying other people. And is there a
component of the fact that they have a strange body plan? They're very, very
different to us. Could you outline the basic body plan just briefly of a spider?
You talked about the segments and the... just describe a spider. Me or Claire?
Claire, you start and then Dieter, you come in when you feel it might be
necessary or not. That's a real good test, isn't it? No, you start. At least say
something about the little legs or whatever. I'll clear up any of your messes
afterwards. Thank you, Claire. Well, the biggest split is probably the front
bit, the head and the second part, which is sort of an abdomen or opistoma.
Essentially, basically, I've got a lot of the legs and the eyes are all in the
front part and the abdomen, which is there for storing a lot of the food and the
fat and producing the silk is in the second part. They've got a couple of
different sets of mouth parts that starts off with a pair of pretty bitey
choppers or... I can see Mariella twitching. Calissa, yeah. Bitey choppers.
Yeah, they've got... the next thing is probably a thing called pedipalps and
they're really fascinating. So if you ever see a spider with what looks like a
sort of a leg with two big sort of boxing gloves on it, it's going to be a male
because they're adapted for him to help transverse them. And then they've got
the eight legs and that's sort of the main part of the first part of the body.
Can I ask a question? And I'm not proud, but somebody has to. If a spider has
eight legs and eight eyes, how many penises does it have? Two. I knew it was
worth asking. It's zero and two. They don't have a penis. They have a genital
opening. They ejaculate the sperm out of the genital opening onto a web. So
males build a tiny little sperm web. They ejaculate onto the sperm web and then
they dip their little pedipalps, their first pair of legs, into the droplet of
sperm. They take up the sperm into their legs. Then they search for a female.
Then they insert one of their little legs into the female genital opening. They
ejaculate again. If they're lucky, they get to do it again with the other leg.
Hang on a minute. Just to check that I've got the order right. They ejaculate
and then they find a female. Yes. And then it's the left leg in and the left leg
out. Once they shake it all about, little spiderlings everywhere. It's
absolutely fine. And then after all that, they get eaten. So in many species,
he's eaten maybe even after the first mating already and after the first
copulation, he's already eaten. Some of the families, he also breaks off bits of
his bits that get stuck inside the female and it prevents other males from
accessing that opening. Wow. He plugs the hole. Yes. And that's what it's
called. It's called genital plugging. So that's the official term. Well done,
Claire. Cool. Well, I've got some big ideas to take home now. Do you think if
the spider waited until she'd just eaten, he might get away with it? Do you know
what, like, is she eating him because she's hungry or? No, because they're tiny.
They're just an hors d'oeuvre. Just a little snack. So they're not substantive.
So it's not about satiation, not about hunger, although hungry females are quite
grumpy. I like to tell my husband he's just an entree. So this is my favourite
thing is watching Brian try to recover from this. I'm thoroughly enjoying that.
To bring it back to this. So why? Why then? Why do they do it? There's different
stories for different species. So it's not a universal explanation. In red-
backed spiders, males encouraged to be cannibalised. When the male inserts one
of his little legs, he somersaults into the mouth parts of the female. And only
then does she start nibbling on him. If he doesn't do the somersault, she
doesn't eat him. And the advantage to the male is if she eats him, she prefers
his sperm over the sperm of another male and fertilises her eggs with his sperm.
We have some spiders, actually. We have some samples. Well, they're not samples.
They're living spiders. Oh, that is actually not in a box. Hang on. Brian, do
you want to swap seats? Yes, actually. I've been assured. To be fair, Brian, it
is in a box. It's just that the box is not fully closed. So we have a very large
spider in a very large web. That's not large. To me, it's large. I'm sorry. I
came over all crocodile dundee there, but that's not a large spider. So this is
a St Andrew's cross spider. This particular one is from Queensland, which we
collected whilst looking out for crocodiles with great care. And she's built an
orb web inside a frame that we have in the lab. So this is how we get a three-
dimensional frame. It's about 10 centimetres wide and 30 by 30 centimetres in
width and in length. And the moment she builds the web, she's actually quite
happy on the web. And you can see she's quite calm and so on. I've also brought
a male. He's tiny. He's very much smaller than her. I'm just going to put him
here at the bottom of the web. We'll see what he does, whether he'll start
climbing up on the web and start courting. It is a bit late for them, so maybe
he will, maybe he won't. Sometimes it's just better to watch a TV show and go to
sleep, isn't it? Well he's now come out of his jar and he's having a look around
and he's got sensors in his legs so he can taste the silk and it gives him
information about the female. And if he's interested, he'll move into the web
and into the hub with the female. He'll nibble her legs a little bit, court her,
create some vibrations and maybe... And then will he do all the things that you
described? What is his fate if he does that? I think a 50% chance that he'll
survive the first meeting. Good odds. It feels really sinister to watch. I get
paid for that. Literally, they pay me to watch them. I'm serious. I mean, nobody
ever told me that was a career option when I was a child. So what species was
that again? So the species is called agaiope. They're beautiful. They have a
stripy back, yellow and white stripes, very gentle spiders, never bitten me. So
I've worked with them for many years. You had that just under the table you're
sat at there. And has she remained in exactly that position? How certain can you
be? So she will remain there until the lights go off and she... Whoever is in
charge. I've got 50 pounds over there. Let's see how much we've got over there.
When she rebuilds her web, which is sort of at night or early morning, that's
when she starts moving around and that's where she explores and she'll come out
of the cage, of course, and she'll find... Dieter said, you know, they're good
at finding spots. And so she may just, you know, come out of the cage and find
another spot. Well, it's not exactly a cage, is it? You've brought some other
spiders as well. We'll keep you updated for the listeners at home on what the
fate of that chap... I brought some huntsman spiders. So yeah. So who's a fan?
Let's find out. Who loves huntsman? Who's a little bit more edgy with the
huntsman? That's good overall. I think they're very much accepted. Yes. There
are two types. There are solitary huntsman. They don't like to hang out with
other huntsman. And then there's social ones and they form little social bonds,
groups and hang out together. They hunt together. They sit on the bark together.
I read recently, if a huntsman bites you, you are meant to... Hang on, let me
get the phrasing right. Remain calm to stop the spread of venom. And I thought
that that was a very ambitious suggestion. I have to be honest, you know,
huntsman, they are pretty... They spook me as well because they're so erratic in
their movements. Sorry, they're erratic in their movements? Yeah, yeah, yeah.
They're just the scuttlers. To describe a huntsman. So these are, what, about
the size of my thumb in total, I would say. But how large can a huntsman get? So
these are juveniles. They're about maybe five to six, seven centimetres long.
The adults can get quite big, maybe a span of 20 centimetres. And the females,
really big, big, big bottoms. Like really nice and fat. Lots of eggs inside. And
then she of course lays a cocoon and then she'll hang on to the cocoon and the
little babies hatch. And then they stay with mum. They stay with mum for weeks.
The social ones never leave mum. The solitary ones eventually go away and leave
mum. Do all spiders molt? Because I only found this out really recently that
they... Do all of them... So they don't grow, they just shed a skin and then
they're bigger? I just... When I think about trying to wriggle out of a tight
pair of pants and then imagine that pair of pants has eight legs, I'm just...
How do they get out of those eight trousers and they're bigger? Four trousers,
isn't it? Yeah. Sorry, of course. That's why we have him here. He is very good
at maths. So they can only grow by molting. So because they have an exoskeleton,
a hard shell on the outside, so... Forget the pants, it's on. So what has
happened here? So the male has moved up the web and he's now in the hub of the
female. So she's not aggressive at this stage. She's... Oh, hang on, there was a
twitch. Yeah, that's him. He's twitching. All the under 12s must leave. And he's
going to do a few vibrations. He's going to tug a little bit on the silk.
Mariela, can I please be the godparent of the babies? Yes. 300 little eggs.
That's quite a... So, well, you need to do a kind of a sports commentary on
this. Yes. I'm happy to do it. It may take a few hours. Are you okay with that?
Have we got enough drinks at the bar for that? So we were talking about the
exoskeleton. How do they get it off and how are they bigger when it's off? So
there's a chemical reaction that softens the exoskeleton from the inside out.
And so you get a crack in the exoskeleton. What's under the exoskeleton is quite
soft. And so they kind of slowly just pull themselves out. They're still
suspended on a piece of silk. And then they're super, super soft. But then they
use the hydraulics to expand. That's the growth. And then they wait in this
expanded state. So you can really see them just stretch out the legs. And then
the exoskeleton hardens. And that's when they've stretched their legs. Have you
watched that? Yes, yes, yes. How long does it take? Oh, it does take a while.
Yeah. Life as a spider is, I think, pretty crap. A lot of things are trying to
eat you all the time. Mariela just mentioned that she's going to have 300
babies. But you can guarantee that an overwhelming majority of her kids aren't
going to make it. Love me, the spider. Sorry. Mariela hasn't had her genital
plugging yet tonight. I'm so sorry. Cut that, please. That won't make the
podcast. I'm so sorry. Nacy, if we cut the earlier bit, that's going to be a
really interesting one. Hang me out to dry. I just wanted to ask a bit about the
ecological niche that spiders inhabit. Because we hear about, for example, you
often hear it said, well, wasps. We could do without wasps. They're pollinators,
for example, that the world without wasps would be a much worse world. In terms
of spiders, what ecological niche are they operating within? They're predators
and they're voracious predators, particularly of a lot of other insects. One of
the reasons I think so many of you were supportive of the huntsman is you know
that they're in your homes happily chomping on the cockroaches you might not
want to have at home. The reason we want to keep these things is they really
enrich our lives. I think that's one of the things that's really important.
These animals do an enormous amount. You're pollinators, you're parasitoids,
you're spiders, and they're going about their business doing it. But this notion
of people saying, kill it with fire and stuff like that, I'm a big fan of live
and let live. Our spiders have clearly got a reputation for being deadly when
they haven't killed that many people. It means that we should really celebrate
them a little bit more, I reckon. How's it going over there? We'll have a quick
last report. I think he's changed his mind. He's just sitting there. Very wise.
He's not feeling it. No. It's his choice. She's not going to do anything at the
moment. She's sat in the middle of the web. She's going to stay there. Yeah. So
it's his choice to proceed. He spins a mating thread and suspends himself and
then strings the mating thread, not unlike a guitar. And then it is her choice
to move on to the mating thread. And she has to hang at a particular angle,
otherwise his legs won't reach. And then he'll take a run up and insert a leg. I
was looking to Claire for a comment and you seem speechless. As if there's
anything I can say off the back of that, except, wow, that's a long birds in the
bees chat for those spider kids. Thank you very much to our fantastic panel
there, Marilla Herbstein, Dieter Hockerley and Claire Hooper. We asked our
audience a question too, and it was what makes you jump most if you found it in
the bath? So what would make you jump most if you found it in the bath? Petros
just started with my ex-wife. Though I like the way you've spelled ex there,
with just one, not ex, just ex, to suggest that again, still in the Marvel
universe there. Gordon, Gordon said Robin in Sea Winds Sea Spider. Someone had
to do it. Very good. Schrodinger's cat wearing one of Robin's cardigans. It's
delivery, Brian, it's delivery. I mean, let's go back again to your delivery.
Show Brian how to deliver. Oh, that, okay, that's a bit too much pressure. Also,
there is certainly more value in a joke when it hasn't been heard before, but
I'll give it a go. What would make you jump most if you found it in your bath?
Schrodinger's cat wearing one of Robin's cardigans. Yeah, yeah, see. You'll
notice there was a tonal change there, Brian. Your perpetual uh just didn't sell
it. My teenage son, who'd be least expected to be there. So thank you very much
for those. Thank you very much. This is the last show for the time being that
we're doing in Australia, and I hope we're going to be back to do more shows
here. You've been a fantastic audience and brilliant panels as well. And we
don't actually know at the time of recording, we don't know what next week's
episode is going to be, but we do know that it won't be about nature because
Brian gets very cross, don't you, if we do too many things about living things
because you don't understand them. So it'll be some cold, cold, indifferent bit
of the universe. Claire, have you got... No, I was just going to say, imagine if
Brian Cox spun a web, it would be a perfect grid. And with that, goodbye.
Goodbye. And the Infinite Monkey Cage was, as always, presented by Brian Cox and
Robin Innes. The producer was Caroline Steele, and it's a BBC Studios
production, and all the episodes from this series of The Infinite Monkey Cage
are available on BBC Sounds right now. Welcome to the Spark. When we're in the
midst of it, we're going to make decisions that are different than the decisions
that we would make if we were looking from the outside in. Bold thinking for a
better world. We struggle to recognise or remember that these inequalities come
from somewhere. That sense of human connection can save a life. I'm Helen Lewis
with a new series of close-up conversations. More big thinkers with big ideas
bidding to change our world and hearing some of the personal reasons behind
them. Probably one of the best decisions I've ever made in my life was making
that step. The Spark starts next Tuesday morning at 11 on Radio 4 and BBC
Sounds. Now Radio 4, here's Victoria Gill with this week's BBC Inside Science.
Hello. This week we are once again trying to work out how the COVID-19 pandemic
actually started. And critically, how can we unpick the scientific evidence from
the political blame game? And we're weighing in on an attempt to measure the
mass of all the wild mammals on planet Earth, as well as asking why on earth
scientists have done that. But first, COVID is in the headlines again. Not one
journalist worth their salt would sit on a cache of information in such an
important matter, such a historic matter. This is our plan. First and foremost,
from the start, we've focused on the need to control the spread of infection in
social care settings. Former Health Minister Matt Hancock has been accused of
ignoring scientific advice from Chief Medical Officer Chris Whitty to test
everyone entering a care home for COVID-19. We all saw how the tragedy of COVID
affected care home residents who were particularly vulnerable. Mr. Hancock has
denied the claims that came to light amid a leak to the Daily Telegraph of
thousands of WhatsApp messages. Now we're not going to get into the who said or
WhatsAppped what, but focus on what this whole saga shows us about the role in
government of scientific advisors. Can their expert input simply be ignored?
Well, someone who has been looking at that issue and what it can teach us about
the response to the pandemic is science writer Phil Ball, who is a co-author of
a scientific paper looking at this very issue. Phil, first of all, have you seen
these now infamous WhatsApp messages? A hundred thousand of them, apparently.
Yes, I've read them all. They're incredible. No, I mean, who knows what is going
to be amongst them? No, I mean, of course, no one apart from some folks at the
Telegraph have seen them all. So, you know, we've yet to see what they contain.
But I noticed you were tweeting about the wider theme of what this says about
scientific advice and the role of scientific advisors and and particularly the
kind of conspicuous silence of Chris Whitty in response to this. So on that
point, what do you think this shows us about that role and how kind of open and
transparent scientific advice to the government can be? Well, this to me is a
big part of the issue, certainly in terms of that initial debate about what
Chris Whitty advised Matt Hancock about testing in care homes and what Matt
Hancock then did. It seemed that that immediately was the thing that jumped out
about that. And we've heard nothing about that. You know, in all this debate,
the people we've heard nothing from so far in the media are the scientific
advisors like Whitty. And that to me speaks volumes. My interpretation of that
is that Chris Whitty and, you know, presumably Patrick Valance and the other
scientific advisors are taking the view that because they in particular are
civil servants, their responsibility has been to provide objective advice to the
government and to support the government. And so it's not for them to sort of
leap into the fray and start saying, well, I said this and you didn't do that.
And I think that's quite proper. The point seems to come down to the Telegraph
is suggesting that Matt Hancock disregarded Whitty's advice on testing in care
homes for some reasons, perhaps to do with politically motivated agenda. Hancock
has responded by saying, no, I made the decision that I did because I was told
in another meeting that there was insufficient testing capacity. Now, presumably
Chris Whitty knows the answer to that. And if he is taking the view that it's
not proper in his position to intervene, I fully understand that. But I think
one of the key considerations here has to be the right, the absolute right of
the very many people who lost loved ones and relatives in care homes because of
this situation. They have a right to know why the decisions that were made were
made, what was the basis for them. And so, you know, it seems to me a situation
where we do need to hear from the scientists what the situation was. There
doesn't have to be any judgment about the, I mean, the politicians like Matt
Hancock, of course, have the right to disregard scientific advice if that's what
happened. And if they have some reason to think that it's only one part of the
equation. But if that's so, we need to know why that was. And we need to know
what the scientific advice was. You know, is it the case that there was a
shortcoming in testing? And if so, then the question falls on that. Why was
there this shortcoming? Why wasn't there greater preparation made earlier on
when we saw what was coming? These are things that the scientific advisors would
be able to help with. And it seems to me entirely proper and in fact, important
and necessary to have that input. And if we have a situation where the
scientific advisory system to government that we have prevents them from
clarifying in that way, then there is a problem with that system that needs to
be discussed. How do you think that the relationship of scientific advisors to
leaders and to the public can be helpfully amended so that we do this better? I
think it needs to be made more explicit that transparency is crucial, that the
scientific advisors have the right and perhaps the duty to sometimes address the
public directly, not to contradict what ministers are doing, but simply to lay
out the scientific advice to them directly. But also that it needs to be made
more clear for the advisors themselves what their latitude and what their
responsibilities are. I think part of the problem here is that it seems it's
been left to Chris Witty and Patrick Valance and others to try to figure out
what they can and can't say. And I think that puts them in an invidious position
that perhaps has left them erring on the side of caution. If it were made
explicit what they can and can't say, they wouldn't have to be wrestling with
those decisions. Now, the question of how this whole terrible pandemic started,
where the virus that causes Covid-19 came from, is back in the headlines again
too. Because the director of the FBI, Christopher Wray, told Fox News this week
that the origins of the pandemic are most likely a potential lab incident. But
the FBI has not published any evidence they've seen that backs up this new
conclusion. So we seem to have another political firestorm that doesn't actually
tell us anything else about the origin of the virus itself. So we want to unpick
what the science does tell us. Let's have a quick look at what we do know. The
lab leak or lab incident theory that the FBI director was referring to centres
on the Wuhan Institute of Virology, a research centre that studies viruses in
the Chinese city where the first human cases of Covid-19 were detected. Jane Kui
is the only science journalist to have been inside the institute in recent
years. She visited several times and even went on a bat virus sampling mission
with the scientists there. Jane is a former microbiologist herself and as she
told us last year, she was rather unimpressed with the lab. It's quite ordinary.
It's just the same as any molecular biology labs everywhere. They have collected
over 20,000 samples from bats in the past 18 years. I didn't really realise
actually how difficult it is to get live coronaviruses out of bats. After 18
years of really hard work, the team managed to isolate only three coronaviruses.
There are lots of misreportings about those 20,000 bat samples. I read articles
saying that they have 20,000 bat viruses. 20,000, that is truly scary. I would
really worry about if they're working on 20,000 viruses or even 2,000 viruses,
how can they know that none of the 20,000 viruses are responsible for the
pandemic? But they actually only have three virus isolate. And also they have
created another three viruses based on the genomic sequences, use synthetic
biology. So they have six live viruses, all close relatives of the SARS virus,
the original SARS virus. Jane Kui there. And to clarify, those virus samples
she's talking about were related to the first SARS virus outbreak, the virus
that spread in 2002 and 2003, not the SARS-CoV-2 virus that caused the pandemic.
So what conclusions have scientists reached about how the virus that causes
COVID-19 found its way into humans? We called on virologist Marion Koopmans,
who's one of the members of the World Health Organization team that first
visited China to investigate the origin of the pandemic. While that mission was
heavily criticised for not having enough access or independence from Chinese
handlers, they did manage to produce an epidemiological map showing how and from
where the virus first spread in the city of Wuhan. First, though, what did she
think about the FBI chief's pronouncement on the lab leak theory? Well, I tried
to find if there was any new information, and I couldn't find that. So when I,
yeah, when that was clear, I must say that was a deep sigh. Because of course,
we've heard this before. It is important. It does remain an important question.
What exactly happened? How did this pandemic start? But I think having these
statements, which is not the first time, but without providing evidence that
people can look at, that scientists can look at, that WHO can look at, I think
it's increasingly difficult to know what to think of it. What do we know now? In
terms of the clues, the biological clues that we have about where the first
human case came from, how this all emerges, what more do we know? So an
important new finding was a publication that came out somewhere in June or July
after our visit, that had surveyed what types of animals could be found on
markets in Wuhan. And they documented up until end of November 2019, that they
had seen a range of wild animals and farmed wild animals. So wild caught, wild
animals and farmed wild animals. And that included several species that we know
are susceptible to the virus. So that was a new finding. We actually have a clip
of Eddie Holmes, one of the scientists that led the study into where the
samples, the positive samples were clustering. My colleague, Roland Pease, spoke
to Eddie Holmes about that study when it was published. So what happened was in
early January 2020, once the outbreak started, they closed it down and the
health officials went in and they swabbed surfaces. They swabbed drains and door
handles and tables and cages, it turned out, and things like feather-removal
machines for birds, poultry. They swabbed all these and they tested them for the
virus, for SARS-CoV-2. What we then managed to get a hold of was then a map of
where those positive hits for the virus were in the market. So then you
basically plot them on to each store. And what we see, the cases are very
strongly associated with the west side of the market, very strongly concentrated
to the southwestern corner of the market. That's of huge significance because
that's where the wildlife were. And in fact, when I went to that market in 2014,
I took photographs of some of the animals there. And I took particularly raccoon
dogs because I knew that raccoon dogs were implicated in the emergence of SARS-
CoV-1 back in 2002, 2003. I took those exactly in the southwestern corner of the
market. And that's where most of these positive samples were actually found. Was
that where the China CDC were doing most of their swabbing? In other words, are
you just seeing where the swabs were taken? Lots of our statistical analyses try
to account for these sampling biases and there are sampling biases in there. But
I think we managed to account for that. So I think there really is a hot spot in
that southwestern corner. The main thing, Rowan, I think most of all, is that
there was one store that they got five positive swabs from. One of them was
inside a cage, a metal cage. Lo and behold, that was exactly the store that I
photographed the raccoon dog in in 2014, the very same one. The missing pieces
of that puzzle, a bat testing positive for a virus that matches exactly or
another intermediate species that might have been in that market, we've not got
that exact match, that kind of that missing link. Do you think those pieces of
the puzzle could be filled in? Will we ever get to the answer of, you know, what
was the origin of this outbreak? If the closest virus is indeed from bats, I
think that's still possible, that we would eventually find the right bat cave
where that original virus came from. The question is, where would you look? And
in our initial recommendations, we had said the best way of going forward would
be to backtrack all the trade routes from the animals that were introduced on
the markets and go to the places where they were farmed or caught and start your
sampling there. As scientists, it's not a case of wanting to kind of shut down
different hypotheses, but we've seen the lab leak theory is the thing that's in
the headlines again, being directly pointed to by a very powerful figure in the
United States, the director of the FBI. What evidence is there of a lab leak? I
mean, it's still a hypothesis that's on the table while we don't know how this
started, isn't it? It is. And it is also very difficult to prove a negative.
Right. So and that's why I must honestly say I'm a little bit annoyed if they
keep saying this without sharing the evidence with an organization that can
actually follow up with it. It doesn't have to be open or public, but there's
ways of sharing information confidentially with the WHO and then they can
compare the information and say, hmm, there's something to it or not. I really
think that's the process that needs to happen, because if not, this discussion
is just not going anywhere. With all of the evidence that you've seen and
everything that we've learned over the last three years, what do you think
happened in late 2019 at the start of this outbreak? What do you think is the
most likely scenario? To me, the most likely still is that an uninfected animal
somehow entered the market chain. That was not in the month of December. That
was before that, because the virus circulation started earlier. So it was in the
period when wild animals were documented on the market. So my best guess would
be one of those farmed wild animals, maybe with a temporary outbreak. We know
that, for instance, on mink farms that have been infected in Europe, we see the
virus burn through. So after a while, you don't find the virus anymore. So that
could have happened on, let's say, a raccoon farm somewhere in China. Do you
think we'll ever answer the question categorically, how did this start? So there
has been additional bat screening work and there's been interesting findings
from bats outside of China in Southeast Asia that also were quite closely
related and also had the capacity to directly bind to human cells. So that's
been found. I think the most likely piece of the puzzle would be that even
closer viruses are found in bat surveys at some point in time, that really, if
you put them into a phylogenetic analysis together with all the viruses that we
know, that that really would be the closest ancestor and that not with a big
time window in between. That's, I think, still possible. So if you look at all
the different animal species that could be involved and then look at what
samples of which animals have been tested, that clearly is not enough to rule
out an infection route of a farmed wild animal species. So that's still
possible. I think by now I'm more thinking of that it's been a temporary pass
through some kind of intermediate host. And the reason why I'm saying that is if
it was still circulating, let's say, in raccoon farms, raccoon dog farms, I
would think we would have seen new sparks, new introductions into people from
that. So we would have seen new outbreaks in China during its lockdown and its
closed borders with viruses that were very much like the original strain in
Wuhan. And we haven't seen that. Marion Koopmans from Erasmus University in
Rotterdam there. And we also heard from Eddie Holmes from the University of
Sydney. But now for a lighter topic, helium. What is here, it's about 100 tonnes
of equipment. Within the vertical part, the heat exchangers. In the horizontal
part, the expansion turbines. So basically this is a very big fridge. It is
exactly a very big fridge. Yes. Costing as well some money. Yes. And how much
helium do you look after here? In total for the LHC, we will have a bit more
than 120 tonnes of helium. About 10% of the European market per year. So would
that fill a swimming pool? I mean, not that you'd necessarily want to, but is it
that sort of amount? In liquid form, I've got to think a bit. So we have 400,000
litres of liquid helium. If the swimming pool is 10 by 20, by an average of two
metres, that's 400 cubic metres. So it's 1,000 of reasonable size swimming pool.
1,000 swimming pools. Yes. That, to put it scientifically, is a lot of helium.
And scientists at the University of Oxford say they've uncovered a new way to
help pinpoint hidden helium gas fields and avert what they've called a global
supply crisis. Because helium is in relatively short supply and it's extremely
useful, as earth scientist Dr Anran Chang told me. Helium is actually called
inert gas. It's part of the noble gases. And in Chinese, we actually call them
lazy gas. So all those names are actually describing the same properties that
they do not involve in chemical reactions. So they are a perfect choice for
filling gas. And also they are very small in their size. So they are the second
on the periodic table. They're perfect to penetrate through tiny leaks, tiny
areas. Therefore, they're perfect for leak checking. And most importantly, they
have the lowest boiling point that we know so far, which is four Kelvin. That is
minus 269 degrees C. That means we can actually manipulate helium to achieve
that temperature relatively quite easily with the current technology. And
because of all these properties, they are widely used in a range of
applications, but behind the scene. So for example, medical applications like
MRI. They're also used in industrial production of fiber optics and
semiconductor. And also very important scientific researches of superconductors
and the very famous Large Hadron Collider. And also some rocket engines uses
helium to fuel the empty space left by few combustions to control the pressure.
In that medical setting, in MRI, in that manufacturing setting, what is it about
those properties? How is helium put to use and why does it need to be helium?
MRI in particular, it is using this low temperature that it can achieve. So the
temperature, the cooling ability of helium is actually widely used. Right. So
it's much more than balloons. But we are facing something of a crisis of supply.
What's happening in the world at the moment that has caused that? So helium is
actually all found by accident. So during the drilling of hydrocarbons like gas
and oil, when there is successful drilling of oil and gas system, then people
would probably just test what it is in there as well and find that there is
enough helium to actually generate economically favorable byproducts. And then
helium is produced. But that had been enough to supply the market in the past.
But currently, as you can imagine, the global development just increased the
demand of helium quite a lot. So our lab, who is actually trying to find helium,
we received a letter before Christmas stating that as a non-crucial user, we are
restricted with our helium supply and we're still restricted at the moment. So
our lab manager is very cautious. We check our helium tank every day to make
sure that there's no people in the lab secretly filling a birthday balloon or
something. Tempting. Essentially, you're figuring out where to find it on
purpose. What are you looking for? What provides those clues about where these
sort of reservoirs of helium could be? So in our model, we have helium and
nitrogen. The associated nitrogen produced both from this crystalline basement.
So the crystalline basement is a dense rock from mantle to the near surface. And
they are millions or billions years old and likely to be more than 30 to 40
kilometers thick. So they're basically a good kitchen and a storage room for
helium and nitrogen. And then they are both produced and they are then dissolved
in the water in this tiny pores between the crystals. And they will slowly
migrate up to the sediments that lay over the basement. It's like layered cakes.
So there are sponge cakes, which you can imagine they have like bigger pore
spaces and helium and nitrogen just can travel through this quite easily. And
there might be things like brownie cake layers. And then this helium and
nitrogen just takes a little while to transport through. And then there's the
solid icing units, which is just very hard. And they pretty much just slow down
the helium and nitrogen transport significantly. So to find the helium
reservoir, we need to have a right combination of these different layers, their
deposition time. And if that is right, we might accumulate large amount of
helium and nitrogen in the deepest unit or units. And finally, we want to end
today's program with a scientific countdown because we can reveal to you the
world's top five wild mammals in terms of their collective mass. That's right.
Scientists have measured the collective weight of Earth's wild mammals. So here
it is the top five. In at number five, weighing in at a collective 500,000 tons,
it's mule deer. Just in front at number four at 600,000 tons, it's Eastern gray
kangaroos. With just half a million individuals weighing in at an extraordinary
1.3 million tons. At number three, it's the African savannah elephant. At number
two, it's wild boar, 1.9 million tons. But outweighing all those at number one,
it is not even close. With a total mass of 2.7 million tons, it's white tail
deer. Sorry, as a science journalist, I do have to live my countdown DJing dream
where I can. And the other enthusiastic voice you heard there announcing the
number one heaviest wild mammal species was Ron Milo from the Weizmann Institute
of Science in Israel. He is a quantitative biologist and I spoke to him and his
colleague Leo Greenspoon, who led this study. So all the wild land mammals
combined, all the elephants and all the deer, all the giraffes, all the rodents
and bats all together sum up to about 20 megatons, 20 million tons, whereas the
domesticated are at 600 million tons. So that means 30 times more. If you look,
for example, at cows, you know, the far outweigh all of the other wild animals
by far. And Leo, what surprised you? What numbers really jumped out at you when
you did this study? I think if you would have asked me before approaching the
study, I probably would have guessed the top five were to be elephants,
giraffes, maybe tigers, other things I know from children's book that I read
growing up. Definitely not something along the lines of a few deer species. So
the most surprising thing to me were how much of an impact we also have on wild
mammals. And most of the ones that contribute most to the total biomass of wild
land mammals are ones that kind of enjoy our presence. We also hunt them
sometimes, but they also go into our backyards and eat some of our leftovers and
eat some of the stuff we put in our bins. And I found that very surprising. The
fact that humans became so abundant and dominant on the earth means that the
type of mammals that enjoy our presence, for example, coming and eating from our
backyard, are also the ones that are now number one in the chart of wild
mammals. And this is now a different type of wild. This is a wild that's really
in a strong relationship with humans. Presumably, in terms of biomass of mammals
on earth, we're probably number one by a long stretch. Is that right? Do we know
how much we outweigh the biomass of wild mammals, the humans? We weigh about 400
megatons in comparison to the 20 megatons of all wild land mammals. So we
outweigh all of the other wild land mammals by about 20 fold. Ron Milo and Lior
Greenspoon there, taking a new measure of life on our planet. And that's all we
have time for this week. BBC Inside Science is produced in collaboration with
the Open University and we'll be counting down the days, all seven of them,
until we're back with you, weighing up more of the science that's shaping our
view of the world. BBC Inside Science was presented by Victoria Gill and
produced by Julian Siddle. Evan Davis will be live in Birmingham with the PM
programme next. The Patch on BBC Radio 4. We are making changes to the way BBC
live streams are distributed via third party services and platforms and the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds. And BBC Sounds starts next Wednesday morning
at nine. This is BBC Radio 4.