TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-18H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 on BBC Sounds. This is Radio 4. It's 5 o'clock, time for PM with Evan Davis.
BEEPING Hello, Theresa May couldn't solve it? The House has spoken and the
government will listen. It is clear that the House does not support this deal.
Boris Johnson thought he had solved it. We have a plan to do it. We have a deal
that is ready to go. It is oven ready. Whack it in. Gas mark four. I'm not a
great cook, but you know what I mean. It's there. But he soon changed his mind.
I don't think that the interpretation or application of the protocol is sensible
or pragmatic. There are all kinds of impediments being constructed and we need
to sort it out. So has Rishi Sunak now made history and actually sorted it out
once and for all? We have now made a decisive breakthrough. Together, we have
changed the original protocol and are today announcing the new Windsor
Framework. Well, it's a new deal on Brexit and Northern Ireland. It is certainly
a huge day for UK-EU relations, a complete change in the tone, goodwill flowing
freely, with the prospect of British science rejoining its European
collaborations. The European Commission President has been to see the King. On
PM, we'll look at what's been agreed, what it means for Brexit, Northern Ireland
and this government. Plenty else on the programme. We'll remember Betty
Boothroyd, the first woman to serve as Speaker to the Commons, who died today.
We'll examine the data on how young people watch television in their own
language with the subtitles on. But we'll start with the BBC News, read today by
Chris Aldridge. Rishi Sunak and the President of the European Commission, Ursula
von der Leyen, said they've reached the beginning of a new chapter agreeing a
revised deal on post-Brexit trade arrangements for Northern Ireland. Under the
proposals finalised in Windsor this afternoon, most goods coming into the
country from other parts of the UK would pass through green lanes aimed at
reducing paperwork and bureaucracy, while the Stormont Assembly would be able to
reject new EU laws. But some unionists say the Prime Minister has oversold the
deal. Here's our political correspondent, Jonathan Blake. The Windsor Framework,
as the agreement has been named, was, the Prime Minister said, a decisive
breakthrough that marked a turning point for Northern Ireland. Ursula von der
Leyen called it an historic deal, signalling a new chapter of relations between
the UK and EU. Rishi Sunak said the deal would ensure smooth trade, removing any
sense of border in the Irish Sea, guarantee the availability of food and
medicines, and safeguard sovereignty for Northern Ireland with a so-called
Stormont Break that could stop new EU laws applying there. But Ms von der Leyen
confirmed the European Court of Justice would continue to have the final say on
issues to do with the single market. The Prime Minister will make a statement to
Parliament this evening. He insisted MPs would get a vote on the agreement at,
he said, the appropriate time. Some Conservatives and Democratic Unionists have
expressed concerns about the King meeting Ursula von der Leyen at Windsor Castle
shortly after the deal was finalised. The former Cabinet Minister, Jacob Rees-
Mogg, said it was constitutionally unwise to involve the King in a matter of
immediate political controversy. Northern Ireland's former First Minister, Lady
Foster, described the meeting as crass. Downing Street said it was not uncommon
for the King to accept invitations to meet certain leaders. Police are offering
Â£20,000 for information about the shooting of a senior officer in Oma last week.
Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell remains in a critical but stable
condition in hospital. The dissident Republican group the New IRA has claimed
responsibility for the attack outside a sports centre where Mr Caldwell had just
finished a training session with young footballers he was coaching. Detective
Chief Superintendent Eamon Corrigan says it's fortunate more people weren't
injured. There were at least ten shots fired. I can disclose that two shots hit
vehicles that were parked in the car park. It shows how reckless this attack
was. Israel has deployed extra troops in the occupied West Bank after a
Palestinian man was shot dead when Israeli settlers attacked Palestinian
villages, setting fire to houses and cars. The violence near the city of Nablus
came in response to the killing of two Jewish brothers in the area yesterday.
Tributes have been paid to Betty Boothroyd, the first female Speaker of the
House of Commons, who has died at the age of 93. The current Speaker, Sir
Lindsay Hoyle, described her as a dedicated and illustrious servant to the
Commons, while the former Foreign Secretary Lord Hague said she was kind, fun,
fair and forthright. This is how the former Labour Cabinet Minister Dame
Margaret Becket remembers Lady Boothroyd. Always full of life, full of
enthusiasm, witty, very attractive, very charming. She was just tremendously
popular and very, very highly regarded right across the House. And I remember
when she decided to stand down, she announced it and the whole House kind of
went, oh! A former retained firefighter has admitted directing sex attacks and
rapes of girls in the Philippines from his home in the Highlands. Gary Campbell,
who's 59, paid for child abuse to be carried out as he watched and recorded it
via a live stream. Among the victims was a girl thought to be four years old.
He'll be sentenced at the High Court in Edinburgh next month. The Food Minister
Mark Spencer is meeting supermarket bosses this evening to discuss shortages of
some fresh fruit and vegetables. He says he wants to hear what they're doing to
get shelves stocked again and to avoid a repeat. Consumers continue to face
empty shelves or buying restrictions on certain items, such as tomatoes,
cucumbers and peppers. Thank you very much, Chris. Well, are we nearly there
yet? For years we've talked about Brexit and that one enormously difficult
problem in particular, how you can have a border without having a border. Well,
Rishi Sunak has renegotiated the protocol that tried to deal with that
conundrum. The original solution put the external trade border of the EU in the
Irish Sea between two parts of the United Kingdom. It left many in Northern
Ireland feeling cut off from the rest of the UK. That feeling has led to the
suspension of the devolved power sharing arrangements there. The deal to change
the protocol has been gestating for a while, but it finally emerged in a day of
marked choreography set in Windsor, in Windsor seemingly simply to give it the
name the Windsor Framework. I guess we'll call it that now and no longer have to
talk about the Northern Ireland Protocol anymore. There were talks today between
Rishi Sunak and Ursula von der Leyen, the President of the European Commission,
then a joint press conference before she went to tea with the King, as you do in
Windsor. He will be talking to his cabinet and addressing the Commons this
evening. But the optics of the joint press conference really did make it feel
like something of a new chapter in the post-Brexit relationship. So let's hear a
little of it because Rishi Sunak outlined the details of the deal in terms of
three key steps forward. The first, he said, was delivering smooth trade between
Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Goods destined for Northern Ireland will
travel through a new green lane with a separate red lane for goods at risk of
moving on to the EU. In the green lane, burdensome customs bureaucracy will be
scrapped. It means food retailers like supermarkets, restaurants and wholesalers
will no longer need hundreds of certificates for every lorry. This will end the
situation where food made to UK rules could not be sent to and sold in Northern
Ireland. This means that if food is available on supermarket shelves in Great
Britain, then it will be available on supermarket shelves in Northern Ireland.
This means we have removed any sense of a border in the Irish Sea. People have
been making jokes about food not being available in the United Kingdom and not
being available in Northern Ireland. This is a different topic. Now, the second
step, Rishi Sunak said, was the protection of Northern Ireland's place in the
United Kingdom. We've amended the legal text of the protocol to ensure we can
make critical VAT and excise changes for the whole of the UK, for example, on
alcohol duty, meaning our reforms to cut the cost of a pint in the pub will now
apply in Northern Ireland. The same quintessentially British products like
trees, plants and potatoes will again be available in Northern Ireland's garden
centres. Onerous travels on pet requirements have been removed. And today's
agreement also delivers a landmark settlement on medicines. From now on, drugs
approved for use by the UK's medicines regulator will be automatically available
in every pharmacy and hospital in Northern Ireland. OK, so that's the second
part of it. Now, the final step, you said, was about safeguarding sovereignty.
Now, one of the issues for many in Northern Ireland was they would be forced to
comply with single market rules of the European Union but would have no
mechanism for having any say in those rules. And the Prime Minister said
safeguarding... The deal, the Windsor Framework, had safeguarded the sovereignty
for the people of Northern Ireland. The only EU law that applies in Northern
Ireland under the framework is the minimum necessary to avoid a hard border with
Ireland and allow Northern Irish businesses to continue accessing the EU market.
But I know that many people in Northern Ireland are worried about being subject
to changes in EU goods laws. To address that, today's agreement introduces a new
storm-on-break. Many had called for Stormont to have a say over these laws. But
the storm-on-break goes further and means that Stormont can, in fact, stop them
from applying in Northern Ireland. This will establish a clear process through
which the democratically elected Assembly can pull an emergency break for
changes to EU goods rules that would have significant and lasting effects on
everyday lives. If the break is pulled, the UK government will have a veto. This
gives the institutions of the Good Friday Agreement in Northern Ireland a
powerful new safeguard based on cross-community consent. Well, there you have,
if you like, the meat of what the Windsor Framework is about. The text is being
read and pored over by experts and MPs everywhere. But the European Commission
President, also at that press conference, was there to talk about the deal. She
spoke about working with the Prime Minister to strike this deal. We knew we had
to work hard with clear minds and determination, but we also both knew, dear
Rishi, that we could do it, because we were both genuinely committed to find a
practical solution for people and for all communities in Northern Ireland. At
the press conference, we had another bit of news. This Windsor Framework is good
news for scientists and researchers in the European Union and in the UK, because
of course the moment we have finished this agreement, so it's an agreement in
principle, the moment it's implemented, I am happy to start immediately, right
now, the work on an association agreement, which is the precondition to join
Horizon Europe. So good news for all those who are working in research and
science. Right. So that was the press conference. Now, reaction coming in, we
have some words from the Democratic Unionist Party, who more or less say, in
broad terms, it's clear that significant progress has been secured across a
number of areas, whilst also recognising there remain key issues of concern. The
Prime Minister made clear this afternoon he thought the DUP needed time to look
at this agreement. The DUP are taking some time as they reflect on it, but they
will not have had the documents for very long. But in terms of getting buy-in
from Brexiteer Britain, Steve Baker now has a role of Minister of State for
Northern Ireland. He's the Conservative MP for Wycombe, but is, if you like, one
of the gurus of Brexit on the Brexit-supporting side. Just before we came on
air, he gave me his reaction to the news that this deal had been struck. So I
checked with him. He was absolutely happy, not preparing to leave government
over it. I am not resigning. I am absolutely delighted. The Prime Minister's
really pulled a blinder in delivering a deal which I think meets the legitimate
interests of all interested parties. I'm extremely pleased. Tell us a little bit
about that deal. Is it a compromise? Are there things in it you don't like, but
you're willing to put up with because it is a deal and it parks the issue for
the time being? No, it's very straightforward. Insofar as it is a compromise, it
is in order to have an infrastructure-free border on the island of Ireland. So
there may be people, hardline unionists, who oppose it, but I think if anyone
should ask them, would you be happy to have north-south border infrastructure? I
think that people who oppose the deal would probably say yes. There are some
unionists who take that view. I think for the majority who want to have no
border down the Irish Sea and no border infrastructure on the island of Ireland,
they will find that this is a satisfactory and pragmatic deal which restores
Northern Ireland's full place in the UK's own market, which ensures that
Northern Ireland continues to have unfettered access to the EU market, which
restores more broadly Northern Ireland's place in the union by dealing with,
say, medicines, pets, tax. It's an extraordinary achievement. And of course the
Stormont break is also really quite a remarkable achievement, using the petition
of concern to ensure that Northern Ireland can stop new rules from applying to
them. It's a terrific, terrific achievement. Just on that particular one, the
Stormont break, Northern Ireland might find itself being told, this is the new
rule of a single market, a product has to meet this standard, you have to do
that. They will be allowed to opt out. Just tell us a little bit about how they
will be able to opt out. Does it require both parties, both cultures in Northern
Ireland to sign up to that? Well, there is a mechanism called the petition of
concern in order to provide for cross-community consent on matters. That
requires 30 MLAs, members of the Assembly, 30 MLAs from two parties to register
a petition. And that is the mechanism which will be used to object. And what
we'll do is we'll negotiate with all of the parties and I expect, and obviously
it's early stage, but I expect that we will legislate to put in place the UK
government's response to such a petition. But yes, it is the case that they will
be able to stop new laws from applying to them. It's a remarkable thing. And
I've been very clear that sovereignty here means the right to say no, and they
will have that right to say no, and I'm extremely pleased about it. Some will
say it's never going to happen because obviously there would be in effect a
nationalist veto over invoking that right. So it's not going to really happen
because nationalists will tend to go with whatever single market changes are
being agreed for the EU as a whole. Well, people need to just look at the
numbers and the way the system works. It's 30 MLAs from two parties, and I think
you'd find with the... It's perfectly possible to foresee two parties objecting
to something, but if it were a clear majority required, that would be a higher
threshold. So I think it's worth just bearing in mind that by using the petition
of concern mechanism, we're in the place where actually the unionist legitimate
concern is in a strong position. If people really think we can do better than
this, I'd be very keen to see what they think better would look like. I'm
personally delighted. As late as yesterday, I was extremely concerned on this
point. I woke up this morning, went into number 10, read the papers, and was
just delighted. The Prime Minister and I spoke, and I told him, you've done it.
This is great. He would be very relieved to have had that conversation with you.
Did you feel cut out of it a bit? Certainly the DUP feel they were cut out. I
know many of your, if you like, former colleagues on the European research group
of Brexiteer MPs in your party feel that they were cut out of it. Did you feel
you weren't really being told what was going on? I don't think I should pretend
that I felt other than excluded from negotiations, but the Prime Minister's
given me an extremely good reason why, which I'm not in a position to share with
you. But now that I understand that there was a noble and good reason for it, I
feel rather sorry that I was a bear with a sore head about it. But after
everything you'll be aware that I've done over seven years, I personally wanted
to hold the pen and solve this last problem. But this is not a time for pride
and ego. It's a time to be thinking about the best interests of 1.9 million
people in Northern Ireland and more broadly, the Republic of Ireland, the EU,
the UK. It's time for us all to, as has been said, turn the page, move on to the
next chapter. And this is an agreement which allows us to do that. And you'll
appreciate after all the rollercoaster we've been through, I really hope that
Eurosceptics and Unionists agree with me that this is the right basis to move
on. That is going to be a very powerful endorsement. But you will have to
concede the European Court of Justice does have final say over aspects of life
in parts of the United Kingdom years after we Brexited. Well, that is, as I said
earlier, it's about the compromise which comes from accepting that we have a
border on the island of Ireland, not just on goods, by the way, but in terms of
tax and other matters and currency. It's been there for a very long time in
those regards. But because we have an infrastructure-free border, that has
implications. So I think it's 1,700 pages of EU law being disapplied by this
deal. We're down to the minimum of EU law necessary to keep that border
infrastructure-free. Now, I understand the EU's worked out that's only 3% of EU
law. And I think for the prize of a border that is going to be unique, I mean,
what an extraordinary opportunity for Northern Ireland. Dual access to both
markets, no infrastructure on the border, complete access to the UK's internal
market, the opportunity to take advantage of free trade agreements with the
whole UK. It's the most extraordinary and unique set of circumstances. And
perfectly honestly, I think what's been delivered here by the EU and by the
Prime Minister is equal to the level of, for want of a better term,
statesmanship which delivered the Belfast Good Friday Agreement. And so for that
to happen now as we approach the anniversary, I think it's nothing less than a
triumph. So the Northern Ireland Protocol Bill, which gave the British
government power for itself to unilaterally override the protocol, that all goes
now, presumably, doesn't it? We don't need that. We've now got an agreement, so
we don't need to threaten unilateral withdrawal from it. Well, that's right,
yes. And that is correct. We've got an agreement that's a good agreement and
actually is better than what the Protocol Bill could have delivered. Apart from
anything else, if we'd had to use the Protocol Bill as an act, it would have led
to a great deal of upset and uncertainty. It would have only been temporary. And
it did a promise alignment for the purposes of the red lane with all EU law,
whereas as we've rehearsed, thanks to the Stormont break, we're in a better
position than the Bill could ever have delivered. And of course, because it's
being delivered by consent, by agreement, which was always our preferred
approach, this can be a stable and long-term solution. So actually, I'm very,
very pleased that we've been able to move beyond that Bill, do better than that
Bill in this agreement. As I say, this is why I'm so very pleased. Finally, just
finally, because I know you've got to move on, how did Rishi Sunak achieve this?
What did he have? Does it show that, if you like, a more civil relationship with
European counterparts delivers results? What do you think clinched it? Well, I
think that all of us have worked extremely hard, the Prime Minister, the
Secretary of State, myself, if I may say so. People will have seen the apology
that I made, it's very carefully worded. And also great statesmanship by Simon
Coveney, by Michal Martin and by Leo Varadkar. Everybody's pulled together and
said, actually, the relationship between the UK and Ireland is fundamental. Our
partnership with the EU, actually, yes, it's very important, it's fundamental.
Everybody can see that with Ukraine. And we've all worked extremely hard to be
civil to one another, to recognise one another's mutual interests and to just
decide to have a new chapter. And I think that's something in politics that,
thank goodness for once, we can be very proud of. Steve Baker there, Minister of
State for Northern Ireland. Brexit supporting MP, very much endorsing the
Windsor Framework. We will be coming back to that through the programme,
actually. A lot of people reading the text at the moment to get themselves
across the detail. And we expect the DUP to be saying something to camera before
long. But let's just at this point, 22 minutes past five, have a look at some
other headlines. Here's Chris. Scotland's Finance Secretary Kate Forbes, who's
vying to succeed Nicola Sturgeon as First Minister, has criticised her
government's plan for a 20p deposit on single-use drinks, bottles and cans. She
said the scheme, aimed at boosting recycling, could cause economic carnage. The
Chartered Society of Physiotherapy says it's escalating its industrial action
over pay in England. Around 4,500 physiotherapists will take part in a strike on
March 22nd. Canada has said it will ban the Chinese social media app TikTok from
all government devices because of security concerns. The European Commission
took a similar decision last week. Thanks, Chris. Now, what next in the West
Bank after a night of violence? There's been escalating tension between
Palestinians and Israeli settlers. And last night, dozens of settlers set fire
to a Palestinian village, Huara. Even the trees were not spared. They burned
everything, said one resident. A Palestinian in another village was killed. Now,
that came after two Israeli brothers, two settlers, were fatally shot as they
drove through Huara. Israel's Prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has appealed
for calm. He said, I ask, even when the blood is boiling, not to take the law
into one's hands. Well, this year, 63 Palestinians have been killed in the
violence, 11 Israeli civilians. Let's get an update from Tom Bateman, our Middle
East correspondent who is in Jerusalem. Any sign of calming there, Tom? No, not
really. I've just come back from Huara. This is a Palestinian town that sits,
basically, there's the Route 60, which is the main north-south highway that runs
through the occupied West Bank. It cuts right through the middle of this town.
And it is often a flashpoint because that road is used by both Palestinians and
Israeli settlers. So what we saw last night, as you say, earlier in the day, a
Palestinian gunman shooting dead two Israeli settlers. And then after that,
people from some of the local, quite radicalised, very ideological settlements,
posting social media adverts, calling for a march on the town in revenge. I
mean, they said this in the leaflet. So it was clear to the Israeli army, which
has to protect the Palestinian civilians there, because they don't have their
own security forces, that something was likely to happen. Hundreds of settlers
then rampaged through the town. And I've been speaking to Palestinian residents
there. I mean, they were just absolutely terrified. One man, for example, ran
his kids up to the rooftop to stay safe, and their building was torched. I mean,
these were just scenes of carnage. And the aftermath there is pretty horrific.
The atmosphere is very gloomy, but also very tense. And I think that's the
problem now. We've had reports in the last couple of hours of a Palestinian
shooting towards an Israeli vehicle, and a person critically injured in another
part of the West Bank. So despite the fact there was a big security summit
brokered by the US yesterday, the first of its kind actually in years, between
Israeli and Palestinian security officials, we're now looking at further
violence. Tom, thank you very much for that update there on events there. Let's
return to the Windsor Framework. The big deal, the first reset of the UK-EU
relationship since the Brexit trade deal was agreed in 2020. It relates to the
work of the Northern Ireland Protocol. The substance was published late this
afternoon. Some of that, frankly, might be offering more detail on red tape
issues that are going to be lost on most of us. But we asked the trade expert,
Sam Lowe, to come on to PM as soon as he had had a chance to look at the
paperwork. And he joins us now. Sam, let's just talk about the practicalities of
trade. Is this going to make much difference? My initial view is, and I should
caveat this by saying I, of course, haven't read every footnote yet. It's just I
haven't had the time. But in terms of what I've read so far is that it should
improve the terms of trade for most companies moving goods from Great Britain
into Northern Ireland. So it will be better than it exists now. Of course, it
doesn't remove all friction. There are still obligations. There are still
criteria that they have to hit. But, for example, it does seem to remove the
need for customs codes with the information being provided rather by normal
commercial documentation. So that's an improvement. It will help. And, yes, it
looks it looks OK. And just in terms of all of that, who's made the most
concessions? Are these essentially the EU coming around to what the Brits had
wanted? Or is there a degree of meeting in the middle? There's a degree of
meeting in the middle. I think I think with all of these things, you have to
accept that both sides have to be comfortable with it. So clearly, the EU is
comfortable making some of these these concessions, as you said. But for a
while, the EU really did push back on this idea that you could have a green lane
that substantially removed most of the obligations. They were sort of OK with
one that made it just a bit simpler. So the UK seems to have got something
there. You've been discussing the storm on lock on the program, which is seems
to be the big rabbit. Yeah. Yeah. So let's talk about that, because the odd
thing about the storm on lock is and I don't quite know whether it gives a
unionist veto, effective veto, if unionists feel so minded over new regulation,
single market regulations applying in Northern Ireland. But the storm on lock
certainly raises the possibility that Northern Ireland somehow will say, no, we
don't like your single market rule on potatoes or whatever it is. And, you know,
we'll be they'll be leaving the single market on that. So we should say that
this is actually building on an existing provision. So the protocol already had
a mechanism by which the UK could object to the imposition of new EU laws. This
expands that by also allowing the UK to object to tweaks to EU laws. And then
the UK itself has provided a mechanism by which Stormont can raise an issue and
escalate it to the point that the UK then raises it in the joint commission
committee. It's interesting that the UK said that this should only be used for
non-trivial matters. You know, what's trivial to some one person might not be
trivial to another. So it's going to be interesting to see how they specifically
define that. But this is this does go further than than what we expected, what I
expected. It sort of removes automatic dynamic alignments to a degree. However,
we should remember that there are consequences to saying no to the EU. And
throughout this process, people sort of forget that then the EU will respond. It
might cut off some access. It might do something that makes life worse. So it's
it's not something that could ever be used lightly. All right, Sam, thanks so
much for reading that through for us. That's Sam Lowe there. Let's change the
subject. Interesting piece of polling from YouGov, not on the usual treadmill of
politics, but on our habits watching television and on whether we have the
subtitles on when watching something in our own native language. Now, overall,
not surprisingly, most people don't use subtitles, but more than a quarter do.
And the most interesting feature of this survey is that it is very pronounced
among young people. So most 16 to 24 year olds claim to watch TV with the
subtitles on. Why? Why are they doing this? We've asked three Gen Zers to
explain. I've got dyspraxia and that can mean that it takes me longer to process
things. And when I just want to switch off, I find the subtitles just helps with
my processing of words. I also find that when the subtitles are on, often at the
end of the day, you kind of want to do other things whilst you're watching
telly. And it means I can just feels like half of your brain can kind of stop
working and relax a little bit because you've got the words. You don't have to
spend as much time trying to keep up and process. I can just sit back and relax
a bit more. Using subtitles has become quite a norm for me. I think the main
reason for that is just convenient. So like if you're watching something and you
don't hear the dialogue because of bad sound mixing or other factors, you don't
have to rewind or just assume what was said. You can kind of see what's been
said and you still feel immersed in the full thing. I feel a sense of comfort
using them as it means I won't miss anything that's going on. I feel fully
immersed in what I'm watching and it definitely helps me concentrate. Also, a
little bonus is that you get to learn how to spell fancy things like Vol-a-von
watching the Great British Bake Off, which I definitely wouldn't have known
without the subtitles. That was three voices on why they use subtitles. Let's
talk to Dr Jane Gilmore, consultant clinical psychologist at Great Ormond Street
Hospital. Out of interest, Jane, do you ever watch English language TV with
subtitles? Well, I can tell you I can confirm it as a thing because I also did a
highly unscientific straw poll this afternoon. And 18 to 19 year old year
students said, yeah, we do that. This is what we do. And similar, quite similar
responses to the why. So I can do other things. I can scroll, in other words,
using two types of technology at once or double screening. Yeah, I don't get
this. I can do two things at once. The sound allows you to be doing two things
at once because you can look at your phone while listening to the TV. The
subtitles require you to watch the television, unless it's that you can read the
subtitle more quickly than the sound delivers the line. So you can then be
reading your phone while the end of the line is uttered as you've read the
subtitle already. Yeah, this is such a this is I mean, this just puts our old
brains in an adult state. Right. So at a push, you might argue that double
screening is a sort of attention task. So if you're focusing on one thing while
they're competing, stimuli in the environment is a selective attention task,
which is actually very predictive of educational attainment if that is what's
going on. But I think the other concern there, and I think the one that's
probably raised in many people's minds is the idea, is this a phenomenon of
young people chasing stimulation? And if that is the case, if it's the latter
case, then there could be a loss in terms of brain state experience, because if
we're always focused on the external world, then our brain doesn't fall into the
default mode network, which is a sort of daydream state. And that network is
linked to creativity, reflecting on the past and visualizing on the future. So
there, you know, we're postulating and hypothesizing here. We don't really know
what's going on. And of course, it's a question of degree. So many things like
using social media or double screening done to excess would be considered
harmful. But a little of what you fancy does you good, right? I mean, the truth
is that one of them mentioned the fact it is just very normal on phones and on
some of the social media sites to have subtitles with the, you may not even have
the sound on, you know, headphones aren't working, you're sitting on the train
or whatever. And that norm just maybe carries over, maybe just looks better on
the screen. It feels like a full picture to have the words written out as well
as spoken. And I loved here that young person said, well, now I can spell Volvo.
And actually, we know from the young, very young children, so the pre-readers,
having subtitles on the TV is a wonderful habit to get into because it does
increase literacy. So there is something in that. I think it's very interesting.
I think the other thing to notice is the people that we're talking about here
are 18 to 25 year olds. And as far as brain science is concerned, the brain
doesn't reach maturity until the age of 25. So we're talking about young people
in the teenage brain state. And it could be that they're craving novelty because
we know the teenage brain craves novelty. So it could be part of that. Or as you
say, it could be habitual. I think it'd be very interesting to see what happens
to these young people after the age of 25 when their brain has reached maturity.
Will that will that habit continue into later adulthood or will it drop? Jane,
you reach an age where you just say, I can't, they're not talking clearly, for
goodness sake. You put the subtitles on to hear what they're saying. You keep
going with the subtitles and they become useful for other reasons. I think
that's fair to say. Jane Gilmore from Great Ormond Street. Thank you very much.
Discover the very best in arts and culture with Front Row. I love when the
theatre becomes absolutely silent and they're like, what's happening? With live
discussions, news and reviews. It was extraordinary. I got very moved. And
interviews with the people creating and changing the world of arts around us. I
pay a lot of attention to lessons in the human condition that never cease to
inspire me. Join Tom Sutcliffe and me, Samira Ahmed, for Front Row. Some of the
lines that I write, I personally do actually really love. Live every Monday to
Thursday evening on Radio 4 at 7.15 with thousands of episodes now on BBC
Sounds. And it's now, well it's coming up to 25 minutes to 6. This is PM. We'll
have a summary of the news from Chris Aldridge. Rishi Sunak and the European
Commission President Ursula von der Leyen have agreed new post-Brexit trading
arrangements for Northern Ireland, describing the deal as a decisive
breakthrough. MPs will get a vote on the proposals, which include the
introduction of green and red customs lanes for goods arriving in Northern
Ireland from the rest of the UK, in a move to reduce bureaucracy. Members of the
Stormont Assembly will also get a veto on any changes to EU rules that affect
them. The Northern Ireland Minister Steve Baker told this programme that a bill
allowing the UK to unilaterally override the existing Brexit agreement would be
withdrawn, but the Democratic Unionist Party, which pulled out of power-sharing
at Stormont in protest at the current trade arrangements, said it had key areas
of concern about the new deal. It added that while significant progress had been
made, some parts of the Northern Irish economy would still be subject to EU law.
Downing Street has defended a meeting between the King and Ursula von der Leyen
at Windsor Castle this afternoon, shortly after the deal was agreed, following
criticism from the DUP and the former Cabinet Minister Jacob Rees-Mogg, who said
it was constitutionally unwise. Number 10 insisted it was not uncommon for the
King to accept invitations to meet certain leaders. In other news, a Â£20,000
reward has been offered for information which helps track down those behind a
gun attack on an off-duty police officer in County Tyrone last week. The
dissident Republican group the New IRA says its supporters shot Detective Chief
Inspector John Caldwell in Oma. He remains seriously ill in hospital. More
Israeli troops have been sent to the occupied West Bank after Israeli settlers
attacked Palestinian villages overnight. Houses and cars were set on fire near
the city of Nablus. The common speaker Sir Lindsay Hoyle has described one of
his predecessors, Lady Boothroyd, as an inspiration following her death at the
age of 93. Betty Boothroyd was the first woman appointed to the role and was
known for her no-nonsense management of parliamentary debates. Chris, thank you
very much indeed. Well, Brexiteers of Britain now have to make a decision. Agree
to the Windsor Framework with some of the compromises within it, notably giving
the European Court of Justice a final say on some aspects of life in parts of
the UK, or continue the fight. Let us talk to a former Conservative leader, a
Brexit-supporting one now in the Lords, Michael Howard. Lord Howard, thank you
so much for joining us on PM, Michael. Are you on board with this deal? I am on
board. I haven't had a chance to read the small print yet. I expect I'll find a
lot of subtitles in it. But from what I've seen, I think that this is really a
remarkable achievement. I think Boris Johnson would have bitten off Michel
Barnier's hand to get a deal like this. Really? And what is it you like about
it? Because it does leave the ECJ having a say over life in some of the United
Kingdom. To a very limited extent, and that's an inevitable consequence of the
fact that Northern Ireland is in the EU single market. Even the Northern Ireland
protocol bill, which would have given the UK a unilateral right to set aside
parts of the protocol, even that bill made provision for a limited role of the
ECJ. So that is absolutely unavoidable if Northern Ireland is to be part of the
EU single market. OK. Northern Ireland protocol bill, that goes now, by the way,
doesn't it? We don't need it now if we've negotiated an alternative protocol.
That's right. It was always seen as a bargaining chip. So I think that has to
go. No need for it anymore. There may be Brexiteers in the Commons who say this
is still allowing too much. It's given too much to the EU. Do you think there
will be any? What do you say to them if they want to continue the fight? Well, I
think it's really quite difficult to see what that too much could conceivably
be. They are obviously entitled to read the document and form their own opinion.
But you've just put it in terms of they might say it gives too much. What is
that too much? I find it quite difficult on the basis of what I know to see what
that too much can possibly be. This is a remarkable achievement. We've got
agreement on goods going from Great Britain to Northern Ireland. We've got
agreement on the UK setting tax rates on VAT. And as I understand it, on things
like state aid. And we've got a voice for the Northern Ireland Assembly on new
measures which the EU might introduce. So I really do think it ticks all the
boxes. Your party, of course, if it does not line up around this, will be
accused of banging on about Brexit and still talking about Brexit when probably
most of the country feel we've heard enough about it and would like to move on.
I think that's absolutely right. And that's one of the many reasons why I hope
the whole party can rally around in support of this remarkable agreement. What
does it say to you about how we should deal with the European Union? So there
are some, if you like, Boris Johnson supporting types who say, you know, this
shows that Boris Johnson was right. He got us out of the EU. He signed a deal.
He didn't stick to it because he knew it was an unfair arrangement. And now
we've managed to renegotiate it. It shows that Brexit was always doable on these
kinds of terms. Others will say Rishi Sunak has been, you know, just been much
more friendly to the European Union and has managed to get big concessions. Do
you think it's hard play hardball or softball? What does it say? Well, I think
it's a two way thing. And I think one of the difficulties was that in the
immediate aftermath of Brexit, there was a desire to some extent on the part of
the European Union to punish us for Brexit, to make sure it wasn't an example
followed by others. I think that that is now pretty much a thing of the past.
Time has allowed people to see that we have, as Ursula von der Leyen said this
afternoon, we have so many interests in common. There are so many issues on
which we can work harmoniously and cooperatively together in this new
relationship, that it really ought to be a partnership in which we can achieve
many things together, not without the UK being a member of the European Union.
And I think we now have the opportunity and we saw it in the mood music between
the two leaders this afternoon, of a new, constructive and very fruitful
relationship between the UK and the EU. If Boris Johnson comes back after he's
read the text here and says, I don't think it's good enough, I think we should
pursue the Northern Ireland Protocol Bill that gives Britain the right to
unilaterally withdraw. What would be your message to the former prime minister?
Well, I think he'd have to say why he doesn't think it's good enough. And I
think he'd be up against it if that's what he's looking for. I think he will be
pushed to find things in this agreement which will enable him to say it's not
good enough, because it is a remarkably good agreement and a remarkable
achievement. So you'd be amazed if Boris Johnson did in the end fight this?
Because some people see this as the issue on which he wants to make a bid for
leadership. Boris is very unpredictable and I wouldn't dream of predicting how
he's going to react. But it won't be good enough for anybody to say this
agreement isn't good enough. They've got to say in what respects it isn't good
enough, what more they could possibly hope to achieve. And as I say, I think
they're going to find it quite difficult to identify any things like that. Lord
Howard, Michael Howard, thanks so much for talking to us. We may well get some
comment from the DUP, Sir Geoffrey Donaldson, DUP leader, before the programme
finishes. But we'll leave it there for now. Now, in Iran, there has been a wave
of poisoning incidents involving an unknown toxic gas at several girls' schools.
It's an unsolved mystery this, but there is plenty of speculation that this is a
deliberate attempt to disrupt women's education. Rana Rahimpour is a BBC World
Service presenter. And Rana, I know you've been following this, but what are we
actually talking about happening? How is this occurring? So, Evan, students
report that while they're in their classrooms, they sometimes smell a foul
smell. They describe it as rotten fruit sometimes or a mysterious gas, which
makes them feel numb. Sometimes they are unconscious. They have a headache. They
feel they report feeling nauseous. And in some cases, they had been transferred
to hospital on stretchers because they can't move. So, as you can imagine, it's
very difficult and they're unable to find a source in their classroom. In some
cases, teachers and assistants have also been transferred to hospitals. And
people are saying there was something of this kind that happened in Afghanistan.
And people felt that the Taliban had used some of these techniques to disrupt
girls' education. You're right. It was around 2010 that in several cities in
Afghanistan, Taliban did similar attacks on girls' schools because they don't
believe that women should be educated. In Iran, there are far similarities
between those kind of attacks. But unfortunately, because there's no
transparency on behalf of the Iranian government, they are not responding to any
questions. Parents have no idea what's going on in their children's school,
specifically in the city of Qom, which is a very religious city. It hosts a
Muslim, a Shia Muslim. It hosts many religious scholars from across the world.
We had the highest number of attacks today. A cleric, Muhammad Tabi' Fawzi al-
Maybodi, who teaches at one of the seminaries in the city of Yazd, suggested
that it's a fundamentalist group that believes that girls shouldn't be educated
after the age of nine. Rana, thanks for that. Rana Rahimpour there from the BBC
World Service on those mystery poisonings in Iran. It's now quarter to six.
We'll have some other headlines. Here's Chris. The Scottish government says the
Chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, should maintain the current level of help to households
for their energy bills. Regulator Ofgem has cut the price that suppliers can
charge for gas and electricity from April, but bills are still expected to rise
because support from the Treasury is being scaled back. The Turkish president
has asked people in an area devastated by earthquakes earlier this month for
understanding over delays in the arrival of rescue teams and aid. Recep Tayyip
Erdogan said continuing tremors and bad weather meant the government couldn't
act as fast as it wanted. A study by American scientists has found that people
with healthy hearts could spend up to a decade longer free of cancer, dementia
and other major illnesses than people who develop heart conditions. Thank you,
Chris. Betty Boothroyd, the first Madam Speaker in the Commons, has died. She
was 93. One of the most memorable characters in politics from the 90s, her voice
and face so familiar in the country, beyond those who took a close interest in
politics. Here she is in action in the chamber in 1997. Order! Order! There is
no point in waiting for silence. The Honourable Gentleman is going to get
silence. Produce your voice, Mr Hill. Betty Boothroyd. Well, earlier I spoke to
the current Speaker of the Commons, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, who remembers Betty
Boothroyd as an inspiration and a friend. This is the person that commanded the
House, the first woman Speaker. She brought that glass ceiling. The fact she
held respect right across this country. In fairness, she was a national
institution. It's a very sad day. She lived life to the full. And I've got to
say, I've lost a friend like the rest of the country. We will really miss her.
And I'll personally miss her because she was there. She gave me advice even when
I didn't want it. She would always be there for me. She'd bring me up and say,
by the way, I love you, just to remind you, you know, which was fantastic. She
was the Speaker when I first got elected. She was in the chair. So, you know, it
is a sad day and it is a sad moment. She spanned different eras, didn't she?
Really? You go back to her early career, a tiller girl, a dancer. It was quite a
life, quite an interesting life she had. Yeah. And amazingly, you know, she
stood in by-elections, never got the thought about giving up. And then suddenly
she was elected to West Bromwich in 1973, appointed a government whip, became an
MEP as well, went on to serve the select committees, foreign affairs, panel of
chairs, went on to Labour NEC. She's done it all. Member of the House of Commons
Commission, became Deputy Speaker under Bernard Wetherill and of course elected
Speaker in 92. She'd done it all. She's got a great history there from tiller
girl right through to Speaker to becoming Baroness. I don't know whether people
now can even comprehend just how few women were in Parliament in the 60s and
70s. We were in 74. So just after she was elected in that by-election, just
looked it up, 23 women in Parliament. We're at 10 times that number now. I mean,
there has been a transformation, but she was really a very early mover, wasn't
she? She was indeed. And she set the trend and quite rightly. People remember
her because she was strong. She was a great MP, great advocate of Parliament.
And also getting more women into Parliament. She was the attraction and quite
rightly, she did it. She served her country. She served this House with
distinction. And as I say, you know, she was without doubt an outstanding
Speaker, but also a national institution. Yeah, and she did that national
institution is right because she did a lot for the image of Speaker. But there's
something about her, her very no-nonsense style. She brought something to the
role that the public could appreciate was what the job was about. She brought
humour. She was strong. And she ran it, you know, with a rod of fear for people
if they crossed her, you know, because she was doing it for the right reasons.
And of course, as we know, she took no prisoners. She'd even take the press on,
you know. She was that kind of Speaker who said, this is how it's going to be
done. This is the way it will be done and did it that way. For people who don't
follow these things quite as much as you do, Sir Lindsay, just talk us through
the wig. There was a debate about whether she was going to wear the wig. What
was all of that about? I think it was fantastic. The fact that here she is, she
comes in, believes in the role, believes in the sense of dress that you should
wear. And of course, she said, but I don't need a wig. I've got my hair and I've
got the hairdresser downstairs. So she said for the first time, that wig is not
being used. Thankfully, she set a mark that I didn't have to follow as well. So
I've got to say, I'm very grateful to her in every sense, one, for being a great
Speaker, but two, for making sure we don't have to wear the wig. And as a woman
in a very, very male commons back in the 90s when she became Speaker, she did
have the authority. People didn't try and play silly games, gender games and
that kind of thing. No, if you did, you risked better just sorting you out there
and then. And she said to me, she used to ring me up, the phone would go, well
then, just to say, love, are you doing a good job, but, it was all the buts. She
said, I've just been watching, they're getting a bit rowdy. Throw them out, she
said, that'll sort the rest out. That's how I did it. Just throw them out. They
know then, they know who holds the authority and you get the respect. So don't
be frightened of doing it. Just do it. She said, it'll be easier for you. You
know, it's that kind of lovely advice she used to give me. And I'm going to miss
those phone calls and meeting her. You know, we used to have dinner in the
commons. We used to catch up and she used to say what she felt needed to be
done. And usually what I was worried, you ought to be a bit more distinctive in
your dress, you know, go back a little bit to what they should be wearing, you
know, which is brilliant. Just the way she did it, you know, she was lovely. So,
Lindsay Hoyle there, remembering Betty Boothroyd. Now, while we have been on
air, the DUP have been speaking about the Windsor Framework, the agreement to
reform the Northern Ireland Protocol. The DUP have not liked that protocol. They
have brought an end to power sharing while it's being sorted out. And their
leader, Sir Geoffrey Donaldson, well, all eyes on him to see whether he is going
to say yes to this Windsor Framework or not. In fact, what he said is key issues
of concern remain in the UK-EU deal. Without pre-empting our assessment, it
seems to me that progress has been made in a number of key areas. But there are
still issues of concern in some sectors that we think will still need to be
looked at. For example, the fact is that out of some Â£77 billion worth of goods
that are produced in Northern Ireland, that are manufactured here, some Â£65
billion of those goods are sold within the United Kingdom, including in Northern
Ireland itself, and some Â£12.1 billion are sold to the EU or the rest of the
world. So the question is, which rules will apply to the manufacture of those
goods, especially where we're selling those goods exclusively within the United
Kingdom? I understand that where we're selling goods to the EU, of course, we
have to comply with EU laws, that's clear. But what about when we're trading
within the United Kingdom? And I think those are the kind of issues and
questions we'll be examining closely as we read the legal text. So, Sir Geoffrey
Donaldson, pondering on that, reading the text, but raising some issues of
concern. Well, what have we learned today about Rishi Sunak, the Conservative
Party, Brexit and the future of Northern Ireland? Anna Soubry was a Conservative
MP and minister who left the party in 2019, a remain MP who left to join Change
UK, if you remember that. Harry Cole is the Sun's political editor. Harry Cole,
do you think this puts an end to all this talk about whether Brexit's working?
Are we going to now be able to move on? I have to say, as Rishi Sunak was
leaving Windsor, we shouted out to him as he was getting in the car, is Brexit
now finally done? And he was clever enough not to give a definitive answer on
that one. Look, today's a big moment for the prime minister. It's clear that
after 18 months, two years of negotiations, there is definite progress has been
made. However, what happens now is pure politics. Is the Conservative Party
going to hamstring him, potentially by siding with the DUP? Will enough Tory MPs
come out against it? I have to say the mood music in Westminster today is
actually pretty positive for the prime minister. I think at a ministerial level,
no one's expecting resignations today. I think quite a lot of MPs are pleasantly
surprised with the scale of what still appears on the surface to have achieved.
That said, in Brexit, often the way is that these things take time to ferment.
But it's very interesting listening to Steve Baker at the top of the programme,
who was not just saying it's OK, he was gushing about it. He was not in any
doubt at all that this was a great deal. That was what he was going to sell to
his colleagues. That's right. If you look at the people who have negotiated this
deal, James Cleverley, key ERG member, Chris Heaton-Harris, former head of the
ERG, Sweller Braveman, obviously not negotiating it, but in government, staying
in government, another head of the ERG, Richard Sunak, a Brexiteer voter who is
now the prime minister. This deal was negotiated by Brexiteers. And if they're
saying it's good enough, you have to wonder how many of the ERG they can pick up
on, pick off on the basis that this is a Brexiteers negotiated deal for
Brexiteers. Anna, do you feel Brexit is now being done? Is this a day that
you're, I mean, obviously you were never supporting Brexit, but, you know, at
least we have a deal. Yes, but I think everybody seems to have forgotten that
this is about Northern Ireland and it will improve the situation from goods
moving from GB into Northern Ireland. But remember that the people of Northern
Ireland didn't have a problem, the majority didn't have a problem with the
protocol. The problem was the DUP and the party within the party, which was the
ERG. So most of your listeners will be listening to this in a way, sort of,
what's, you know, we've kind of lost the plot on all of this because this is all
about getting that Northern Ireland Assembly up and running, which we
desperately need in Northern Ireland. And the voices that we haven't heard are
from the majority in Northern Ireland, who, as I say, didn't actually have a
problem much with the protocol and actually voted remain for very good reason.
So I think we should put it in that perspective. I think the thing that's really
interesting is that we have now a better relationship with the European Union.
And for the future, that must be good news. But Brexit isn't ever going to be
done because it's such a huge task to do it. And it's all about making something
that has failed to deliver on the promises of economic prosperity. It's actually
harmed our economy and it's about minimising the harm that it will do. So
there's a lot more to be done, which hopefully a sensible government will go on
to do, negotiate things sector by sector, as I say, to mitigate the damage that
Brexit's doing our economy. And I reckon most people get that now. Anna Soubry,
Harry Cole, sorry, short discussion. We need to move on, though. Thank you both
very much indeed. Well, an important, an important day. Is it going to be an
important night? Because you may be able to see the Northern Lights all over the
place. People were seeing them all over the country in places where you
shouldn't be able to see the Northern Lights. People were seeing them yesterday.
Let's get the weather forecast and find out if it's good weather for that.
Here's Louise Lear. Louise. Thanks, Evan. You can always rely on the weather to
spoil a good story, can't you? Yes, it was amazing last night. A great display
of the Northern Lights and quite widespread from north to south. But today we've
had more cloud around and I suspect that means that there'll be limited views of
it as we go into the night tonight. Favoured spots for seeing it, though,
certainly in western Scotland where we keep clearer skies and temperatures could
fall away, maybe as low as minus five degrees, so not quite as cold a night as
the night just passed, but nevertheless quite low. And we also could see, maybe
worth just taking a glimpse as you're closing the curtains before going to bed,
across south-east England and down into Devon and Cornwall if the sky is clear
for a time. But generally speaking, there's a lot more cloud around. But the
cloud will prevent those temperatures from falling too far elsewhere. So
generally, if you keep the cloud, you'll see temperatures a degree or so above
freezing. What's in store for tomorrow? Once again, we're going to be chasing
cloud amounts around. Where we've had the clear skies through the night is where
we're likely to see the best of the sunshine. So yet again, western Scotland
closer to an area of high pressure, seeing sunny skies. But a north-easterly
wind will continue to feed in cloud off the North Sea. A few scattered showers,
particularly east of the Pennines, these could be quite frequent as we go
through the afternoon. And then towards the end of the day, we could see a rash
of more frequent showers pushing in along the Kent coast. Top temperatures
throughout the afternoon, well, they're likely to peak at about where they
should be for this time of year, five to nine Celsius. That's it. Take care.
Thanks, Louise. And that's PM for Monday. Studio director was Alison Purcell-
Davies. Our editor, Alicia Cairo. More on protocol and that developing story on
the news coming up.