TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-11H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Every watch if you're looking for the gold, it's all around the gold watch on
BBC iPlayer BBC News at 10 o'clock police in Northern Ireland say the dissident
Republican group the new IRA is the focus of their Investigation into the
shooting of a police officer in County Tyrone last night Detective Chief
Inspector John Caldwell is in a critical condition in hospital after being
attacked at a sports complex in Oma Assistant Chief Constable Mark McEwan said
people ran in all directions as the shots were fired Whilst John was putting
footballs into the boot of his car and accompanied by his young son Two gunmen
approached and we believe both have fired multiple shots John has ran a short
distance and he's fallen to the ground and as he's on the ground the gunmen have
continued to fire at him That shows the absolute callous nature of this attack
in a crowded space There's been a cautious welcome by football clubs to plans
announced by the government to establish the first Independent regulator of
men's football in England the body will have powers to impose financial
settlements Meaning it could force the Premier League to share more money with
the lower divisions if an agreement can't be reached between the leagues The
Labour leader Sakhir Starmer is launching what he calls five national missions
Outlining his plans for the UK if his party wins the next general election The
commitments will include securing the highest economic growth in the g7. They'll
be announced during a speech in Manchester shortly Doctors at a hospital in
London have published guidance on how to treat the severe side effects of
inhaling nitrous oxide After surgeon people admitted with symptoms over the past
year They're warning that heavy use of laughing gas as it's known can cause
permanent damage to nerves The death has been announced of the football
commentator John Motsen. He was 77 Motsen began his career with the BBC in 1971
he oversaw more than 2,000 games on radio and television before retiring in 2017
BBC News Now on radio 4 it's time for woman's hour with Hayley Hassel Good
morning and welcome to the program. We have got some exciting interviews and
guests coming up on the show for you this morning Shortly, I'll be talking to
Avril Mansfield who made history as the UK's first female vascular surgeon She
was often met with disbelief and what would today be called misogynistic
comments But her amazing achievements have stood out for themselves and I'll be
talking to her very shortly I'll also be joined by Dada Masilo as she talks
about her new ballet called sacrifice It's an empowering display of female power
dance and nature It's got some rhythm and style that you probably have never
come across before so make sure you stay tuned and with us for that And we have
some new research from the Cambridge Center of Family Research Which has
surveyed children over lockdowns from around the world and found that children
with older siblings have fared best Whilst only children have suffered more but
I'd love to know if you can relate to this Perhaps you have siblings and feel
they've supported you and protected you in your life in some way Have they been
your linchpin during the pandemic? Or maybe you wish you didn't have siblings
and envy those only children who get to do more of the things they want their
way Well I'd love to hear your thoughts on this one, please do get in touch
Women's Hour is of course all about you and your involvement in our discussions
So please let me know your thoughts on this one You can text the programme, the
number is 84844 Texts will be charged at your standard message rate On social
media we're at BBC Women's Hour and you can email us through our website too
Many of you have already been responding with me on this From Instagram, Kam
says My sister is 16 months younger than me and we are very protective of each
other The same amount which is a lot And another says my brother became my
father when things weren't going well at home Well please keep those comments
in, it's great to get an insight into your lives And you can now also send a
WhatsApp message or a voice note using the number 03700 100 444 It would be
great to hear your voice with those And data charges may apply depending on your
provider So you might want to use WiFi if you can Terms and conditions can be
found on our website But first this morning you may have seen the news headlines
That a new app to block child abuse images has received £18 million of EU
funding Sorry £1.8 million of EU funding With the aim to help combat what has
been described as a growing demand for child abuse images Now according to the
NSPCC, child abuse image offences have reached record levels With more than
30,000 reported in the last year This represents a 66% increase in child abuse
images and offences recorded by UK Police in the last five years Well their new
report has also revealed that the police have recorded the first child abuse
crimes in the metaverse With eight instances recorded last year Well to discuss
this further I'm joined by Rani Govinda Senior Child Safety Online Policy
Officer from the NSPCC And John Staines, former police officer from East Safety
Training Who now goes into schools to educate children and teens about online
safety Welcome to the show both of you Rani I'm going to start with you please
Because I know children are in constant conversation with you Through Childline
and your own reporting systems So do these figures surprise you at all? No
unfortunately at the NSPCC these figures don't surprise us as much as they are
incredibly concerning As you mentioned we hear through Childline and children
that we work with That child abuse image crimes are unfortunately pervasive on
social media now We get calls for example to Childline from children that are
really worried about these kinds of images Which they know have been shared
about them online And don't know who to talk to and how these can be tackled or
taken down It's extremely worrying though that there has been such an increase
over the last five years It's an issue we've been highlighting for some time and
does indicate that tech companies Need to be doing much more proactively to
tackle these crimes online Why is there that increase? Have you got any idea
what is behind the surge in these child abuse images? There are a couple of
reasons why we might be seeing this increase One reason is that in the pandemic
we saw the online world become a really integral part of all our lives That was
the case for children but unfortunately offenders exploited that and found new
ways To abuse and offend children online based on that increased use of the
internet And that has really been a structural change which has continued since
the pandemic And might be a reason why these crimes have continued to go up But
again another reason is that technology is evolving There are increasingly new
and complex ways that you can communicate and share images online And this has
happened at a really rapid pace and we haven't seen enough action From the tech
firms to think about what the risks of these changes might be To children and
how they can help prevent those Yeah I just want to go back to what you were
saying about the increase in children contacting you And what they're saying so
that we can fully understand this What are children saying to you? What are the
sort of things they're talking to you about? So one example that we get through
from children is when they have Perhaps consensually shared an image with
someone else But then this has been shared with others in perhaps in their
schools Of other people that they know And they're really worried because that's
people that they know that are seeing this But then a different case is when
children have been groomed online by adults And typically male offenders And
they have shared these images because they've essentially been blackmailed into
doing it And then they ring because they have no idea really who this person is
Or what's happening with those photos So there are different ways that this
abuse can play out But the clear running theme is that there needs to be more
done And much more support in place for children As well as design features that
can proactively tackle this harm And sooner as well, it shouldn't be getting to
the point that the ringing child line You know it should be before that that
children are able to notify this Or it should be prevented before it even gets
to the child itself Yeah, absolutely, we would really call for prevention being
the solution here It can't be allowed that in five years time we're still seeing
an increase in these cases We know that there are steps that tech platforms can
take to change the way that children are Interacted with online so that we can
help really bring down these cases But also as you say, if these incidences do
occur, there must be the reporting tools in place And children must be
signposted to the right support so that they know they aren't alone When these
crimes do happen Yeah, you talk about the online space there And I know your
report shows that these perpetrators have moved on to the metaverse Can you
explain to us what that metaverse is and how children are being approached and
groomed there? Absolutely, so the metaverse is essentially a virtual world A lot
of people if they have used it might have put on headsets And it takes you into
a virtual alternate reality Where you can communicate with other people who are
also wearing these headsets And are in these new spaces And this might be in a
virtual cafe or park or you might be able to play games with people This is, as
you say, a new and emerging threat So we don't know exactly how these crimes
have been taking place What's clear is that offenders will find ways that they
can exploit this new and evolving technology And that's why we're seeing ones
like the metaverse where it really does make you feel like you are meeting these
people And that you know them when in fact they might be complete strangers and
you've never spoken to them before And this for children can make them
particularly vulnerable So that's why we are concerned that we're seeing the
first reports of these crimes It shows that at Meta, for example, who have this
platform and are rolling out these tools They need to make sure children's
safety is an absolute priority when they're designing them Because otherwise it
will be exploited and used by offenders Right, yeah, I'm going to bring in John
on that now Because obviously, John, you go into schools to talk to children
about the dangers What do they tell you? What are their experiences in this
online world, this metaverse? It's one of them areas, good morning by the way
The metaverse hasn't really come big in our world at this time So it is there
and people are using it But because, as just explained, you do need headsets,
you do need more equipment to use it We are finding more grooming is actually
taking place on the front end of the internet Just in normal games rather than
offline I mean, this reminds me of many, many years ago when I was working in
the field of the online protection world And we had a thing called Second Life
Now that was a virtual world as well It wasn't 3D as the metaverse is because
this is an evolution of the internet to make it all 3D and more immersive But
Second Life was exactly the same thing And there was areas in Second Life where
perpetrators would go to groom children So these platforms have been there, but
they're more specialised, I think, than the front end Our biggest problem, like
you just heard with the increase in imagery Is really on the front end of gaming
and on the front end of the open internet, really And I think that's the problem
Sometimes, even when we talk to parents and professionals, we're still very
hooked up on the dark web The underbelly of the badness and all the rest of it
Where this stuff has really moved into the front end of the internet And it's
under our noses, but that's why we're not seeing it So how does it work then?
How do the perpetrators target children on these various platforms? Well, we've
come up with basically a three-step approach And it's not a scientific one It's
what we've seen over the years working in the field when we're in the police And
now the children tell us the same way First thing is three steps First one, you
have to get a child to like you, which is common sense So that can be done in
three ways One, you give the child something Now, again, in a game, it's very
easy to go down to your local supermarket Buy a scratch card with the amount on
like a PlayStation card or anything, really Give the child the code They load
that to their account They've got money to spend in the game Secondly, you can
trade in a game So you can buy a super cool item in a game Whether it's from
FIFA right up to Roblox You buy something, you trade that with a child Again,
you're their best friend Or thirdly, the one that's the main one is the actual
What we're finding is emotional support And that is horrendous because the child
has perhaps a bad home life Or is upset or got pressures of school Could be
anything And this could be from any age, really We're talking primary and
secondary They go home at night, log on to their game And then someone in the
game says, how are you today? And that's the first person that's been nice to
them So they go, well, oh, thanks for asking And they start talking That
emotional support And when you talk to children, you say, does it matter how old
that person is? They'll say no So that's your first step Second step is to get
them out of the game, which sounds bizarre Because again, if you're relying on
tech companies And a lot of them will do this They'll put age 13, you can't chat
if you're under 13 So that doesn't help You can't send pictures in a lot of
games That doesn't help a bad person at all So you want to get them out onto a
third-party app And that could be anything From FaceTime to KickMessenger to
Discord Could be anything But that's the second step Get them out of the game
onto a third-party app So for example, if you was playing Fortnite But you've
moved the chat onto a, say, a Discord server Your parents would see you sitting
there You'd have a headset on You'd have the game on a telly You're talking away
Parents would quite happily think you're talking to a friend at school When
you're actually talking to the bad person And then the last step is to get you
to send a picture Now that won't be an indecent picture It won't be a rude
picture That'll be just a picture from the game And this was one we had recently
A 10-year-old girl sent a picture of her pets in her game To this person that
she thought was another 10-year-old They did what we've shown many children what
to do How to geolocate a picture As in work out where it was taken Because of
the second-hand device it was taken on They geolocated it and went back to her
And this sounds really horrible and I do apologise They said, if you don't send
us a naked picture of yourself We're going to murder your parents She had a
choice Go to her parents and say, Mum, Dad, I've been threatened Or send a
picture 80% of the children we talked to From Year 3 up to, well, once you get
to Secondary They'll all do it Because the answer is, I can't tell my parents
Because I've broken one of the rules I've talked to a stranger in a game So I'll
send a picture And then you've got them And that is as simple as that It does
seem incredibly simple And quite quick for these strangers To get hold of
information from these children But you make a good point That they don't want
to tell the parents Because they don't want to get in trouble And perhaps
there's many of these online spaces That parents don't understand as much as the
children do Do you think there's a naivety as far as parents are concerned? Oh
yeah, I mean, there is It's a lack of awareness and education From the parents'
point of view And I understand, as parents, everyone is busy Everyone is doing
everything And unlike our younger people We've got hours and hours to spend
looking at stuff But we use two simple analogies As a training company to
parents We say two things One, we call the internet the internet express And we
say it's a train that's on a journey And no one knows where it's going But the
child jumps on that train And goes on the journey of a lifetime And gets off at
every stop they can So whether that would be perhaps TikTok, Snapchat Instagram,
social media, gaming It could be anywhere They're going to get off at every stop
and explore it As a parent, you've got a choice Get on the train with them Or
wave them off at the station Unfortunately, most parents are at the station
Waving them off and hoping they get where they are With no stranger danger
messages No education in it So it's a bit like saying As parents, we invest a
lot of time in our children In, unfortunately, I hate this, what we call the
real world So if you're teaching your child to swim You wouldn't just walk up to
a swimming pool Throw them in and say, off you go You'd get in the water with
them You'd get armbands You'd give them lessons You'd do the whole lot On the
internet, off you go For example, hobbies The big one we talk about with hobbies
And things like that in life We say to them, if your child does any hobby I can
guarantee as parents And we've all been there If you're listening as a parent
Where you rush home, you rush dinner You get them to the club, you get back
Saturday morning, you're up at 8 o'clock To go down to the field We've all done
that We spend time But on the internet, we don't We just ignore it Rather than
just sit with them for 20 minutes Once a week Play the game Look at the
commodities Look at the dangers Give them the stranger danger message in that
game What the bad people are going to do And how they can look And open the door
to communication Then we will crack this world So get on there with them I may
not understand What my kids are playing online But it's about time I did And get
on there and understand it Just like you would going to the park But John, I've
been with you When you've been to schools And we've visited children And asked
them lots of questions About safety online And one of the things I was struck by
Was when we went into a primary school And I'd say about 80% of the children
Said they'd been asked for pictures online So do the statistics coming out today
Do they surprise you at all? Or have you been expecting this for a long time?
No, we... It sounds really horrible Again, we said at the start of the pandemic
Back in 2020 When we closed And we was in schools at the time Right up until the
Friday Everything's shut We said like This is going to be a complete nightmare
Because, oh, everyone's being furloughed Everyone's being sent home Also, so are
the perpetrators They're all going to be at home So the ones that... And it
sounds horrible Because some of these people work Some of these are I won't use
the word normal people But they've got normal lives and such They're not just
sitting there all day Trying to groom children And that's something they do on
top But they had lots and lots of time on their hands When the pandemic hit And
so we knew this would explode And, you know, when you look at some of the
figures Even from the NSPCC Or even the Internet Watch Foundation You know, a
thousand percent increase A thousand percent worse since lockdown Thank you,
John And, Rani, just back to you for a moment Because I know you found that
police Are taking notice of this online world There have been criminal charges
But is it being taken seriously enough? What are you asking to happen That will
better protect children from this? Absolutely It's really important that the
police Are collecting this data So we can understand where these harms Are
emerging from And make sure action's being taken to tackle that But we do have
the online safety bill Which is going through Parliament at the moment That's a
really important child protection measure Because that's going to make sure That
companies have to take steps To tackle illegal threats Such as child sexual
abuse on their platforms At the NSPCC, a step we'd like the government to take
Is to introduce a user advocacy body For children in that bill Because children
really do need a champion In this new regulatory world We can see with the
increase in these kinds of crimes That children at the minute are too vulnerable
And being left to carry the burden Essentially for the failure of tech companies
To protect them properly So we want to see the government commit To having a
body that can represent children That can listen to them Understand new harms
that are coming through For example on the metaverse And make sure that tech
companies Finally take the steps to prioritise Children's safety on their
platforms And I understand that there are reporting out there There are ways to
report this You can go to Childline of course Or the NSPCC But my big concern
is, is that not too late? Children have already seen these images by then
They've already shared those images by then They've already been abused in some
way Are we not behind the wheel in this? I think at this stage we are, yeah
Prevention is absolutely the most important Approach to take here And no child
should ever have to go through this experience And then the reporting system
afterwards So we do need that approach that focuses on prevention Taking
proactive steps to look at new features That are on platforms Like live
streaming Like being able to connect with strangers And think about the risks
that might pose to children So that we can up front be tackling these And really
bring these figures down over coming years Thank you Rani and thank you John
Rani Govinda is a Senior Child Safety Officer Policy From the NSPCC And John
Staines, former police officer Now runs e-safety training in school Well the
Metta have produced a statement That says this horrific content is banned in our
apps And we report instances of child sexual exploitation To the National Centre
for Missing and Exploited Children We lead the industry in the development and
use of technology To prevent and remove this content And we work with the
police, child safety experts And industry partners to tackle this societal issue
Our work in this area is never done And we'll continue to do everything we can
To keep this content on our apps Well do please keep your comments coming in on
this issue I know lots of people will have children Or young people they know
who are online a lot I'm sure many of you have come across this Please get in
touch with the competition as we go along Now my next guest has made waves in
the medical world And has done so more often than not As the only woman surgeon
in the hospital Avril Mansfield qualified as a surgeon in the early 1970s A time
when women medics were outnumbered by men 8 to 1 Back then a woman saying that
she was a surgeon Was met with surprise, disbelief and sometimes amusement
Nonetheless Avril rose through the ranks And went on to become the UK's first
female vascular surgeon And first female professor of surgery Now age 85 Avril
has written her memoir Life in Her Hands and joins me now Avril thank you so
much for coming on Woman's Hour Thank you very much for having me Now I've read
your book and it's something I've got to admit I wouldn't normally read I'm a
classic 19th century literature girl myself But I was enthralled Not just
because we're from the same town of Blackpool But mostly because you bring to
the medical world of surgery A sort of humble natural heroism That often made my
jaw drop And I wanted to turn the page Wondering what on earth I've been doing
with my life Because you've achieved so much from such an early age You were the
first female vascular surgeon in the UK You were the first female to be honoured
By the American College of Surgeons You became the first woman to be a professor
of surgery And you set up an initiative called Women in Surgical Training To
encourage more women to take up the profession I mean I could go on But can you
tell me what we all want to know Why did you do it? Why did you choose to go
into surgery in the first place? It's a good question And I don't have a very
clear answer to that I started to read books when I was about 8 or 9 About
medicine and particularly about surgery And the history of surgery And I was
fascinated by the fact that people were exploring operations Without them
knowing whether they could work Or even if people could survive Perhaps for
example having their chest opened They had to do it first And as a small child I
was captivated by that And I wanted to go along in that direction I was used to
seeing women doctors Surprisingly my school doctor was female The person who
delivered me into the world was female So women doctors were not a rarity for me
So it seemed perfectly reasonable That I should think I could go along in that
direction In my future career And talking about how you came into this world I
was fascinated to read that your first interest into medical research Was when
you learnt about your own quite traumatic birth for your mother And how there
was no real understanding of your mother's complications Did that map your
interest into surgery? It certainly mapped a specialty interest in my future
career Because she got a deep vein thrombosis And a massive pulmonary embolism
Which very nearly killed her And I was completely perplexed by this And
fascinated by why it should happen And a lot of my research was about why that
should happen And how we can prevent it from happening It's much less frequent
now than it used to be But in those days it was often fairly lethal And I'm sure
your family are very proud about that But I believe you were in the local paper
when you were a child And you said you wanted to be a surgeon But they printed
that you wanted to be a nurse Why was that? Was that just because it was seen as
inappropriate Or unlikely that girls could be doctors? No, it was my mother My
mother thought it was above my station to say I wanted to be a doctor Certainly
not a surgeon But certainly just to say you want to be a doctor You can't say
that You can say you want to be a nurse if you must And I have nothing against
nurses at all I love nurses But I wanted to be a doctor And I wanted to make
that quite plain So I was really very cross about that But yes indeed, they did
publish that See, I always imagine it's the person at the top Is keeping you
down But in a way it can sometimes be people close to home That are too scared
to push those boundaries When you yourself wanted to Yes, I mean my parents had
not had the benefit of higher education They both had to leave school at 13 or
14 They were intelligent people They could have done much, much more And I was
the one with the opportunities And I was the fortunate one Well when you were a
child living in Blackpool There was no NHS of course And I read with fascination
you describing your father Coming home with his wages And putting money in a pot
on the mantelpiece for the doctor So becoming ill or being in an accident Must
have been quite a worry then What was life like for you before the NHS? It was
extremely difficult And it is really a very strong memory When the NHS came into
existence And that pot on the mantelpiece could be removed Things like my mother
requiring surgery To correct for the damage that had been done When I was born
There was a huge strain on family resources It had to be paid for It wasn't
going to come free So I saw that weight of responsibility That came from quite a
small income My father was on a relatively small wage As a welder, which is what
his job was So to see that change To think that everybody could be treated
properly And when they needed it Was a wonderful step forward Even for a child
of 8 or 9 Or whatever age I was at the time It was very clear that this was a
momentous moment That moment when the NHS was created I think you were 11 at the
time How important was that to you? And how important do you still hold dear the
NHS? It's been absolutely central in the whole of my life I've wanted to see the
NHS thrive and prosper And it has been such a wonderful thing That people can
have healthcare When they need it, without having to count the cost So yes, it
has been a really important part of my life But I do wonder how you look on the
medical students of today Because, for instance, you talk about Current students
not being able to perform minor operations Until much later in their study, in
their career But how much do you think today's teachings have changed From when
you were there? And is that positive or negative in some ways? In some respects
it's changed But in truth, the medical students are just the same They're
wonderful young people Who really do want to be looking after patients Doing the
best for patients They are all like that And we need to foster that in our young
students We need to encourage that Because that's really what we all want when
we're sick We want somebody who wants to care for us And to give of their best
to us And most students do Clearly, the fact that they can't do some procedures
When they're students, which I was allowed to do Is just the way of life It's
pushed things back a little bit And I sometimes am concerned that people don't
discover Whether they really have aptitude for something like surgery Which is,
after all, a skill They may not learn that at an early age They may have to wait
a bit before they can discover Whether that really is the future career for them
Because of pushing it back to a slightly older age You going into that world as
a surgeon And then as a consultant as well It was a male-dominated environment
And you were often overlooked You were called a slip of a thing And someone
presumed that you were just taking someone's history And the doctor was on their
way Were you overlooked? And how difficult was it in that environment for you?
You would write in a way that people would be surprised And almost reluctant to
believe That you could be that person with that amount of responsibility It
sometimes worked in the opposite direction, of course Because once they
discovered that in fact You were that person with that responsibility Then
suddenly it seemed as though You must be something extra special So being female
was not without its advantages You stood out from the crowd You weren't one of a
huge crowd of men You were the odd female So there were some benefits from being
the occasional woman And I believe when you told your senior surgeon That you
planned to get married He said, what a pity I thought you had such a promising
career ahead of you He did, I was really disappointed by that Because he was a
great supporter He was the senior consultant And clearly from a different era
Not used to having women Who wanted to pursue a career in surgery And he saw it
as something That you had to be totally dedicated to And there wouldn't be room
in your life for anything else But I proved that that was not the case You could
do both You did And then you went on to set up the Women in Surgery initiative
What have you done for women? Beyond just succeeding yourself You've helped so
many generations after you as well My hope is that what we did With that Women
in Surgical Training scheme at the college Was to make them aware of the fact
That it's perfectly feasible, perfectly possible And indeed desirable for women
To pursue a career in surgery There's nothing odd about it There's nothing wrong
with it And it is of course an extremely fulfilling career And a lot of women
have said You can't be what you can't see And so making it more visible I think
was really very important And the other aspect of it was At that stage only 2%
of surgeons were female And we were approaching about 50% of medical students
were female So the sums just didn't add up We needed to encourage some of those
women going into medicine To believe that it was perfectly okay to become a
surgeon If that's what you wanted to do I've said all my life that what's most
important Is that you actually take a good close look at the career of surgery
Because you're going to be stuck with it for the next 30 years And it is quite a
demanding job as you can imagine And a wonderful one Don't get me wrong, I loved
it I loved every minute of it But you do have to make sure that that is what you
want to do So I encourage young women to explore it and enjoy it Bringing us to
that current generation Many of the papers are inundated with stories of the NHS
strikes at the moment Now you said to yourself that you were in this to help
people Altruism was the core of being a doctor for you You wouldn't walk away
from anything So with that in mind I'd love to know your opinions on the recent
strikes in the NHS How do you feel about doctors going on strike It's often
criticised as leaving vulnerable patients without care Isn't that a difficult
question I kind of guessed you would ask me about the strike This is one, we
need to push it back But it's something I know that I could not have done I
couldn't have walked away I never could And sometimes I would actually dedicate
myself to a patient When perhaps I should have been dedicating myself to some
other issue in the family or at home Because they were paramount The patient was
always the paramount concern as far as I was concerned I understand and
sympathise with the situation that the medical profession is in I want the
health service to succeed I want it to be successful I want it to engage with
the young people who are working in it So that they are content to stay in it
And are properly paid to do what they're doing in it Because they do work hard,
extremely hard But for me it would have been extremely difficult to walk away
from a patient I'm sure it's difficult for them too I don't think any of them
actually want to neglect their patients They just need to give a message to
someone And that's the way they're finding to do it You're right, and it is a
difficult subject, especially in your position But I do want to also reflect on
your life works Lots of people are getting in touch with the programme Who are
huge admirers of yourself I want to read a few of them out to you Fiona says, I
remember from my days as a nurse in Liverpool in the late 1970s The huge respect
we had for Miss Mansfield She was one of, if not the only, female consultants
And everyone held her in high esteem It's great to hear from her today And Dr
Sarah Pape, who's a consultant burns and plastic surgeon Says, we have never
met, but Miss Mansfield was well known for her wise words Which I have learned
them from those who did have the honour of working with her I qualified as a
doctor in 1982 When it was still difficult to be taken seriously as a female
surgeon But thanks to the pioneering work of a very small number of women Like
Miss Mansfield, who went before me It was not impossible She will never know how
much I owe to her That's lovely Thank you for coming on the show You've
obviously helped many women And it's been lovely to have you I don't know what
you're going to do next You've got so many awards, you've achieved so much
You've even met the Queen What is next for you, Avril? Well, I took up the cello
in retirement So that's really the thing I need to concentrate on Is getting
better at playing my cello, which I love Like you do Honestly, you're
unstoppable But it's been so lovely to have you Thank you very much indeed Avril
Mansfield Now, lots of you are also getting in touch with the show About your
older siblings We're talking about this because Cambridge Centre of Family
Research Has found out that during the pandemic Many children were affected and
went through difficult times But those with older siblings came off a little
better We've a shared history with our siblings That can be really valuable when
going through a crisis And according to this study The older sibling can help
keep younger children well adjusted Well, Professor Claire Hughes From the
Cambridge Centre of Family Research Joins me to discuss the adverse effects Of
restrictions during the pandemic on younger children And why sibling
relationships are so important Hello, Claire, lovely to have you on the
programme Thank you very much, lovely to be here Now, the survey, it surveyed
thousands of children From six different countries, I believe All of which had
very different attitudes towards lockdown But tell me more about the study Why
you did it and what you were hoping to find Of course, yes, so we're at the
Centre of Family Research So when the pandemic happened It was obviously a
question on our minds Was how is all this going to make a difference to families
It's going to be terribly difficult We didn't know at that time how long it was
going to go on for But it was clear that the experiences were likely To be
different in different countries So Italy was a little bit stricter than we were
And I have colleagues in Italy So the idea just came of joining in with others
like me Who were interested so that we could get a little bit of extra power
Because we're exploring it in different countries So one of the countries was
Sweden, for example Where they didn't have mass school closures And it turns out
that those children They were affected by the pandemic, they didn't emerge
unscathed But they were doing better than the children in the other countries So
that was one of the reasons for having the international design The idea for
looking at siblings actually came from one of my collaborators Who in Italy was
stuck alone with her one child Thinking life would be so much easier for him if
he had a playmate And thinking about it, siblings don't get an awful lot of
research attention When they do, and when people think about siblings It's often
in quite a negative way So recently we've heard an awful lot about sibling
rivalry That's something that gets a lot of airtime But parents are also worried
when they have a second child That they're not going to be able to give their
second child The same kind of attention and time that they might have given
their first child And they're quite right, they probably won't be able to But
what these findings are indicating is that that doesn't matter Because that's
more than offset in terms of children's behavioural and emotional adjustment
That's more than offset by what the younger child gets from their older sibling
Now we don't exactly know what the mechanisms are It could be that the child
themselves acts as a secure base That they're acting as a little caregiver,
particularly during the pandemic They may have been acting as a playmate They
may have been helping the child with their schoolwork or whatever So they may
have been stepping in as a little parent It may also be that there's a learning
from experience effect That by the time you have your second child that you as a
parent are more skilled So it's a little bit more indirect the effect that the
first child is kind of blazing a trail And parents are making whatever mistakes
they make with that first child And they're getting it a little bit more in tune
with the second child So it could be not the child themselves but how the family
has changed and how the parents have changed We don't really understand the
mechanism But I think it's really important given that there is such a lot of
negative coverage about siblings To remember that siblings can be really
powerful sources of support And that you're not in it alone as a parent That the
older children are actually playing their roles in terms of looking after little
ones It's really interesting that you find it is beneficial to have older
siblings But is it anyway beneficial for the older sibling to have a younger
brother or sister Or is that just a pain? In the pandemic we were looking at 3
to 7 year olds And we asked whether they had an older sibling or a younger
sibling And at that age range if they had a younger sibling there was a smaller
negative effect Which we think is to do with just how busy the parents were
caring for children That they weren't perhaps able to make as much time as they
would do for their older child So that's kind of interesting isn't it? The
parents might worry that the second child isn't getting what they gave the first
But maybe it's what you're used to And if the first child is used to a lot and
then suddenly they're having to lose some of that parental time Because their
parents are busy looking after their baby sibling Then that could affect their
emotional or behavioural adjustments So there was an effect that was slightly
negative But these things play out over time One of the really important things
about the sibling relationship Is that it is the most enduring of all close
relationships It goes on throughout the lifespan And it changes, it becomes more
egalitarian as the younger child grows up And becomes more of an equal sparring
partner, conversational partner, whatever So even if things are a little bit
more difficult in the early days That doesn't mean it's always going to be more
difficult Which is what our listeners are saying actually right now They're
texting, emailing, Whatsapping us Debbie says my little sister is nine years
younger than me I am 62 After the death of our wonderful mum who my sister lived
next door to And I spoke to every single day of my adult life We have made that
our new default We talk every morning on FaceTime whilst munching on our bowls
of cereal This closeness has been a wonderful part of our lives And a big shout
out to all siblings Another one in here from Maureen I have a twin sister who
contacted me every day in Covid She would walk with me and eat meals in her
garden She is the other half of my identity We are part of the Twins UK study
And 60 years old in a few weeks I would have faltered with her in every way
Another one here, my sisters are my absolute best friends I'm the middle of
three girls and love being both a younger and an older sister Without my sisters
I wouldn't be the person I am now I'm eternally grateful for them But I think if
I can Claire Because it's not as clean cut as always the older child Has a more
tricky time The younger child benefits from that Because for instance if
children were from a disruptive or unhappy home They are going to be affected by
that division And perhaps it might not fare well Did your study go into the
different situations That siblings are at home and how that can affect them? We
did find that of course that effect doesn't One of the other really interesting
things about sibling relationships Is that they are not just longer lasting than
any others But they are also more diverse If you know that somebody is your
friend Then you know something about the quality of that relationship To know
that somebody is your sibling It could be wonderful, it could be horrendous You
do get the chalk and cheese all the way through to peas in a pod And it's really
heartwarming to hear the positive stories I think that's very important I know
that sibling violence is the most common form of violence in the home So it can
be really a source of stress If that sibling relationship isn't going well And
we did have some measures about sibling conflict And of course where there was
conflict in the sibling relationship That buffering effect wasn't there So it is
taking the assumption that you've got A supportive functional relationship And
in that case having an older sibling would be best Rather than making
generalisations to any one particular family Because the relationships can be so
different from family to family And of course during lockdown you're stuck with
each other, aren't you? And of course you can't choose your siblings So how does
that affect the dynamic of the sibling relationships? The different
personalities that are in that home? That's a really, really good point So
siblings have been described as having a love-hate quality That historically
psychoanalysts like Freud would have put down To that whole sibling rivalry that
you're competing for parental attention That's why you kind of love and hate I
think it's much more likely that you've got that love-hate relationship Simply
because it's an involuntary relationship Your sib is your sib, no matter how
badly you treat them, they're there Whereas you will lose your friend if you
don't treat them well And so you have a kind of licence to be who you are with
your sibling And usually that means that you can get a really lovely intimacy
That means that those relationships are so special As you've been hearing from
your listeners But it does also mean that children can show complete rage at a
sibling In a way that they wouldn't with a friend And so that involuntary nature
of the relationship Is one of the reasons why it is so diverse Let's talk about
only children for a moment Because if they have been affected more negatively by
lockdown Is there anything we can do? Do we know the full effects of how that's
going to affect them in later life Or are we just waiting to find that out? So
we know from the China one-child policy That the notion of an only-child
syndrome Doesn't really have any evidence base at all So overall, only children
do just fine But I think oftentimes they do fine because the parents compensate
The parents find ways of making sure that they're seeing their cousins Or that
they're having friends over for playdates You don't have to have a sibling But
children do need other children in their lives So you can find other ways of
doing that In fact, just this weekend at my college, Newnham College That funded
this study We had an event to bring families together To do some shared capla
play It's just a building thing And it was to compensate, if you like, for the
way in which the pandemic Has taken away those opportunities for families To
reach out and engage socially And for children to spend time together So of
course there are ways that we can do that And as working parents, I went through
lockdown With a six-year-old and a three-year-old So it's very relevant to your
study And both me and my husband had to work through it at the same time It's
inevitable that you have to leave them to their own devices And they also are
stuck with each other 24 hours a day Is there, hopefully we won't be in that
situation again But as a parent, is there anything we can do To help that
relationship be more fruitful? So yes, to some extent The fact that they are
unsupervised That might be seen as a risk But it is also an opportunity It does
allow children to kind of grow And to take on responsibility in a way that they
wouldn't necessarily If the parents were there in the room Kind of looking after
them all the time But in terms of sibling conflict I think that the two mistakes
that parents typically make Is either they just say, sort it out yourselves I
don't want to know And maybe the children don't actually have the cognitive
maturity to do that Or they jump in as the referee Typically telling the oldest
one You're the oldest, you should know better Set a good example Without
necessarily knowing So the advice I would normally give Is to imagine more that
say you're a mediator And you've got a couple who want to get divorced As the
mediator, your job is not to decide who's right, who's wrong But it's to get
them to listen to each other It's to get them to talk about their problem kind
of constructively And come to a resolution together So you set the ground rules
for how they can resolve that disagreement But it's not you in charge of
deciding who's right or who's wrong Well I'll try that one when I get home,
Clare I'm not sure how it'll go, but I'll give it a go Now I know we don't know
the full effects Of what lockdown has had on children But how can the results
from your study be used in the future Or what do you hope it will be used for?
So I was thinking about this earlier And the way in which, yes let's hope it's a
very long time Before we're in that sort of pandemic situation again But to some
extent we're in another pandemic With the cost of living crisis That is equally
sort of unexplained and uncontrollable for parents So parents can be under a lot
of stress In the same way as they were under stress in the first lockdown And
one of our measures we included was the stringency Of what was going on, the
differences between the countries But also the way it changes over time And we
were finding that children were being affected by that As much as by the family
stress within the home And so I think as a society we really need to be careful
About how we message these things going across So we have another paper coming
out which showed That the children were less pro-social As well as showing more
problem behaviours And that that was explained by their distress Around the
social distancing rules That they were getting upset and anxious about the fact
That they couldn't go near people Or they had to keep washing their hands or
whatever So it's really important that children are getting The message they
need to get And how we communicate that message isn't something That kind of
causes them additional anxiety So the messaging I think is something that we can
all work on Claire, this is something that has got our listeners so excited
We're having so many messages coming through at the moment And a bit of fan mail
as well This one says, my big sister Rachel was actually one Of Professor Claire
Hughes' former students And she's one of the best people I know She has
supported me at every turn from teaching me At eight times tables as a kid To
taking me to my first gigs as a teenager To driving me round to our holidays
together as an adult She is one of the most compassionate, clever and funny
people I know And I aspire to be even half as good as her Thank you Rachel for
being my sister Now I don't know the sister's name And I don't know how much
that was down to you But I think you should take the credit there, definitely
This one says, my sister is ten years older than me My brother is seven years
older They have been my great guides and protectors Now wonderful friends We
have a very busy WhatsApp chat where we share updates Woes, silly gifs,
anecdotes All the drama and the stuff that makes up daily life And this one, my
older sister Claire paved the way for me She made all the mistakes first Got
caught, got into trouble with our parents Making me the better liar about what I
was up to When it was my turn That's from Anna, so there you go There can be
benefits from older sister in all ways Isn't it wonderful to hear? It really is
Now teachers are telling us that a lot of children Who went through this
pandemic are the lost generation And they've missed out, especially those ages
you're talking about Age three to six, they've missed out on those vital years
Not only in education but in social aspects Now we're hopefully through the
worst of it What can we do to get our children back in those spaces? It's a
really good point So I'm doing work at the moment on children's school readiness
And that's a term we often use thinking Is the child ready for school? But you
could also think Is the school ready for the children to come? So I think
schools are having to change a little bit How they do to accommodate for the
fact that The children that are arriving through their doors Have had these
difficult experiences Haven't had the same sort of opportunities To pick up the
social skills that they might otherwise have done So I think as a community we
need to be seeing That we're all responsible for raising the child It's that
African saying, isn't it? That it takes a village to raise a child So that if
all of us are thinking of opportunities Of experiences that we can give children
That will help them to grow That's something that we all ought to do Because
we're in it together Because children are the future Thank you, Claire Thank you
so much That was Professor Claire Hughes From the Cambridge Centre of Family
Research Please do keep your comments coming in I'm loving hearing all your
stories About your older or younger siblings And how they've got you out of
trouble Or helped you in your time of need Now my next guest is Dada Masilo
She's a South African choreographer Who is known for her reworking of classic
stories To reflect black female identity Her latest show is called Sacrifice And
it's inspired by Stravinsky's iconic ballet Rite of Spring The story is about
the return of spring And the renewal of the earth Through the sacrifice of a
young woman Or maiden who is chosen by the community To dance herself to death
Dada herself plays the role of the maiden In this new production Which is on a
national tour of the UK at the moment And will be performed at the Sadler's
Wells In London this weekend Dada, thank you so much for coming on the programme
Thank you for having me First of all, can you tell me about the story Because I
know a little bit about the Rite of Spring And that it's often called The most
controversial ballet of its time But the original, that Eastern European folk
tale Is very different to what you're trying to portray today In Sacrifice,
isn't it? How have you moved the story on? How have you interpreted the Rite of
Spring? I think that one of the most challenging things About the Rite of Spring
for me Is the thin narrative And so what I wanted to do is explore How I can
stretch it out Because it is divided into The adoration of the earth Which is
about ritual And then the sacrifice Which is the maiden dancing herself to death
So what I wanted to do is I wanted to put it in the context of South Africa
Because we've got a lot of rituals, cultures, traditions I mean, there are
rituals for everything in South Africa For getting married, for death, for
parties For asking for rain So, you know, I just focused more on that So that I
could try and stretch the narrative out Because otherwise it would have just
been a dance And I didn't want that And I wanted to create a work that would
move people And it was just so interesting now to hear from The woman that
you've just spoken to That in the beginning I wanted to make a very dark work
But because of COVID everything just changed completely Of course So then the
work became about healing And because a lot of the company members lost their
families and friends And there was a lot of grief going around So I wanted to go
embrace the grief And then let's heal So that is what it's about now It's not
about darkness and whatever I mean, that is happening around the world anyway So
I think that it's time that we heal Because we live in such a desensitized world
Where we just hide our feelings And we just go about our business But we don't
let ourselves go And we don't let our feelings show So I think that that is
really important And because with dance we always say we work in a safe space
It's very important for people to just be able to come to the studio And break
down And know that somebody's going to hug you without judging you Because I
mean, during COVID we were all just going And I think that that's really
important That must have been such a tough time for you Especially that time
when you couldn't do what you loved But you couldn't support your colleagues You
couldn't perform at all And you couldn't be together And it's very interesting
to see that Sacrifice is a very together dance If you know what I mean You are a
tribe You are together quite closely Like siblings that we've just been talking
about Was it one of those things you wanted to express? We're together now Let's
go full out here Yeah, and I think that we have a saying that we do during our
focus It goes, Mother Earth, Community, the Universe So the community are the
people that help to make the sacrifice anyway So yes, being apart was always a
nightmare And I mean, of course there was quite a bit of depression to go with
it Because if you dance for a living and that is taken away from you Then what
do you do? So it was frustrating But I think that's just through talking to each
other About the work on Zoom and on the phone And throwing ideas around That
really helped For me it was a little bit difficult Because I feel as if I've
made four works in a year and a half Because we'd go to work for one month and
then there'd be lockdown And then I'd be at home for a month and everything
would change And I'd change everything and then go back to work And then we'd do
that again And then everything would change again It was a difficult process But
I think that it was one that I needed to go through Because I think that if I
just had three months to make the work Then it wouldn't be the work that it is
now Amazing Now you play the maiden, don't you Dada? Who has been chosen by her
community to dance herself to death So that spring can arrive Why did you want
to tell the story from her point of view? Because that's very different to the
original Rite of Spring Which was from the community aspect Because I think that
people need to understand the journey So there is a journey to being sacrificed
So it's not just the community who just decides who is going to be sacrificed
And then the sacrifice happens But for me I wanted it to be seen through the
maiden's eyes And to go, okay, I'm going through this journey So that I can
reach that point and say I'm not okay with it Because there is a point where she
does fight She fights it, but then she's told, no, you can't fight it And what
I'm doing in my version is that I'm choosing her own mother to sacrifice her
Normally it would be done by a man, but because I didn't want it to look like
rape I thought, okay, let's have the mother do it Because I think it's also so
much more emotional when the mother sacrifices her own child Incredibly so, and
it's quite hard to watch I've not seen the whole thing live, but I've seen many
clips of it And it's what I call a different style of ballet dance I'm going to
call it on the edge of your seat dance Because the rhythms are so jerky, fast,
surprising How did you find choreographing and dancing to this? I understand you
had to learn a whole new dance style, is that right? Yes, I had to learn Twana
Dance, which is a dance from my heritage But the complex rhythms from Twana
Dance reminded me of Stravinsky's music And those chords, and just one minute
Yeah, very quick, sharp, odd And then bang! So that's what inspired me So that's
where the inspiration for Twana Dance came through So it's unpredictable, you
don't know what's going to happen And I think that when we're in performance,
sometimes because I've got four musicians Sometimes we play with each other,
tease each other about, okay, when are they going to go? To make it even more
tense than it is And from what I've seen, you're quite tall and upright and
quite jerky And you all kind of work together in a group in the middle of the
stage And I think you've described it as sort of meerkat dancing And that is
what it looks like Yeah, that's great, I'm glad it comes across that way The
meerkat family is a community And I wanted to really retain that aspect of it,
that it's about the community coming together, working together And I think for
me, ensemble work has always been so important They know solos in ensemble work
We all have to get together and move as one And not, okay, I've got a solo, they
say, yeah, I mean, they are solos and whatever But each solo is about informing
the rest of the community of what is going on So it's not just there for
somebody to showcase their technique It is about going, okay, I'm passing on
this message from this person to that person And then we come together as a
community and we create a sacrifice It's wonderful, Dada, and I wish you every
luck with your tour Wish the cast luck as well, or break a leg, as I should say
And thank you so much for coming on the show and talking so eloquently about it
Love to meet you Thank you And thank you so much for joining in the conversation
today I want to reflect on a few of your messages you've sent in There really
have been so many this morning But lots of you have responded to our story about
pictures and sexual abuse on the Metaverse This one says, my 13-year-old was
friends with a 12-year-old girl who had given a naked picture of herself to her
boyfriend The boyfriend broke up with the girl and sent the picture to all his
mates, including my son My son was horrified, showed the picture to the girl
that she could do something about it This ended up with the police, who called
my son for downloading this type of picture He was only released after the
girl's father pointed out how ridiculous this was We need ways for boys to
report these things without the risk of being put on the sex offenders register
My daughter is six and has already started to ask to play And we will have loads
more of those coming up in the programme But it's been lovely to have the time
with you this morning We will be back tomorrow at 10 o'clock Make sure you join
in the conversation then Bye-bye A new series of Meet David Sedaris starts
tomorrow