TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-19H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at 6 o'clock. This is Alan Smith. Good evening. Shamima Begum, the
East London schoolgirl who ran away to join the Islamic State group, has lost
her appeal to be allowed to come home. Her lawyers say the fight isn't over.
This is an extraordinary judgement delivered in an extraordinary way in which
the Commission is clearly deeply troubled. Yes, we have no tomatoes, or peppers,
or cucumbers. Tesco, the UK's biggest supermarket, is the latest to put limits
on fruit and veg. One item in six in a supermarket trolley is actually fruit,
veg or salad. And prices were already going up at a really high rate before this
latest shortage. An independent investigation has been ordered into the
Lancashire police search for Nicola Bulley. Nurses leaders in England have begun
paid talks with ministers, but other NHS staff have announced a new strike.
Rishi Sunak has told MPs they will get a say on any deal on post-Brexit trading
rules for Northern Ireland. In the past few minutes it's been announced that
Wales' Six Nations rugby union match against England will go ahead this weekend.
Later tonight Vladimir Putin puts on a show in Moscow and Starbucks starts
serving coffee with a shot of olive oil. Shamima Begum, who travelled to Syria
as a schoolgirl to join the Islamic State group, has lost her latest legal bid
to regain British citizenship. The Special Immigration Appeals Commission
accepted there was evidence she had been a victim of trafficking when she left
the UK as a 15-year-old with two of her friends. But the tribunal said it was
lawful for the Home Secretary to revoke her citizenship and bar her from
returning to the UK on the grounds of national security. Her lawyers have
described the ruling as extraordinary and vowed to continue their legal battle.
Our Home Affairs correspondent Daniel Sanford reports. In their ruling, the
judges said they found this a case of great concern and difficulty. Shamima
Begum left her home in East London eight years ago. She was 15 years old. Along
with two school friends, she travelled to Turkey and was smuggled across the
border to what was then Islamic State-controlled northern Syria. Within days
she'd been married to an IS fighter. When Shamima Begum re-emerged as IS rule
collapsed in February 2019, the then Home Secretary Sajid Javid took away her
British citizenship, saying she was a threat to national security. Shamima
Begum's lawyers argued at the Special Immigration Appeals Commission that the
Home Secretary should have instead treated her as a child victim of trafficking
for sexual exploitation. In their ruling, the judges said there was a credible
suspicion that she'd been trafficked and harboured for the purposes of sexual
exploitation. But they decided in the end that that did not trump the Home
Secretary's power to remove her British citizenship on grounds of national
security. Shamima Begum's solicitor, Gareth Pearce, warned that it had been a
lost opportunity to put into reverse a continuing injustice. The outcome that we
face is that no British child who has been trafficked outside the UK will be
protected by the British state if the Home Secretary invokes national security.
And the government's own independent reviewer of terrorism legislation, Jonathan
Hall-Casey, said that the UK was increasingly out of step with other countries
which are taking women back from the camps in north-east Syria. I do wonder,
whatever happens in this litigation now, bringing it forward to 2023 when the
camps are just beginning to be emptied out of Europeans, whether the UK is
prepared to be an outlier on that. If nothing else, it would create this awful
spectre of Britain's Guantanamo. I'm sure it would be a propaganda coup for
Britain's enemies. Speaking before today's decision to the makers of the BBC
documentary and podcast The Shamima Begum Story, the young woman herself clearly
had little hope of making it back to Britain. What do you think you'll be doing
in seven years' time from now? Still be in this camp. Really? Yeah. You don't
think you'll be home? Nope. Not at all? Nope. Why not? Because ISIS was the
worst thing of the 21st century and I was a part of it and now I have to face
the consequences of my actions and this camp is the consequences of my actions.
Shamima Begum's legal team will continue to challenge the government's decision,
but Home Secretaries do have huge powers to take away British citizenship when
national security is at stake. And the podcast I'm Not a Monster, The Shamima
Begum Story is available to listen to on BBC Sounds. Two more of the UK's
biggest supermarkets, Tesco and Aldi, have become the latest to introduce limits
on the sale of certain fruit and vegetables. Asda and Morrisons have already
imposed restrictions because of shortages caused by extreme weather affecting
harvests abroad. The problems coincided with growers in the UK providing fewer
supplies this year because of rising production costs at home. Our business
correspondent Mark Ashdown has more details. With widening gaps on their
shelves, Tesco has now put a buying limit of three items per customer on
tomatoes, peppers and cucumbers. Aldi has done the same. They followed Asda,
which has also restricted those products but has gone further, also putting
limits on lettuce, salad bags, broccoli, cauliflower and raspberries. You can
buy three of each on one visit. If you shop in Morrisons, you can buy no more
than two each of tomatoes, cucumbers, lettuce and peppers. The supermarkets say
extreme weather over the past year in Europe and North Africa has hit their
suppliers. The UK relies heavily in the winter months on imported produce. Jed
Futter is a retail consultant and says rising costs this year have also led to
UK growers producing less than usual. Energy bills for greenhouses, they've gone
up sevenfold. And if you can't get, if you can't recover that, if you're growing
products and your energy bill is that high, if you can't recover that and get
the cost, you will go bust. So it's much cheaper just to have nothing there
whatsoever. While last year's fuel shortages and transport delays were widely
attributed to Brexit, these shortages are not thought to be related to the UK
leaving the EU. But Fraser McEvoitt from the analyst Kantar said prices could
still be affected. One item in six in a supermarket trolley is actually fruit,
veg or salad. And prices were already going up at a really high rate before this
latest shortage. So for instance, price of cucumber up 42 percent. Price of two
and a half kilo bag of potatoes was up about 22 percent. So these prices are
really hitting people's budgets. The government says UK food supply chains are
resilient and well equipped to deal with disruption. All the supermarkets
involved said they hope to end the buying restrictions within the next few
weeks. Lancashire police are facing a number of investigations into the way they
handled Nicola Bulley's disappearance. The country's police and crime
commissioner is setting up an independent review after criticism that officers
released too much personal information. Ms Bulley, who was 45, had been missing
for more than three weeks when her body was found on Sunday afternoon. Here's
our North of England reporter, Nick Garnett. It took police more than three
weeks to find Nicola Bulley's body, which was discovered in reeds in the River
Wyre on Sunday. In the preceding days, Lancashire police released highly
personal information about her medical background and well-being. Information,
the family said the mother of two would never have wanted to be made public, but
it was being done to deter the sale and publication of stories to newspapers
about Nicola. Police said they did it to help explain why they firmly believed
Ms Bulley had gone into the river. There's been widespread criticism of the
force's actions, with some accusing it of victim-blaming or, at the very least,
being indiscreet. A number of reviews of those decisions will now be held.
Firstly, the Information Commissioner's office is to look at the release of the
highly personal details, while Lancashire Police and Crime Commissioner Andrew
Snowden has announced the College of Policing will begin its own wide-ranging
independent inquiry. It is right that we ask those questions around why that
information was released and make sure that that is properly reviewed by the
ICO, about the investigation and use experts who can have access to the
information in the investigation and can have the national standards to handle
and are the national lead experts in this area to make those assessments.
Meanwhile, the Independent Office for Police Conduct has launched its own
inquiry into previous contact between the police and the family after a police
car was called to the house earlier in January. Also today, the inquest into
Nicola Bulley's death was opened and adjourned. The coroner said he was
satisfied the body was that of Nicola Bulley after dental records were examined.
A full inquest is due to be held in June. British Steel has confirmed it is to
close its coking ovens in Scunthorpe with a loss of up to 260 jobs. The
company's Chinese owners are blaming high inflation and energy costs. Unions say
the plan is devastating for the UK steel industry. More details from our
business editor, Simon Jack. British Steel plans to close the ovens that turn
coal into the hot burning coke that feeds the steel furnaces. Energy prices are
60% higher here than in Germany and workers leaving shift today were making that
connection. We're seeing it's energy prices at the minute. Obviously, the rising
cost of living, it uses a lot of electric when in a plant like this. The Chinese
owners Jingye have said they are looking to make further cost savings. Unions
fear that means hundreds more job losses and say the future of steelmaking in
the UK is on a knife edge. Mike Wilkinson is regional officer for the Unite
Union. Well, our fear is that the recent announcements are probably just the tip
of the ice bag and if it closes, I would see Scunthorpe as being almost on its
knees. The government described today's news as disappointing given negotiations
are ongoing to provide British Steel and the Port Talbot plant owners Tata with
around £300 million each in support. Those offers are conditional on long-term
job guarantees and are tied to decarbonisation goals that the firms say will
cost billions. Recent comments from the business secretary, Kemi Badnok, that it
was not a given the UK needed its own steel industry, have set alarm bells
ringing throughout the sector. Pay talks have begun between ministers and the
Royal College of Nursing after the union suspended next week's strike in
England. But Unison has announced other NHS staff will hold another day of
strike action across England next month in an escalation of their dispute. Our
health correspondent Sophie Hutchinson reports. There's yet to be any word from
the talks between the health secretary and nurses which have been held this
afternoon. There is, however, some hope that the two sides will find common
ground to reach a deal on a pay rise for nurses in England. Meanwhile, outside
the negotiating room, the relationship between the government and other
healthcare unions seems to have deteriorated during the day. A new strike was
announced for the 8th of March by Unison across nine of England's ten ambulance
trusts and at some hospitals, including specialist blood and transplant
services. Along with that, the flicker of hope for the meeting between the
doctors' union, the British Medical Association and government officials was
quickly extinguished this afternoon, with the BMA saying it was very
disappointed the health secretary had decided not to attend. It said there was
no offer on the table and that it was made clear the government was not ready to
enter negotiations. It means the planned three-day walkout by junior doctors
next month, the longest ever attempted by NHS medics, will still go ahead. But
the government has said the health secretary met the BMA in January and now
wants to arrange another meeting as soon as possible. The rail union, Aslef, has
announced that London Underground drivers will walk out on the 15th of March,
the day the Chancellor announces his budget. Aslef said 99 per cent of the
drivers who took part in the ballot had voted in favour of strike action in a
dispute over pensions and working arrangements. Around 100,000 civil servants in
the Public and Commercial Services Union are also planning to strike on Budget
Day as part of a dispute about pay, jobs and pensions. Rishi Sunak has told MPs
that Parliament will have a chance to express its view on any changes to
Northern Ireland's trading arrangements negotiated with the EU, but he told
Prime Minister's questions that intensive discussions were still taking place.
The Labour leader, Sikir Starmer, accused Mr Sunak of failing to stand up to
what he called the wreckers on the Conservative benches who opposed the changes.
Here's our political correspondent, Jonathan Blake. Downing Street insists a
deal has not yet been done, but the Prime Minister is coming under pressure to
reveal details of an agreement with the EU which had looked close to being
announced this week. Sikir Starmer pressed Rishi Sunak on what he said were the
trade-offs that needed to be faced up to. Northern Ireland, Sikir said, would
have to follow some EU law to avoid a hard border with the Irish Republic and
there would need to be a role for the European Court of Justice. Rishi Sunak
responded with what he said were his criteria. I am a Conservative, a Brexiteer
and a Unionist and any agreement that we reach needs to tick all three boxes. It
needs to ensure sovereignty for Northern Ireland. It needs to safeguard Northern
Ireland's place in our union and it needs to find practical solutions to the
problems faced by people and businesses. Asked if MPs would get a vote on
changes to the Northern Ireland protocol, the Prime Minister said Parliament
would of course express its view. Did that mean a vote? Downing Street later
said it wouldn't get into hypotheticals. Sikir Starmer repeated his pledge to
support any deal reached with the EU and sought to highlight Conservative
divisions. It's the same old story. The country has to wait while he plucks up
the courage to take on the malcontents, the reckless, the wreckers on his own
benches. But I'm here to tell him he doesn't need to worry about that because we
will put country before party and ensure that Labour votes to get it through.
The Prime Minister accused Labour of agreeing to anything the EU offered, which
wasn't a strategy, he said, but surrender. Sir Geoffrey Donaldson, the
Westminster leader of Northern Ireland's main unionist party, the DUP, asked for
a guarantee that the current trading arrangements would be replaced. It is
unacceptable that EU laws are imposed on Northern Ireland with no democratic
scrutiny or consent and will he assure me that he will address these fundamental
constitutional issues and do so not just by tweaking the protocol but by
rewriting the legally binding treaty text. Mr Sunak said he had heard loud and
clear the DUP's concerns. This afternoon, the Prime Minister held a call with
business leaders in Northern Ireland. Last night, he spoke again to the
President of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen. And this evening,
the Foreign Secretary, James Cleverley, met Tory backbenchers as the government
continues to try to shore up enough support to finalise a deal. You're listening
to the 6 o'clock news on BBC Radio 4, the main news so far. Judges have rejected
Shamima Begum's appeal against the decision to bar her from the UK for joining
the Islamic State group when she was 15. Tesco has become the latest supermarket
to limit sales of tomatoes, cucumbers and peppers. Still to come… Are you not
stretching enough? Or are you not pulling through on the sally quite firmly
enough? Or have you got not quite the right amount? Yes, that made all the
difference. An invitation to ding-dong merrily on high for the coronation. The
Russian President Vladimir Putin appears to have confirmed that his Chinese
counterpart Xi Jinping is planning a visit to Moscow. Mr Putin has held talks
with China's most senior foreign policy official days before the anniversary of
Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Russia thanked China for what it described as its
consistently balanced position on the war. President Putin went on to address
crowds filling Moscow's main stadium for a patriotic gala from where our Russia
editor Steve Rosenberg reports. Today the Kremlin put on a show to rally
Russians around their president and his war in Ukraine. At the stadium which
hosted the 2018 Football World Cup final, patriotic pop songs were the warm-up
act, plus speeches reminding Russians that their country had defeated Napoleon
and Hitler and would be victorious in Ukraine. The event was highly staged
managed. Tens of thousands of people had been bussed in from colleges, factories
and state enterprises. After Vladimir Putin. Sharing the stage with Russian
soldiers back from the front line, the Kremlin leader declared right now there
is a battle on our historical frontiers for our people. They are fighting
heroically, courageously, bravely. Three cheers, hurrah. Patriotic propaganda
here tells Russians that it was the West that started the war in Ukraine. Many
in the stadium seem to believe that. We didn't start all this, Irina tells me. I
trust our president. Not everyone here though was so enthusiastic. In
temperatures of minus 15 we saw large crowds streaming away from the stadium
even before Vladimir Putin arrived. Independent investigators have issued a
critical report into the deaths of three women who were being cared for by a
maternity unit in Derbyshire. The report into university hospitals of Derby and
Burton found the women may have survived if lessons had been learned from
previous reviews. Investigators also noted failings in the way staff dealt with
four other serious cases, as our social affairs correspondent Michael Buchanan
reports. Of all seven cases, three deaths and four potentially life-threatening
incidents occurred over a 16-month period between January 2021 and May 2022. The
review carried out by the Healthcare Safety Investigation Branch found that
while the incidents did not have common themes, robust action planning and the
prompt addressing of learning from previous investigations may have had an
impact on the care the seven women received. They also found there was
substantial evidence of poor behaviours, bullying and a hierarchical culture,
especially within the obstetrics team. Aaron Horsey, whose wife Bernadette died
at the Royal Derby Hospital in January 2022, moments after giving birth to their
son, said he was dismayed by the findings. To me, it goes to show the importance
of having a really thoroughly embedded atmosphere where learning is taken on
board and it's just clear that this particular trust historically has not had
that. In a statement, the University Hospitals of Derby and Burton Trust
apologised to all seven families and said they had already addressed the
report's immediate recommendations. Maternal deaths are on the increase in the
United Kingdom. The number of women who died either while pregnant or up to six
weeks after giving birth rose by 19% between 2017 to 2019 and 2020 to 2022, with
deaths from suicide, preeclampsia and haemorrhage all increasing. Palestinian
officials say at least 10 people, including an elderly man and several
militants, have been killed by Israeli forces during a raid on the occupied West
Bank. Witnesses described hearing explosions and gunfire as troops entered the
city of Nablus. The Israeli military said its forces were looking for terror
suspects. Our Middle East correspondent Tom Bateman is in Nablus. Explosions and
gunfire sounded in the heart of Nablus as armoured troop carriers and soldiers
with dogs raided the narrow streets of the old city. It triggered armed clashes
with Palestinian gunmen before Israeli troops fired shoulder-launched missiles
at a house in which three senior Palestinian militants were holed up, having
said they wouldn't surrender. Israel says they were involved in the killing of a
soldier last year and were planning imminent attacks. But several of those
killed outside are civilians, including two elderly men, while footage shows
young men, apparently unarmed, running away as gunshots are heard before one
falls to the ground. The Israeli army said it was reviewing the video.
Palestinian officials called it a massacre, while the militant group Hamas said
its patience was running out. After a spate of Palestinian armed attacks,
Israel's military search and arrest raids in the occupied West Bank have
intensified over the last year, and this one is one of the deadliest since 2005,
with a huge number also injured. Health officials say more than 80 people have
suffered bullet wounds, now being treated in five different hospitals. It is a
further sign that recent attempts by the US to ease spiralling tensions are
failing. For the first time, crime figures in the UK show that paedophiles are
using virtual reality headsets to view and share child abuse imagery. The data
was obtained by the children's charity the NSPCC, which contacted every police
service in the UK. The survey also showed a record number of offences involving
the possession of illegal images of children. Angus Crawford reports. Although
the numbers were small, only eight recorded offences involved the use of VR
headsets across the country, the NSPCC warns that this may be just the tip of
the iceberg and an emerging threat to young people. Experts predict rapid growth
in the use of virtual reality devices and a move by tech companies into more
immersive online experiences in the so-called metaverse. Figures overall showed
there were more than 30,000 crimes recorded last year for sharing and possession
of child abuse imagery. Almost 10,000 offences involved popular gaming or social
media platforms. Officials in Japan say they've solved the mystery of a large
iron ball that washed up on a beach, triggering nationwide alarm about possible
foreign skullduggery. Bomb disposal experts were deployed and images were
analysed by experts in espionage. But the truth was far more prosaic, as our
Tokyo correspondent Shaima Khalil reports. From speculation about whether it was
an unexploded bomb from the Second World War or an old mooring buoy, there were
hundreds of comments about the mysterious metal ball since it washed up on the
beach at Hamamatsu. The Japanese broadcaster NHK showed footage of two officials
looking at a big rusty sphere about a metre and a half wide. One man who came to
the beach for a run told local media he tried to push the ball, but that it
wouldn't budge. Fears that it could be a stray mine were dismissed after bomb
squad experts examined the object and said it posed no threat. Local authorities
say it will be removed soon. There are no indications it was anything to do with
espionage by North Korea or China, but the mysterious ball washed up amid
nervousness about Chinese surveillance balloons. In the past hour, it's been
announced that a strike by Welsh rugby players, which could have led to the
cancellation of the team's Six Nations match against England on Saturday, has
been averted. Members of the squad had threatened to boycott the game worth £10
billion to the Welsh Rugby Union because of a dispute about their contracts. The
players had been unhappy about a proposal to cut their salary and introduce a 20
per cent performance related element. The Welsh rugby captain Ken Owens, who has
been involved with the talks, gave his reaction. It has been a really tough,
tough sort of another event in Welsh rugby, which is hugely frustrating. But
it's been a difficult period of the last sort of year, 18 months. I hope we
don't end up here again. One thing I can say from a player's point of view is it
has been tough, but we are fronted up in training. We've prepared as we would
for any test match over the last 10 days since sort of the announcement came.
We're looking forward to getting out on Saturday and going toe to toe against
England. In the city, the 100 share index ended the day down 47 points at 7,931.
On Wall Street a short time ago, the Dow Jones was up 113 points at 33,243. On
the currency markets, the pound is trading at $1.207. And against the euro,
sterling is at 1.136, and that makes a euro worth 88 pence. The American chain
Starbucks has unveiled plans to add a Mediterranean twist to its coffee. It's
launching a series of drinks infused with olive oil, including a cafe latte,
which it boasts has a velvety smooth texture. It's being launched in Italy, but
UK chains will serve the new blend later this year. The idea isn't to the taste
of some traditionalists, including Antonio Poledri, who owns an independent
Italian coffee bar in central London. How can they even think about going to
Italy and teaching Italians about coffee? I've got a business that's been
running in this street for 75 years next year, and it's successful. I don't want
to tinker with it. If people want olive oil, they can come and have olive oil,
but to start adding it to coffee, where will it end? With 10 weeks to go until
the coronation, the race is on to recruit and train more bellringers to mark the
big day in May. The Central Council of Church Bellringers says it wants to ring
every bell in the country for an event it's calling Ring for the King. It
estimates there are around 30,000 to 40,000 campanologists in the UK, but 8,000
more are needed. The head of the church at Jo Black sent this report. On the
waterfront at Ipswich, the bells at the Church of St Clement ring out. It's a
deconsecrated church, and this isn't the weekly service. It's a training
session. Balance to balance, so when we ring rounds in a minute, you can
control. That's it. Now control the backstroke. Most of the new recruits have
answered the call to Ring for the King, a recent appeal by the campanology
community to get more people interested in acquiring this skill. Among them,
Freya, a 17-year-old A-level student who has been ringing since November, and
says being involved on coronation weekend will be something to remember. It's
been something I've been interested in, but I suppose Ring for the King made me
think this is the time to get into it. Amanda Richmond from the Association of
Ringing Teachers is guiding the new members, and is pleased with their progress.
We want to make sure that there are ringers for every church so that we can all
ring out for Ring for the King for the coronation. In some areas of the country,
bell ringing is thriving. Those here at St Paul's in Birmingham are aged between
11 and 80 years old, and their bell ringing school is full. But in other places,
there can be very few. Simon Linford is from the Central Council of Church Bell
Ringers. We probably had a couple of decades of not really realising that the
ringing community was getting older and failing to replace ourselves, but now
we're actively looking to replace ourselves. It takes around 10 to 12 hours of
one-to-one tuition to get a basic level of ringing. Still time to learn ahead of
May the 6th. The headlines again. Tesco and Aldi have become the latest
supermarkets to introduce limits on the sale of some fruits and vegetables. But
our main story is that Shamima Begum, who travelled to Syria as a schoolgirl to
join the Islamic State group, has lost her appeal against the government's
decision to revoke her British citizenship. Josh Baker is one of the makers of
the BBC documentary and podcast, The Shamima Begum Story. He has this
assessment. There's no doubt that Shamima Begum will be disappointed. She's
repeatedly told me that she wants to return to the UK to have her day in court.
She describes the Syrian detention camp she now lives in as a kind of purgatory
for her. Today's judgement is about the woman who walked out of the ashes of the
so-called caliphate in 2019, who appeared unrepentant and was deemed a threat to
national security. But when I talk to her now, it often feels like I'm speaking
to three different people. There's the naive teenager who took 30 bars of her
favourite mint chocolate to a war zone. There's the close-minded IS member who
spent her formative years with the terror group. And there's the woman who spent
years reflecting on the decisions of her younger self, having lost three
children and now living in a detention camp. She's repeatedly told me that she
regrets joining IS. What would you say to your 15-year-old self now? Don't do
it, bitch. Just don't do it. Really? Yeah, that's all I would say. She wouldn't
believe me anyway. She would not have listened to me. She'd have still decided
to go? Probably, yeah. She was too arrogant at that time. So for now, her home
remains a camp on the edge of the desert, along with hundreds of women who were
linked to IS, as well as their children. Josh Baker, BBC News. The newsreader
this evening was Alan Smith. Conversations from a Long Marriage is our comedy
next. Joanna Lumley and Roger Allum star, as the long-married couple still
passionate about life and each other. That's just after we hear about the return
of someone else with a zest for everyday life. The master of satire, David
Sedaris is back with his unique blend of wit and wisdom. I know that people are
now taking pictures of themselves at funerals because when I looked up selfies
at funerals was the third option. The humorous laughs at life and himself. I've
been studying Japanese and I'll say something to Hugh. I'll say, oh, did you
know that this is how you say, and he says, we're only going for four days. A
new series of Meet David Sedaris starts tomorrow evening at 6.30 on Radio 4 and
BBC Sounds. Now on Radio 4, Joanna is called upon to give some marital advice.
Conversations from a Long Marriage. By Jan Etherington. Starring Joanna Lumley.
And Roger Allum. Too many broken hearts have fallen in the river. Too many
lonely souls have drifted out to sea. Episode two, Let It Go. The things we do
for love. The things we do for love. What are you doing up there? Cleaning my
teeth. Not funny. Get down now. I'm finished yet. Tough. Good grief. I only went
out for a loaf and I come back to find you dangling like a stuntman. I am not
dangling. I'm adjusting the satellite dish to get a better signal. You don't
know how to do that. Al said it was easy. Al's an engineer. Why do you always
think I don't know what I'm doing? I don't always think that. Except in this
case I do. It's not safe up there. And look, Amy's running around. She could
knock you over. Who let her out? She came out with me because I was looking for
you. I didn't know you were up the extension ladder. Could you take her in
please and leave me alone to complete my task? I'm not leaving. Look, we agreed
that you wouldn't go up the big ladder again. I was just inches away from a
clean getaway. What does that mean? Just a Jack Nicholson line that says it all.
If you hadn't come back when you did... I could have found you splattered on the
terrace. Oh, I might as well unblock the gutters while I'm up here. No, you
don't need to. Shane does that when he does the windows. My emasculation is
complete. Am I really considered incapable of flicking leaves out of my own
guttering? It's not that simple. Some things are best left to those who do it
for a living and... I've got a crick in my neck looking up at your feet. Come
down now. Ah, Verity and Jonah have finally got their garden kitchen installed.
I know. Very smart. All wood. I'm just trying to check out what the oven's like.
Don't lean. Get down this minute. All right. But don't blame me if the signal's
still poor. I don't care. Take it very slowly. Oh, cripes, I feel as if I'm
talking you down from a cliff door. Don't grab me. I won't. Oh, thank God,
darling. I said don't grab me. Oh, I couldn't resist. Actually, I'm quite
relieved. It's a bit scary up there and I need a pee. I bet that's what Tom
Cruise says when he's been up in a plane filming Top Gun. Need another ice pack?
No thanks. The pain's easing off. You really are completely crazy. That big
ladder weighs a ton. I know. Shouldn't have done it. I'm just so cross with the
signal we're getting, or not getting. Yes, I can see it. It's very blurry. What
are you watching? An old edition of Top of the Pop, so I guess that's bound to
be fuzzy. What year? 1968. Oh, gosh. That was the start of us. It was. Are you
all right? If you knew back then what you know now, would you still have married
me? I'm banning you from drinking Rioja midweek. I'm serious. Would you?
Absolutely not, because I'd know you'd still be asking the same daft questions
50 years later. I've just been talking to Celia. So, how are they? It's a bit of
a sad house, because she just told me that Jules has discovered she can't have
children. Isn't Jules about to get married? Mm-hmm. But she went to the doctors
and had lots of tests, and discovered she's having an early menopause. But she's
only 20-something. 24. Celia's very upset about it. Of course. Only child, no
grandchildren. Although your mother wasn't that bothered, I seem to remember.
She was the only one who was delighted we didn't have children. She hated the
thought of becoming a granny. But I didn't think Celia's even thinking about
that. She's just devastated for Jules. Does Jules want children? Well, probably
not immediately, but Ethan comes from a big family, and it's having the choice
taken away. Why has it happened to her? It's not really clear. It seems her
ovaries just packed up. Maybe they can restart them? They're not spark plugs.
Oh, that is very unfortunate. Celia wants me to talk to her about what it's like
not having children. Crikey. Do you really think you can do that? I can try. I
am her godmother. I don't think that's necessarily one of your duties. But I
must help if I can. Does Ethan know? Not yet. She's only just found out herself.
She's scared to tell him. Ah. That's why you were asking me what if I'd known
then. Yeah. I should talk to Ethan. Oh, that might be a very good idea. Do you
think you could? Darling? Sorry. I was just thinking about the day we found out.
Beautiful sunny morning. We walked out of the hospital like zombies. You were
clutching my hand so tightly. It was one of those times when it feels like
you're in a swimming pool, and all sound is distorted and echoey. I don't know
why we decided to walk across the park. Because it was on the way back to the
station. But we seemed to be weaving our way through a blockade of prams and
pushchairs. And then you picked up a toddler who'd fallen off his tricycle right
in front of us. Yes. You could pick up strange children in those days without
getting arrested. And the mother came up and thanked us. And she had a new baby
in her arms. And she said, it's not easy with two, as I'm sure you'll find out
one day. And we laughed. And then we turned away. And you cried. You wasn't to
know. I'm cross with myself that it's still so painful. Right. I don't think you
should do it. It's too much to ask. I feel I can't say no. I'm just not sure
what I can say that would be of use. Would you like to run your thoughts past me
before you talk to her? Well, that might help. A lot. But do you really want to
go back there? Might be easier if we go back together. Thank you, darling. Let
me top you up first. You said you were going to ban me from drinking midweek.
Don't pretend you'd have listened. Oh, my God, Sal, a month! I'm not surprised.
Does he know how you feel? Of course he would be thrilled. But unbelievably
tough for you. Honestly, I don't know what to suggest except, I don't know, sign
up for a singles trekking holiday through the Australian outback. Look, I'm just
going to take the dog out. I'll swing by and we can talk about it properly. 20
minutes? OK. Bye. Come on, Amy. Walkies. Darling? What? Don't what me. OK. What?
Who was it who said 95% of married life is shouting what from room to room?
James what and his immediate family? And the other 5% of marriage is hearing
your partner say doesn't matter. For God's sake, I'm busy. What do you want?
Stop snapping at me. I don't like it. Sorry, but I'm on the phone trying to get
some sense out of yap yap or whatever they call themselves these days and I've
been listening to Vangelis for weeks. I thought the TV was OK now. Is it still
pixelating? No, I'm just phoning them for a chat about the price of fish. Of
course it is. What's really frustrating is someone did answer about 40 minutes
ago and took the details and then silence. And now I'm being held in a queue and
my call is important to them. Ah, liars. I need a pee. Here, can you hold the
phone for a minute? But I'm taking the dog out, going to Sal's. I'll be in and
out quicker than a penguin down a water slide. Anyway, they won't answer till
Thursday. Do not do the crossword in there. I know you put it on the shelf. Come
straight back. All right. Don't cut yourself off by mistake. Yeah, right. Do do
do do do. Ba boo boo boo. Sorry about this, Amy. Slight delay. Just sit down.
Sit. Sit. Good girl. I'm sorry. Oh, hello. Yes, we have a problem with our TV
reception. My husband has already given you those details. Do you? Hang on. He's
got the account number and the paperwork with him. He's just in the, um, just
two seconds. Darling? What? He won't be a minute. Are you still there? Hello?
Oh, hell, farts and utter bums. Ugh! What? Doesn't matter. Oh, I need a pint of
water, quick. You look completely wiped out. You should see the other guy. Thank
God I had a puncture so I could stop for five minutes. Peter, annoyingly, took
the break as an excuse to do some lunges and squats. You should tell him it's
too much for you. It's not. Let me get my breath back. I have big news. Peter's
son, Joe, is staying with them for a whole month. How do you know? Sally told
me. And I'd have told you yesterday if I'd been speaking to you, which I wasn't.
He's thrilled. Sally isn't. Really? You never said. He wouldn't because he
doesn't know or doesn't care how Sally feels. Doing what he wants has always
been his default position, which is how he got a son in the first place. What
did Sally say then? Look, could you peel off your Lycra somewhere else? Well,
don't you find it a bit of a turn-on when things pop out? Flop out? Oh, I'm just
so hot. I've got to get everything off quickly. Isn't that the opening line of
Debbie Does Dallas? How would I know? Yes, so Sally is upset. No change there
then. Because? Well, it's quite a complicated answer really, which I can't
formulate while I'm staring at Bradley Wiggins' dad doing a striptease. Free at
last. I don't think I could ever take up diving or skiing. I'm not a fan of
constricting clothing. Is that my bathrobe? Get off! Come on. I need it for my
modesty. No, you're all sweaty and it's freshly washed. But if I stand around
with nothing on, there's a danger you'll find me impossible to resist. No, I'm
taking it upstairs. Let's take it upstairs together, babe. Oh, for goodness
sake, have it. Ah, thank you. Oh, it's lovely and warm. It's just out of the
tumble dryer. Room inside for two? Oh, jeepers. Who knew an electric bike was a
marital aid? I'm going to chug a bucket of water over you. Tempting. But let's
have a cup of tea first and we'll see where the evening takes us. I tell you
where it's going to take us if you'll stop pratting about. Out for a pizza with
Di and Al. So you'd better have a nap first. Tell me about Sally. That'll send
me to sleep. That's not very nice. She's pretty cheesed off with Peter because
he's told Kirsty he'll have Jo to stay without discussing it with her at all.
And she's not keen on the idea? Well, of course she's not. Jo's a constant
reminder of Peter's affair and almost marriage to Kirsty. Yes, I can see it's
tough for her. Well, it's more than tough. Sally's been remarkably tolerant. No,
she hasn't. She's been a raging virago. Maybe not tolerant, but outwardly
sanguine about it all. She's had Jo for weekends, even Christmas, but she never
ever wanted children of her own. And taking on someone else's five-year-old for
weeks on end is not what she fancies doing as a senior rail card holder. And
yes, those were her exact words, seasoned with a few ripe curses. I remember she
was very anti-motherhood, even as a teenager. I don't think Peter might have
either, when they were young. But since Jo came along, he's realised how
wonderful it can be having a child. So it's a dilemma for her. Should she say no
and risk Peter's disappointment, or let Jo come to stay and put up with it? Look
at me. It's upset you, hasn't it? Come inside my fluffy robe. No, you're whiffy.
Au contraire. This smells of fragrant laundry sheets. It's a wonderful irony,
isn't it? Sally can't stand the idea of having a child around. Whereas... I
think it's more about whose child it is. No, she really doesn't like kids.
You'll probably sense that. She's old enough now. Sally won't pay the wicked.
What is she? Not a stepmother? No, because she was there first. There's no word
for it, really. Anyway, I said we'd have Jo for a few days. What? Give Sally a
break. He's very active. Oh, bugger. And you are his godfather. Honorary
godfather, appointed just after my knee replacement. I think Peter expects me to
be the one steering him towards the beat poets, Joni Mitchell and Cinema Verite,
not having a kick about on the common. He's got a couple of 20-something
godparents for that. Tough. I've told her we would. So you'd better start
practising your flying tackles. Obviously not on me. That's definitely a red
card. Hold me close, don't let me go. Oh no. Yes, I love you and I think that
you know, that you know. Oh. Every cloud's got a silver lining. What? When I
lift my arm up like this, it hurts. Well, don't do it then. All across my back,
it aches. You've just broken my concentration. I'm making some notes for Jules.
I'm sorry if I'm standing here inconveniently in agony. OK. Did you go round to
Jenny's yesterday with the power hose? I did. Sluiced out all the muck and mouse
droppings. You could eat off her garage floor now. And has she got a basketball
hoop on the back wall for the teenagers? Let me think. You had a go, didn't you?
For about half an hour? Well, I had to beat Jenny, didn't I? But you didn't beat
her. She was laughing when she told me. You just wouldn't give up. Am I to have
no private life at all? Not in this street, no. I'm getting old and creaky,
aren't I? Undoubtedly. That makes me a bit sad. Do you think I've still got a
vigorous walk? A bit of a swagger? Yes. Look, can we talk about your
insecurities later? I need to finish these thoughts because I'm going to see
Jules tomorrow. Oh, OK. Sorry. Why don't you take Sally with you, give the
alternative view? I think that would be counterproductive. Jules wants a family,
but Sally never did. She even refused to babysit for her friends. Remember when
we all went round to Paula's and she gave Sally the baby to hold and Sally
handed it back and said, babies are not my thing? Never knowingly sensitive. She
was treated like a freak because she was adamant she didn't ever want to be a
mother. She used to bang on about overpopulating the planet, even then. And that
just wasn't fashionable in the 60s. Everyone thought you got married because you
were planning to have kids. So we wanted until we found out we couldn't. So what
have you said in your notes for Jules? I've had to be honest and tell her it'll
feel like the end of your world because it did to me. Never quite gone away, has
it? I think it's heightened because I'm talking about it at the moment and it's
bringing back that feeling of isolation when all our friends are flaunting
babies and in the club. I remember very intrusive questions like, what's up with
you two? Not doing it enough, as if. People just don't think. They're
deliriously happy with a new baby. They obviously believe you could pop one out
just as easily. Are all those temperature charts, sex by appointment, before we
discovered we were wasting our time. It was all my fault. No. Because of that
terrible miscarriage. It broke us apart. But we put ourselves back together
again. Time passed. Yeah. But then you get a different question along the same
lines. How many grandchildren have you got? Not always. People are more likely
to whip out a photo of their Labrador than their grandchild. Which reminds me, I
took this pic when Amy was confused by a tortoise at Jenny's yesterday. Cute,
eh? In the night there are sights to be seen. Stars like jewels on the crown of
a queen. But the only sight I want to give is that wonderful picture of you. I
don't know what those flying rats are eating but it's purple. The blackberries,
obviously. This can't go on. It's ruining the paintwork. I'm going to sprinkle
some Imodium on the blackberry bush. That's a bad idea. We eat the blackberries
too. Collateral damage. What the world needs now is more constipated pigeons.
Did you clean it all off? For now. But it's farting against thunder. They're all
sitting in the tree, wings on hips, waiting for me to go inside and then it's,
all right lads, he's buggered off. Back to today's mission. See if you can hit
the wing mirror, Percy. And aim for the door handle, Morris. Morris? Shall I
make us a sandwich? Great. Oh, Sally's put her foot down. On what? She says
she's only letting Joe stay for ten days. If Peter wants to be with him for any
longer, he can, and I quote, bloody well take him off to Disneyland, Legoland,
or any of the other lands where lone fathers desperately try to bond with the
children they hardly know. What did Peter say? She hasn't told him yet. Then
we'd better make up the bed in the spare room. One of them will storm out
tonight and end up here. Sally's not going to give any ground. I put my money on
Peter. Then I'll get out the blue sheets. Oh, gender stereotyper. You're going
to put Action Man on the pillow. He's not having my Action Man. Do men ever
entirely grow up? I think you know the answer to that one. I'll get the sheets
out while you make us a sandwich. I can sort Peter's bedding out later. I
thought you were going to see Jules tonight. Well, funny thing. Celia phoned and
apologised for asking me to talk to Jules. She said she was just so concerned
about her. And she was trying to think of someone who'd know how it felt to be
told you could never have children. That's exactly what I said must have
happened. And now she realises how painful it must be for me, recalling that
time in my life, and she wouldn't want to put me through it. Good. I'm glad she
phoned you. Hey, is this anything to do with you? What do you mean? Did you talk
to her and tell her I was upset? I'm not that sensitive. You are. Sometimes.
Quite often. It wouldn't be surprising if you had said something, because I know
you're worried about me. And you always like to fix things. Well, it's fixed
itself. You don't have to do it. Of course I do. So, you're still going to meet
Jules? Look, the truth is, it was a long time ago for me, but it's very fresh
and raw for Jules, and of course I must talk to her. OK. You really want to do
this? I do. She's actually coming here tomorrow now. She wants to see the dog.
Oh, it's from Peter. We haven't made the bed up yet. He wants me to meet him for
a drink and tell him what to do. Dave had a row and Sally's on her way round
here. Sally? It's the pink sheets, then. Morning, honey. I'm home. Oh, totally
run out. Oh, you could do with a shower. Did you sleep at all? We talked for
most of the night, and at about 2am I thought I might as well stay in the house
with him as Sally's obviously not coming back. I did send you a text late last
night. I know. I read it when I woke up for a pee. So, what's happening now?
Peter's gone off to pick up Joe. Did you give him any advice? Mostly, I just let
him talk, though I did say, don't upset Sally. Is she still in bed? No. She's
taken the dog out with Jules. Jules is here already? Yes. She came really early.
Sally was staying, so the three of us had quite a long chat. I'm about to make
brunch while they take Amy to the common. How'd it go? Presumably, Sally's been
telling Jules she would be better off without kids. Well, initially she did, but
she was very sympathetic and discussed it in a surprisingly sensitive, practical
and, you know, quite funny way. Oh, you know Sally. The world is overrun with
ankle biters. So I'm glad she was here. Told you she'd be useful. Jules was very
positive as well. She's talked about it to Ethan and he was extremely
understanding and said he only wants her and really isn't at all bothered about
having children. Sounds like she's got one of the good guys. She does, doesn't
it? He's only concerned for her like you were for me. One of us had to try and
stay strong. And you did, most of the time, and definitely when it mattered.
Thank you. Do you think Jules has got over the initial shock? Well, they're
making plans to travel quite extensively, go to Australia for a year or two and
then see how they feel. Ethan is quite happy to adopt if she wants to be a
mother. You didn't want to do that. No, I didn't. Sometimes I wish we had. I
suppose I just wanted our baby or nothing. I couldn't help it, but that's how I
felt. We felt. Good news is, lots of her friends apparently don't want children
either. One of them sent her a link to the non-mums network. How fantastic that
she's got a supportive gang of friends. You know, Jules said something lovely to
me about how she could see I'm having such a wonderful, happy, fulfilled life.
Who with? Oh, yeah, funny. She can see the love we have between us and she
envies that and wants that for her marriage. And she realises, when she looks at
us, that you don't have to have children to have a happy married life. At which
point I'm guessing Sally chipped in with here, here. She did, exactly that. But
the important thing I wanted to say to Jules is that I believe I'm the lucky
one. I have the most important thing, a lifelong love affair with my husband,
uncomplicated by having to share that love with hordes of children. Also,
they'll have much more disposable income because kids are so bloody expensive.
I'll tell Ethan that. Next time I'm marrying an incurable romantic. Ah, traffic
is crazy. Shall I take the bike? You can't get a pack of nine lou rolls on a
bike. I knew I'd forgotten something. Hilarious. The soup will be ready on
Tuesday. Where shall I put the ticket? Give it to me. You'll lose it. Hoped
you'd say that. Did you have a sandwich in town? No. Ridiculous queue at the
deli. I'm starving. Fancy an omelette? Lovely. Ham and tomato? Bacon and
mushroom? Cheese and onion? All of the above. You make the coffee. Will do.
How's your day been so far? Interrupted. Sally's just been on the phone,
sobbing. Nora, shall I get the pink sheets out again? No need. Joe's only been
there five minutes. It can't have gone wrong already, but it has, has it? Quite
the opposite. When Joe came through the door with Peter yesterday, he was
clutching a big card that he'd drawn himself. He gave it to Sally and it was a
picture of her and Peter with him in the middle holding their hands and it said,
to my other mummy, kiss kiss. Oh, he's obviously heading for a career in the
diplomatic service. As soon as she looked at it, she started crying. But that
was because she said it was such an unflattering likeness. Apparently he'd drawn
her with crossed eyes, her hair was orange and grey spikes, her legs were like
bloody tree stumps, darling. I hope she didn't ask him to do it again. Not even
Sally would do that. She gave him a hug and a mini magnum and now they're all
going to Disneyland Paris next week. You're joking! I know, who'd have thought
it? Oh, more good news, TV's fixed. I thought he was coming tomorrow. Well, he
had a cancellation and called in on the off chance. Ah, but I wanted to be here,
make sure it was sorted. Don't panic, it is. Young guy, whizzed up the ladder.
Fortunately, he was very agile. And you get out of deck chair to keep an eye on
his progress. Oh, he was no Diet Coke man. Rather skinny and hunched with a buzz
cut. You look much sexier up the ladder, your hair blowing in the wind, letting
off a string of expletives. Clinging on for dear life. All good news then,
especially for Sally. I suppose so. It's just, I can't quite work out where the
idea of the card came from. Jo's too young to know how to navigate the emotional
minefield of shared parenthood and Kirsty wouldn't have got him to do it. She's
completely indifferent to Sally's feelings. Peter would never come up with that
idea on his own in a million years either. He might have done. Did he mention it
when he was with you? He didn't, no, not at all. But you did. How'd you get to
that? I bet you did, didn't you? He asked for your advice about how to make
Sally more welcoming to Jo. Yes, that was the reason why we were talking all
night. And? And, okay, I might have run it up the flagpole along with naming a
star after Sally to buying her a goldfish. Hey! Oh, I knew it. I love you. You
are the most kind and wonderful person. I really, really love you. Right, now
we've established that. What happened to the omelette? Conversations from a Long
Marriage was written by Dan Etherington. It starred Joanne Alumley and Roger
Allen. It was produced and directed by Claire Jones and was a BBC Studios
production. And you can join Joanna and Roger again at the same time next week
when they find themselves all at sea. Well, back to this evening and we'll of
course be finding ourselves in Ambridge next where Linda is about to up the ante
in this evening's archers and on Front Row at a quarter past seven the actor
Nathaniel Martello-White will be telling Nick Ahad about his directing debut
with the psychological thriller The Strays. Front Row is live here on Radio 4 in
just over 15 minutes. BBC Sounds. We are making changes to the way BBC live
streams are distributed via third-party services and platforms and the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds. Radio 4. Music, radio and podcasts available
on most smart speakers. Just say open bbc sounds