TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-16H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds this Monday evening at 8 o'clock. level of Â£2.5k,
with further subsidies from the government. A parliamentary committee says Boris
Johnson may have mislead MPS multiple times about lockdown parties in Downing
Street. In an interim report, the Cross Party Privileges Committee says the
COVID breaches would have been obvious to Mr Johnson at the time. In a statement
Mr Johnson denied misleading Parliament. He also expressed concern that
committee may rely on evidence from the report done by the former civil servant
Sue Gray, who's just been offered a job by the Labour leader Sikir Starmer.
Labour have said they will abide by the decision of Parliament's anti-corruption
watchdog, which will decide the suitability of the appointment. Lord Kerslake, a
former head of the civil service, dismissed suggestions Ms Gray may have behaved
improperly while conducting her inquiry. She only took on that inquiry because
the then cabinet secretary Simon Case recused himself. And so we really got to
see this is not some devious process where she was drawn in or used her
position. She was drawn back into a role she had left in order to do a piece of
work that they had no one else to do. A man and a woman have appeared in court
charged with the manslaughter of a baby whose remains were found in East Sussex
earlier this week. Constance Martin and Mark Gordon are also accused of
concealing the birth of a child and perverting the course of justice. They were
remanded in custody by magistrates at Crawley. And the reality TV personality
Stephen Bear has been jailed for 21 months for sharing an intimate private video
of his ex-girlfriend. Bear, who won Celebrity Big Brother in 2016, put the video
on his OnlyFans website. Georgia Harrison, who's appeared on Love Island, did
not know she was being filmed at the time. BBC News. Now on Radio 4, Peter Gibbs
and a panel of horticultural connoisseurs are back to answer all our plant
predicaments. It's gardeners question time. Hello. Well, this week we've picked
up our gloves and shovels and set off to explore the horticultural happenings of
Trafford, Greater Manchester. The borough boasts a number of notable green
spaces, from public gardens to ancient deer parks, and sits on a bedrock of
sandstone topped with gravel deposited in the last Ice Age, no less. Well, here
to stave off any icy blasts are your panel, our very own cosy terrarium of
wonders, James Wong, the always vibrant Ashley Edwards, and sunshine itself,
Christine Walkden. Your panel. Now, you don't need the scientific expertise to
realise that an Ice Age would challenge the most resilient of flora and fauna,
which is why it caused such a stir when scientists in 2012 successfully grew
some grafted cells from the 32,000-year-old seeds of Sialene stenophylla, or
narrow-leaved campion, recovered from Siberian permafrost. How's that for frost
hardiness? Well, with the weather still a little bit chilly out, I wonder what
our panel's favourite ice-resistant plants are. Christine, they've had to be
ice-resistant this last winter. Well, things have been a little bit chilly,
haven't they, depending on where you are. My favourite plant for bad weather and
frozen conditions is a little plant called Saldanella alpina. It's a member of
the Primulaeae. It grows on top of high mountains, so above 10,000 feet. It
produces little olive leaves, around about a hapeny size, old hapeny size. The
flower stem comes up to around about three inches, eight centimetres, wine red,
and then off it little pixie's hat. It is so tenacious, it actually flowers
through snow, and at the edge of snow patches you often just see the flowers and
not the foliage, and there's a lot of people that have seen the flowers and have
never, ever seen the foliage. Slugs adore it. From a million miles away they'll
come across the Himalayas, you know, and whatever, to nobble your plant. So it's
not the easiest of plants to grow in cultivation, but it's a stunner. Saldanella
alpina. Wow, I'll be looking that one up. Ashley, what about you? Well, I love
all plants that flower early and that can get through that frost, and a lot of
plants can actually produce their own heat, and they push their way through the
ice and frost, and I think that's so impressive. But something I love in the
garden are snowdrops. To me, they just speak of hope for the coming spring, and
they're usually the first thing you see flowering in the garden. It's always
exciting to see them, so I think that's my favourite. Absolutely, it's a great
point of the garden, yeah. James? I think for me it's something that's really
unexpected. So sometimes we attach cultural ideas to plants that don't really
reflect their biology, and so I think of something that can really, really
handle, you know, minus 40 degrees, which we're never going to get in the UK
anytime soon, hopefully, you can tell me. Plus 40, yes, minus 40, maybe not.
Well, this plant will handle both of them. So the Apuntea cactus, there are
many, many different species of Apuntea cactus, but some of them can handle
minus 30, minus 40 degrees, and then also plus. So there are some Bunny Ears
cactus that go all the way up to Canada. So if you can grow them there, you can
grow them here. They just require really, really fast drainage. They hate winter
wet, but they look incredibly exotic, and when you see them covered in snow, it
is kind of like you can't fix the two thoughts in your mind of what you expect
cactus to do and what the biological reality of cactus doing is. Fantastic.
Well, thanks, panel. Let's get things warmed up, I think, with our first
question. My name's Chris. I'm from Stockport. I have a cord line which has
suffered quite badly with the frost damage that we had in winter. The leaves are
very wilted, black. I wanted to see if it's salvageable, and if so, when and how
do I get it cut back and stimulate new growth? Okay. Is it in the ground or in
the pot? It's in a pot, about 16-inch wide pot. Okay. Ashley, what's best? Well,
if you look at the plant and the center of it is still green, you've got hope
that that part will regrow. It will look really ugly for a while, but in the
spring, you should be able to take off all the dead leaves. The center part of
the plant will regrow, and you should have a crown of new leaves. I also think,
I've never done it because I've never been brave enough, but I'm pretty sure you
can just chop them down pretty hard, and they will produce new sprouts on the
base. So you can also do that. Yeah, your fellow panelists are nodding at that.
You get a multi-stem then, is that right, James? Absolutely. So if you've killed
off the growing tip, what's going to happen is you're going to start to get
little shoots that will come off of the side of the stem, the central trunk, if
you have a central trunk. If not, they definitely do come up from beneath ground
level. I would always recommend, if you can, and for hardiness, growing them in
the ground, because that gives that extra layer of insulation to the plant's
roots, just in case you get all the top growth cut down, they can come back from
the base. Christine, it was a bit of a stinker this winter, wasn't it? Even
though temperatures weren't desperately low, there's a lot of things looking a
bit sad. There's a lot of things looking very, very sad, yes. I think what
happened, we had that very mild back end, you know, November was very mild, and
then it plummeted, and then we had, you know, spells of quite protracted cold
weather, not necessarily severely cold, but cold enough to hold things back.
Stay below freezing for days on end. Absolutely, and we haven't seen that for
many years, and even quite established trees and shrubs, and people are
reporting all over the country, strange things that have gone and other things
are okay. I think the key thing, particularly trees and shrubs, is don't be too
quick to have them out, because quite often these things, though the top may be
burnt off, they will often shoot from lower down, and I know, I mean, I went
round to a friend and she dug out various things that I've actually nicked,
because I suspect they might not be dead, and there are some quite nice things
that she's decided are dead. Well, the base wasn't dead, because if you just
take your thumbnail and scrape up, if it's green and it's moist, it's still
alive. If it's brown and dry, it's requiem mass time, it's gone, but certainly
down below, so I am the benefactor of some very nice plants that she's ditched,
but I acquired. So don't be too quick to dig up and get rid of. Okay, but Chris,
it sounds like there's hope for you anyway. Better take another question, I
think. My name's Pamela Riley and I'm from Hell Barns. I have an orchid in a
small pot, it's three and a half inches diameter, nine centimetre diameter, on
the bathroom windowsill. As I understand, they like steam, but there are grey
roots that are hanging out at the side, and when I've lifted the plant pot out
of the holder, I can see lots of roots in the soil, so is it okay to cut off
these ugly things that are just... You don't like the ones that are coming out
the top, okay. Well, I can't see how they could be doing anything, because
they're just on the tiles on the windowsill. Okay, all right. Ashley, are they
doing anything? They are, actually, they are doing something, and a lot of
orchids are epithetic, so that means that they grow on trees, or they might
cling on to rocks, and those roots that are all poking out the top of the pot
that you hate, actually are collecting moisture from the air, so when you have a
steamy shower, all that steam is actually being absorbed by those roots, and
they have a very spongy type of root that helps them absorb water from the
atmosphere. So if you do cut them off, that means that you're reducing the
amount of water it can take up, and they also can photosynthesize, so if you cut
them off, you're also reducing the energy to the plant. So I wouldn't cut them
off. If you take the pot out and it looks really root-bound, you can repot it,
but orchids generally don't want lots of soil. They'll rot if you have a lot of
soil, so keep them as tight as you can. I think it's fascinating how there are
as many different types of gardens as there are gardeners, because I've been
doing everything just to grow those roots. I'm not hugely fascinated about the
flowers of orchids, but I love this amazing silvery-grey curtain of roots, and
I've been taking orchids out of pots and pinning them to pieces of cork bark and
hanging them on my wall just so I could see a shower of these water-folly roots.
So you won't necessarily be killing your plant by taking them off, but you will
potentially weaken it, and if you're really interested in seeing flowers, those
roots will be beneficial, particularly since orchids are quite susceptible to
over-watering, and roots need both air and water. So if you have some roots that
are sticking out of your pot, if you accidentally over-water the material that's
in the pot and those roots rot, you have that secondary defence of the roots
that are outside, so it gives you a bit of leeway. Thank you. Do you like the
roots now? Yes, better. Excellent, thanks Pamela. Who's next? My name's Leslie
Entisle and I garden in Timperley. Can the panel give us some tips on how to use
a terracotta rhubarb forcer? I've had no success so far, what am I doing wrong?
Oh, what have you been doing? It's on the allotment, so I've obviously just put
it over the rhubarb when we planted the rhubarb, left the lid on it, and when we
came to look it just died. This is newly planted. It was last year. Right, well
there's your mistake. Oh. You need to let the rhubarb establish. So on an
established crown you can force it. Having planted a young plant, it's unlikely
to have established properly, it won't have enough reserves to push it. So buy
yourself a new crown, or nick one from one of your friends, plant it, let it
establish for this year, and then next spring put on your forcing pot. And
normally you shouldn't have any problems. I think it's the fact that you've just
put it on an unestablished plant. James, explain the idea of forcing. Yeah, so
the bit we eat of rhubarb, as you'll know, are the ptos, the leaf stems, and
they can be quite fibrous. They're filled with these fibres to keep the leaves
upright, but humans tend to like things that aren't packed with fibre, that are
kind of soft, that are not going to be stringy. And a way to treat the plants,
to encourage that kind of soft, succulent, fibre-free growth, is to suppress
light. So the plants will react to the lack of light by growing longer, skinnier
stems, desperately searching for the light by keeping them in darkness. So
that's what forcing is about. But what we mean by that is essentially excluding
light by putting a giant piece of terracotta, you can put a bucket over the top,
anything that excludes light will work. And the reason why it didn't work this
time is you've just planted the plant, and then you're literally starving it of
light, just after you've planted it. Don't feel bad, it's a very, unless you
know, it's a very normal thing to do. So the solution is to have a plant that
settles in, has lots of starch reserves, has really its botanical battery really
charged up, and then you can be mean to it and get it to do that. But you also
probably ideally shouldn't be doing that every year to the same plant. So if you
have maybe three plants and alternate them every year, you're sort of forcing
the plant and weakening it, but having a good harvest, letting that one recover,
and then you have another two to take the brunt of that. Patience, Leslie. Thank
you, that makes sense. You can't beat it though, can you? Forced rhubarb early
in the season. Wonderful. In a crumble. I'm hungry now. Let's go over here now.
Hi, David Merrill from Hayle-Watman Society. I'd just like to ask, if I'm using
a commercial nematode slug deterrent for my hostas at home, should I avoid
growing tagetes nearby, as I have read that the roots of tagetes exclude
chemicals that kill nematodes? Okay, so Christine, the nematodes are going in
there to hopefully get into the slugs and finish them off, but is this true? Is
this a thing? There are various species of tagetes, and I think it's Exotica
that is known to give off alliopete effects, producing chemicals that will
affect other things. The difficulty with giving you a specific answer is, I
don't know which nematode species you're using, and I mean, unless the
information's on the packet. I would be surprised, to be honest, that if you use
nematodes and grew tagetes, you'd have a problem, to be honest, because the
tagetes is producing a very specific exudate that we can also use as a weed
killer, and there is commercial interest in using tagetes. Exudate has
herbicides, so I don't think you've got a problem. Tagetes exotica is an
interesting plant. It is ugly. It grows to about three foot high, about five
foot across, so it's not the most aesthetically pleasing plant in the world. So
you probably wouldn't be growing that with your hostas anyway? Well, the one
that I read that suggested it for killing nematodes was actually your general
everyday French marigolds, or your African marigolds. Have you come across this,
Jen? Yes, there is good evidence for that. However, there are probably lots of
different, so this is where I know about plants but not animals, there are
probably lots of different types of nematodes, and they're probably very
specific to the chemicals produced by the plants. So there is good evidence.
Tagetes minuta is used commercially for that reason, and it's also the same
chemicals that create that pesticide effect, also are flavor chemicals, and it
lives a secret double life outside of the West, and where it originally comes
from in Peru, as a herb. They call it huacatay, or black mint, and if you want
to buy that from a Peruvian grocer online, it'll cost you a fiver, which is
significantly more than if you were to grow the plant yourself. It has a kind of
a pineapple-y flavor, and it's used much like mint, so you have that extra
benefit. I know that it kills nematodes, but it may not be the ones that you are
adding, and that's one of the tricky things. Under that umbrella, there'll be
many, many different species which have very precise interactions, so it's hard
to generalize. Proceed with caution, I suppose, then, is the answer, David? So,
do we need to get the manufacturer to put the specific name of the nematode on
the packaging? It normally is there, actually. Totally unpronounceable names, I
will mention, but normally it's declared. It's like when we look at, for
example, you can buy mycorrhizal fungi to add to things. There are hundreds of
different mycorrhizal fungi which have very specific interactions with different
plants. So, we call it this umbrella term, but maybe what you're adding doesn't
actually work, and we're just beginning to scratch the surface. So, it might
affect it, it might not. The only way to find out is to give it a go, I guess.
That's the wonderful thing about gardening. There are so many questions we don't
know the answers to, and it's up to gardeners to find that out through
experimentation. Okay, thank you for that. Thanks, David. I've learned something
there, as I always do on this program, endlessly. Well, thanks, panel. We'll
have more questions from the audience here in Trafford very soon. Well, as we
slowly and with longing edge our way out of the icy season towards the relative
warmth of spring, many of us are turning our thoughts to what we can start
planting. And with the current economic climate, there's never been a better
time to think about growing our own vegetables. One of the classic stables and a
GQT favourite is the humble potato in all its delicious varieties. GQT producer
Dom Tyerman went to Juliet Sargent's allotment for a masterclass in preparing to
grow them. So, Juliet, here we are in your allotment. It's cold, it's frosty,
the ground's hard, there's not going to be much in the way of digging, but
that's not what we're here for, are we? It's a good time for preparation, isn't
it? It's a perfect day for getting ready for planting in a few weeks' time. The
sun's shining, it is crispy and frosty, but a great day for gardening. And
you're holding some seed potatoes. Yep, these are my potatoes which I am going
to chit or not chit, that's the question. So tell us, what is chitting? What is
chitting? So people talk about chitting and there's this endless debate about
whether to do it or not, and it's really very simple. It's basically the idea of
allowing your potatoes to sprout for a few weeks before you put them in the
ground, so you're getting them ready to get off to the best start when you plant
them. And so if we don't do that, what happens? Not a lot, really. This is the
whole debate. Some people swear by chitting, other people say it's not necessary
at all, and you can put the potatoes straight in the ground and it won't make
much difference. The research is a little bit hazy, there's a little bit of
evidence for it, a little bit of evidence against it. It may be that actually
the most important thing is to choose the right variety of potato for your
particular situation, your particular climate. But I'll tell you about chitting
anyway in case you want to do it. I mentioned we have seed potatoes, so what do
we need? Do we need seed potatoes or can we just do them with any old potato?
Well, you can actually do it with any old potato. I mean, the good thing about
seed potatoes is that you know that they're in the perfect condition. They've
been prepared, ready for planting, and they're nice, healthy potatoes. They
don't have any virus in them and they're not wizened and old. They're ready to
go. But if you happen to have some potatoes and they're starting to sprout and
they're still sort of plump and firm and healthy, you could use them. Okay,
great. So we'll go with seed potatoes to be safe. Yeah, we've got some seed
potatoes. What next? So if you have a look at your potatoes, most people know
what the eye of a potato is, which is where there's a little indentation. You
can see a little knobbly bit and that's where they're going to sprout from, the
eye of the potato. And chitting is really just finding the surface of the potato
that's got the most little eyes on it and placing that part of the potato
upwards because that will produce the most sprouts. And to keep the potato
upright, you just put it in something like an egg box to hold it upwards and put
it in a light, coolish place, but out of the frost. So somewhere like a window
sill in a porch or in your garage where there's enough light to encourage it to
sprout, but not direct sunlight. Okay, and how long do we leave it there for? It
will need about six weeks and what will happen is from the eyes you'll get
little sprouts and because you've got them in the light, they will be little
green sprouts that come up and after about six weeks they'll be an inch or so
tall and then you can plant them. So that takes us to the types of potato
really. So some will say, why what's the rush? Why do I need an early start?
Yeah, so some potatoes tend to flower and produce earlier. The very earliest are
called the earlies and then the next ones are called the second earlies. And
just to confuse everybody, the next ones are called the main crop and then even
more confusing, there's a second main crop. So it just means the time when they
produce and you plant them sequentially. So the earlies you plant earliest, the
second earlies next and so on. So chitting is more essential for the first
earlies? Yeah, so for the first earlies and the second earlies, most amateurs
would chit. Some people will chit for the main crop but most people wouldn't
bother chitting for the main and the second crops because actually they have
quite a long time to grow anyway. It's really the idea of getting ahead while
the ground is frosty and you can't plant. Juliette and producer Dom getting
chitty with it. When it comes to growing potatoes, what are your preferred
varieties and why do you like them? Christine, what do you go for? Well, I don't
grow many because I'm not a great potato eater, but I do like Charlotte, which
is a salad potato that's waxy. That's always a question that is interesting
because it's so specific to soil type and up here when I grew in Richton, my
favourite variety was Majestic. Down in the south where I am now, it's a waste
of time even considering chitting it, let alone growing it. James, what's yours?
So I would grow more potatoes if I could get hold of some of the amazing
varieties from where the potato originates from. Because in Peru, there's two
centres of diversity for the original potato, so it's Peru and Chile, and
there's at least 2,000 varieties of potato there. What we've got is a tiny
narrow subset of what was originally introduced, so there's really, really poor
genetic diversity in the UK compared with what there is over there. And when you
go to a market there, there'll be these ones that look like raspberries and
they're literally knobbly like a giant raspberry and fluorescent pink. They come
in like stripy red ones, purple, yellow, like every colour you can imagine. And
all their flowers are incredible. When you see a field of them, they're almost
like these dazzling hibiscus flowers. And I remember going to the Canary
Islands, and what I discovered when I was there is that it was the trading stop-
off point between South America and the old world. So there are lots of
varieties of potatoes in places like Las Palmas, which we think of as a holiday
destination. You go to a market there and they've got these ancient potato
varieties, and I'm probably the only person that gets excited about this. So I
go to the market and I sit next to these old ladies that were telling all these
different types of potato, and they were telling me all their favourite ones,
and they all have these exotic names. And one of them, she said, it's Kinewa.
And I was like, wow, that sounds like it must be an indigenous term from Latin
America. I wonder which dialect it is. Could it be Quechua? And then she showed
it to me, it's King Edward. So I would grow more potatoes if I could get hold of
those varieties. Ashley, do you have a favourite? I like AÃ±o, which is like a
small knobbly one. It's great for potato salad. So that's a nice one. But yeah,
I also like to grow heritage varieties. So I usually look in a catalogue and get
really excited and then buy way too many. And like last year, basically half my
plot was potatoes. I've still got some left. And even though I gave loads away
for Christmas, but yeah, I do get a bit excited when I look at the potato
catalogue. Well, thanks for those panel. Lots of varieties mentioned there and
lots of plants mentioned through the programme as well, of course. Don't worry
if you haven't noted them down, because it's all listed on the GQT pages of the
Radio 4 website underneath the details for this programme. You're listening to
Gardener's Question Time on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds with me, Peter Gibbs. And
joining me on the panel today are James Wong, Ashley Edwards and Christine
Walkton, who are taking questions from an audience of Trafford's plant
enthusiasts. One of them has our next question. Philip Barrett, Halo Allotment
Society. When I'm harvesting my potatoes, I get a good crop, but when I come to
use them, they're often hollow and black inside with no obvious signs of damage
on the skin. There's no grubs or slugs or any evidence of anything in there. Oh,
but very disappointing, yeah, after all that effort. What's going on here,
panel? What soil type are you on? It's a heavy loam, but not clay. I think this
is boron deficiency. Why I say this is when I was in Yorkshire as a student, we
had exactly this problem, and it was put down to borax deficiency. Now, you can
buy borax from chemists. It's quite expensive, but you can also get it from
commercial horticultural fertiliser suppliers. It might be worth just getting
some and sprinkling it lightly over a small patch and seeing if that has any
effect. To get a boron test done commercially is quite expensive, and it would
outweigh the advantage of you doing anything. The other thing is this black
stripe, there's a thing called frang, which is a nutrient deficiency, and that's
a calcium boron complex that's going on. Do you know what your pH of your soil
is at all? No, but I've tried to dig in lots of organic matter, manure and leaf
mould. The white skin potatoes seem to be affected more than the red skins. If I
grow desireae, they don't seem to be as bad. All right. Just check your pH isn't
getting a bit too low. I mean, ideally, around about 7, 7.5 for your spuds. If
it's lower than that, then take appropriate action. Thank you very much. Sounds
like a pH kit might be on the shopping list. It will. Thanks very much, Philip.
We'll take one over here now. Anne McNaught, Haylett-Lockham Society. Last year,
we were advised that if we couldn't afford aubergines, we should grow our own.
What luxury fruit or vegetable would the panel recommend for northern allotment?
Yes, bearing in mind local climate. James, don't say cucumelons. I'd say that
probably the most expensive way to possibly get hold of an aubergine is to grow
an aubergine, because they don't cost that much. And the plants are very,
they're expensive to buy. If you get the seed, then they're relatively easy to
grow, but you do need to grow them in under glass. So you'd have to have a glass
house, preferably a relatively large size one. You can't really grow them as a
houseplant, because the plants need to be really quite big, even if you get a
small variety. Generally, the idea that growing your own as a form of saving
money is just not borne out by any sort of evidence. So what I would suggest is
to stay away from things that are cheap to buy, things like potatoes, things
like onions, and go for the most expensive things in the supermarket per weight.
And they generally, by amazing coincidence, are also some of the easiest to
grow. And the two things specifically would be herbs and salad ingredients.
Herbs are, for most herbs, once you plant them, you will have more than you will
ever be able to eat. If you have a rosemary bush, you will probably never ever
even dent 10% of your potential. A single plant will last you a lifetime. And
rosemary is really expensive to buy in a supermarket by comparison. So rosemary,
sage, all of those things. And also salads. I would grow them, you can very
often even buy them right at the end of the year when seed packets are really
knocked down, and grow them as microgreens indoors, or you can grow them in
trays. Salad per weight is probably the most expensive thing in the fruit and
vegetable aisle. So those are the two things I would go for. Ashley, what would
you go for? Yeah, kind of going down the route that James was talking about with
herbs as well is like pineapple sage, because you get the flavor of pineapple in
a sage leaf, and it's quite easy to grow. You can grow it as an annual or you
can bring it indoors over winter, and it will survive for the next year as well.
It actually has really attractive flowers, beautiful red flowers. And you can
add it to fruit salads, or you can put it in your cocktails for the summer. So
it's really nice. And also wasabi rocket, which is like a rocket, but it has the
exact same flavor as wasabi, which is actually quite hard to come by in
supermarkets. So yeah, you can add that flavor to your salads and make them very
exotic. Sounds good. Christine? Well, I was going to go with salad leaves, etc.
But also melons. I mean, if you start them early indoors in a house, and then
harden them off, you get a decent summer. I mean, you're not going to do it
every... In Manchester. They do have decent summers in Manchester, I will inform
you. Do you? Yes. Yes. More than folks realize. No, I grew up in the Lake
District. You can't pull the wool over my eyes. Get off. No, I would go with
melons. What about... The other thing is, in this particular climate, soft
fruit. Generally, up north, it's harder to grow most fruit. But things like
raspberries and blackcurrants are better to grow up north. And they're a
fortune. Exactly. And the more niche the berry, the more expensive they are to
buy. And usually, things like gooseberries. I mean, how many supermarkets
realistically sell gooseberries these days, except the really fancy ones? And
they're the most expensive. And yet the plants, you could probably buy a
gooseberry bush for the same price as one punnet of gooseberries, and they will
give you fruit for the rest of your life. So in those limited examples, it could
be a good idea. What do you fancy from that, Anne? Raspberries, definitely. And
some interesting herbs. That would be a good idea. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you. Good.
Excellent. Thanks for your question. Let's take another one. Hello, my name's
Rachel Ward, and I'm from Stockport. We have a flower bed that is northwest
facing. It's a six foot fence along it, and it's about 110 centimeters wide. I
measured it before I wrote the question. The back of the bed gets very little
sun, and the front a bit more in the summer months. We have a happy camellia and
some green shrubs. But what about some summer color? We really want to get some
summer color in there to attract the bees and wildlife. Okay. Is there anything
you particularly like? Anything that's got a flower on it, really. Apart from
yellow flowers. I don't like yellow flowers, but apart from that. Okay. I feel
the link is getting narrower now as I talk, so I'll stop. Well, we'll see what
they come up with, and you can pick from that. Ashley, what would you do? So I
would definitely climb something up the fence that you have to add a green
backdrop. I was thinking schizophragma, the climbing hydrangea, because it
tolerates deep shade, and it's actually beautiful when it's clothed in flowers.
And the flower structure is kind of sterile flowers around the edge, and then
you have the kind of true flowers of pollen in the middle, and they're really
attractive for insects. Not yellow? It's not yellow. No, it's like a beautiful
creamy white color. So it would actually look really nice in a shady area.
Christy? Pitosporum tibara. Now, Pitosporum tibara is an interesting Pitosporum
because it's a large leaf Pitosporum. It's quite thick and leathery, and it
doesn't look immediately like a Pitosporum. And it is much hardier than some of
the fine, softer leaf Pitosporums. Have it in the sunny position. There is a
dwarf form of it that will only grow to around about two foot high, but the
scent would scent this sort of space. We're looking at quite a big garden. You'd
whiff it on your nostrils before you saw it. It is very fruity, and it's a
beautiful thing. Excellent. I like the ideas of all the sensitive plants. That
sounds good. Thank you. Excellent. Happy to please. Thanks, Rachel. Well, if
you'd like to get in touch with us with your questions or observations, drop us
an email at gqt at bbc.co.uk, or you'll find us on Twitter at BBC GQT. But on to
the next question now. Hello, I'm Christine Gibbs from Macclesfield. What is the
best way of using spent tomato compost? Is there anything we could add to it to
make it more useful rather than just putting it on the flower beds or vegetable
patches as it is? Okay, so from grow bags? Is that what you're thinking? You're
growing the tomatoes in the grow bags and then you want to make use of the
stuff? And pots. And pots, yeah, afterwards. Okay. Ashley. So tomatoes are quite
hungry plants, so they're going to have depleted most of the nutrients that are
in that compost. You could use it to pot up other potted plants that you might
have in the garden, ornamentals, and you could use it to top dress a lot of your
pots in the garden. Putting it on your garden beds is probably the best option
to improve the soil structure. But I wouldn't use it to pot on seedlings, for
example, because you can carry on, you can transfer diseases. I wouldn't use it
for your tomatoes next year, because the same problem, you can end up with
blight. So I think the safest option is to use it either to top dress your pots
or use it as you are and put it on your flower beds. James. Something that could
really save you money and be a lot easier and mean you don't end up with this
situation is just to not use grow bags in the first place. Tomatoes, there's
some really good evidence to suggest that growing them in soil not only improves
flavour, it also helps improve the resistance to drought, for example, and you
don't have the plastic of the bag. So sometimes the easiest solutions, and then
you don't have a problem of what to do with the bag once you've spent it, and
you're not locked into a cycle of buying a bag every year. There are some things
in horticulture where Victorian advice is based on control and making you work
too much. And there are other things in horticulture where it's manufacturers
trying to encourage you to buy something every single year from them, and to
lock you into a cycle of forking out for that, when you don't really don't have
to. As long as there's no disease build up in that soil, they can be grown in
that soil year in year out, and you'll get a much better result. But of course,
the benefit of a grow bag can be you can grow things where there isn't any soil.
Exactly. And particularly in a glass house, if you have a concrete floor, for
example, yes, they are a really good solution in that setup. But don't do that
instead of soil thinking that they're superior, because they're not. I hope that
answers the question, Christine. Yes, thanks very much. Thank you. And who's
next? Hi, Joan Pringle from Hale. What plants with flowers can I grow under the
shade of trees, not hostas, not ferns? You're not a fan? No, and that's all
anyone ever seems to say. Can we do it, Christine? If you think of the
aquilegias, they will do perfectly well in that situation. Many of the
aconitums, now we tend to think of aconitums as being blue, you know, the wood
bane, but there's white and these yellow aconitums, they would be okay. Think of
extending the bulb range, you know, if you think of the sillas, and on the edge
of that shade, you may well be able to get away with a plant called silla
peruviana. It doesn't look like a silla. It produces quite wide strap-like
leaves, but a round blobby flower that's spiky, quite spectacular. That would
probably do on there. Don't get it too near the dense shade, but that would
probably be okay. The plaskinias, the chinodoxas, you know, widen that range of
bulbs. Some of the South African watsonias on the edge would be okay. For denser
shade, think of the citlermen. Ashley? I was thinking of astrantias. They're
really great for shady areas. They do like a moister soil, so if it's very dry
under your tree, you will have to water them in dry weather. They can tend to
flop, but the great thing about them is if you cut them after flowering, they
will give you a second spurs to flowers, and they're just so delicate in the
shade. They look beautiful. They really light up an area. You could also have
wood asters. So they have a white flower. They spread with underground stems.
They're very hardy, and after they finish flowering, they actually have really
beautiful seed heads that are fluffy and easy to propagate as well. You can dig
up and spread them around your garden. And another one, epimediums. So a lot of
the epimediums will grow in deep shade and can tolerate dry soil as well. If you
cut the leaves down around the end of February, you'll have the flowers that
come up before any leaf appears, so you have this carpet of really beautiful
either yellow or red flowers, depending on the species you choose. James? So I
would go for, to mimic the environment that you've already got, I would go for
woodland edge species. So things like Lunaria might work. Lots of the ornamental
cow parsleys could work in that environment. And then the other thing that you
could do, which is very similar to what Christine said, she stole my idea again,
is to go for bulbs. And that's specifically because these species aren't
necessarily woodland species, but because they come out before the leaves are on
the trees, you can get away with them because they don't compete at the same
time. So you could probably get away with, depending on how much shade and the
season, some of the tulips, some Fritillarias, some really, if you said you
wanted mid-height, those are examples of things that are quite tall that will do
most of their growing before the leaves are fully out. So even though they're
not woodland species, they probably shouldn't compete too much. You've got
plenty to go out there, Jim. Yeah, I have, yeah. You're going to be a riot of
colour. No, I'm having no hostas and ferns. No, and no hostas at all, that's
right. But now, who has our final question, please? Hello, Anne Menzies from
Hale Allotment Society. I'm asking a question on behalf of my husband, who said,
how do I get my wife to spend more time on the allotment? Well, perhaps we
should ask you that question. What stops you working on the allotment, Anne?
It's kind of the reverse. He likes to be at home with a good book undisturbed.
He would like me to be absent more than I already am. Oh, I see. Right. Oh,
okay. Right. We don't usually have it that way around. Ashley, what would you
do? I mean, it sounds like you already spend a lot of time down there. I don't
know how much more time he wants you to do. Do you want to camp there or
something? But I think, you know, when we spend time outdoors and we're
gardening, we really feel the benefits of it. And I think it sounds like you are
getting all the benefits and just being observant and looking. And sometimes you
don't even have to garden. All you have to do is just stand there and watch. And
that in itself is just so calming and beautiful. And it really grounds you with
nature. So I think just do more of that. Do more of what you're doing. James? I
think that when people ask about gardening advice, they often ask about things
to do. So in Garden Media, we talk about jobs for the week, as like a list of
tasks that you've got to go through. I think the most important thing, exactly
as Ashley said, is the reason why you're doing it in the first place. And one of
those things is just enjoying it. So, you know, you can do all of your stuff
like digging at this time of year or pruning at this. But one of the things is
just to remember to enjoy it. And like sitting in a hammock, if you're allowed
that in your allotment, or, you know, or cooking some food with some mates or
using it as a leisure space. The UK has this amazing tradition of allotments,
but there are other countries where there's an equal interest, but people use
them in a much more, I would say, as a leisure space. So if you look at the
allotment culture in Germany, it isn't just practical. It isn't considered just
a method of food generation. I would say more than half of the allotments that
I've seen in Germany are basically people who don't have their own garden, and
they have a summer house, they have a hammock, they have a barbecue, they do
everything other than grow fruit and veg. They have it as their separate holiday
home almost, where they would almost spend their weekend just doing that. So
that's how I would see it, which is culturally how we're looking at a space. It
doesn't have to just be a productive space. It can be a space just for your own
aesthetics, for your own leisure. I think I'll have to bring his hammock down
and put it on the allotment. Oh no, but then he'll be there. I thought the point
is you're getting away from him. Well, I think he needs to appreciate the things
that you've said we should appreciate about the allotment. I'm thinking you have
a much healthier relationship than I had pictured. You want him though. I
thought you wanted to escape him. Well, good luck anyway. Thank you. When he
hears this program. Thanks very much. Well, that's all we've got time for this
week here in Trafford. Thank you to our audience, to our questioners, and to you
for tuning in. Well, next week, is your clematis a fan of Miley Cyrus's new
number one? Are your delphiniums partial to a bit of Dalib's flower duet? Tune
in next week to discover just what on earth we're talking about. But until then,
from me, Peter Gibbs, our esteemed panel, James Wong, Ashley Edwards and
Christine Wharton, and all the GQT team, it's goodbye and may the weather be
with you. Thank you. Now on Radio 4, short works and the tale of a middle-aged
man in Lycra who worries what his wife is up to when he's out riding his bike.
Daisy Daisy by Julie Ma read by Ruth Jones. She had to be having an affair. It
was as simple as that. Gethin wanted to rage, to shout and throw bits of
crockery about, but he felt certain the barista team would disapprove,
especially that one whose pectoral muscles were barely contained inside his
company issue shirt. Instead, he sighed as he rotated the mug of coffee with his
thumbs and looked into the froth still gathered in the bottom. Phil was still
wanging on in the background, expressing every single doubt he'd ever had about
Daisy. It took a while, and Gethin grudgingly respected how his old friend had
managed to keep his gob shut for the best part of 40 years. The three of them
had known each other since the days of Rara skirts, lumberjack shirts and ill-
advised poodle perms. That last one had been Phil's. He'd been channelling a
Kevin Keegan vibe at the time. Gethin stopped listening and instead glared at
the tablet of dark chocolate they always put on the saucer. He used to give it
to Daisy if she was with him and always pocketed it to hand over later if she
wasn't. Used to? Oh, surely it hadn't come to that. He unwrapped and shoved it
into his gob where it dissolved bitterly onto his tongue. His whole new world
summed up in a tiny bit of confectionery. I'm sure she was two-timing you with
that Frank Mason back in Form 4, Phil was saying. Do you remember him? The one
who always smelled to TCP on account of his zits? You told me about him before,
said Gethin. She wasn't. She was giving his sister a lend of her make-up. It's
not 1984 I'm worried about. Oh, tell that to George Orwell. It's what you've
seen lately that bothers me. Well, there was that time she definitely pretended
not to notice me when I let her out to that junction. Not even a wave. If your
worst enemy let you out, you'd have to put a temporary halt to hostilities to do
the old. Phil lifted just his index and middle fingers, careful enough not to
allow even a sliver of daylight to come between the two digits. Whichever way
you looked at it, that small gap changed the nature of the message entirely. And
I saw her getting into her car looking all hot and sweaty last Wednesday
afternoon. Oh, she told me she was having a half day, said Gethin. And when I
saw her hugging some skinny little guy at the entrance to the clubhouse down by
the rugby pitch. Phil used his tongue to examine his teeth for loose chocolate
chips. Could be a perfectly innocent reason for that, said Gethin. Oh, you
didn't see the look on her face. She can't be having an affair, said Gethin.
It's our wedding anniversary next month. It seemed wrong to celebrate with an
extramarital affair directly against the spirit of things. Still, she had been
different lately. Busier, out and about more, coming home and running straight
upstairs for a shower. What about those cuts and bruises on her arms and legs?
Her constant moans about aches and pains in parts of her she didn't know she
had? When he'd asked if she'd been doing anything to get them, she'd clammed up
pretty quick. He got up early the next day for a bike ride before work. You
don't normally go out in your Lycra's on a weekday, she'd said as she rolled
over in bed. How did she do it? When Gethin woke up, he had to rub the sleep
from his eyes and the trail of dried saliva from his mouth. Daisy looked like a
sleeping beauty, just kissed and not by him. Thought I'd slip some miles in now
and then we can have the weekend together. Do something you want to do? Daisy
sat up quickly. Oh, sorry, I got something planned for Saturday morning, a
shopping trip into town with the girls. She flopped heavily back down onto the
pillows. Unless you want to come with us to check out the latest Charlotte
Tilbury, eat a stack of pancakes, do a touch of Pilates. Oh, well, whatever,
said Gethin as he left the room. He didn't even know you could stomp down the
stairs in just socks, no shoes. Who left that phone charger on the bottom step?
Oh, he did. Ouch. You couldn't really get up much speed on the estate, but as
soon as he hit the main road, he knew choosing cycling for his midlife crisis
had been the right decision. There'd been other options, of course, including an
affair at work. But like Paul Newman said, why would he go out for saleswoman
rep hamburger when he had Daisy steak at home? He could have got himself a
Porsche or a Jag like Phil had done until he rear-ended that old lady in the
Skoda. Apparently, as soon as she noticed what he was driving, she clutched the
back of her neck and started moaning, whiplash, whiplash, over and over again.
She'd been fighting fit enough for liberal use of the F word before that. There
was hardly any traffic around as he descended the slip road out onto the empty
dual carriageway. It was just him and the highway. He relaxed, allowed his mind
to empty of anything other than keeping this machine, half man, half bike, on
the road. The fresh morning air brushed past him with only a hint of a whiff of
the farmyard about it. He had to stand on the pedals on the steepest part. This
was not a day to get off and push, even though he'd been guilty of that often
enough. This way, he knew he deserved his freewheeling reward at the top as he
tilted downhill at full pelt. Gardens, hedges on one side, the estuary blurring
past him on the other. He'd never get his private pilot's licence now, but this
was the closest thing to flying he would ever get. As he neared the Lugha
Bridge, he spotted the 605 from Carmarthen to Swansea clattering across. He
sucked in a lungful of air, pressed his feet down, felt his legs like pistons
and finally dared to turn his head to the left. He was doing it. He was keeping
up, his bicycle level with the final carriage of the train. Nobody on board
noticed. Nobody ever spent their train journey looking out the window at the sea
and sky when you could gawp at your phone or your tablet instead. Then he saw
him, a small boy whose mouth dropped open at the sight of this superman riding a
bike as fast as a speeding train. Gethin pedalled. He gasped. He wished he'd
shaved his legs, but even as the bike crossed the bridge, he knew he did not
want to see the back of that train, its end carriage disappearing towards High
Street Station while he turned right at the roundabout down towards the gower.
He would pedal to keep level with that train even if it killed him. Some things
were worth fighting for. See you this afternoon, Angie, said Daisy. She leaned
in to peck him on the cheek as he sat in his dressing gown over the Saturday
papers. Have you got anything planned for this morning? I'll have a potch about
the house, probably, said Gethin. I'll see you when I see you. Oh, said Daisy.
Righty-ho, then. As soon as he heard the car door slam, Gethin tore open his
dressing gown and stepped out of it, fully dressed. He waited for the sound of
Daisy pulling out of the drive before hurrying out and getting into the car.
There was one good thing about living in the cul-de-sac, after all. It made
following your wife to her secret assignation so much easier when there was only
one way out onto the main road. Phil had advised him to start making a list of
Daisy's bad points. Scientific research proves you can drop your loving feelings
for your ex by 18% if you focus on your feelings, he'd said during one of his
so-called pep talks. It also increases your feelings of sadness by 18%, but thus
by the by. It was hard, though. Look at her now, slowing down instead of
speeding up at the zebra crossing to let the brownies cross the road, indicating
for a good three seconds before turning. It made tailing her so easy. His heart
sank when he saw her indicator pipping and the car stopped to turn right down
towards the rugby club. He parked up on the side. There was a training session
on the field, men with thighs that could crack nuts doing shuttle runs while
someone shouted incomprehensible things at them through a megaphone. But there
was no sign of Daisy. A cycling club was using the concrete yard next to the
pitch. Children were wobbling up and down, around and around, on balance bikes
or scooters. There was only one cyclist who was just about good enough to ride a
bike with its pedals on, and even then the bike swayed precariously. As the kid
rode past where Gethin was standing, he could see it wasn't a child at all, but
his wife of 30 years. It was Daisy. She spotted him too, and as soon as she did,
she stopped pedalling, the bike tilted slowly to one side, and she fell off.
Gethin dashed over, so did one of the cycling coaches, one who matched Phil's
description of the skinny little guy who his wife had been seen hugging so
enthusiastically. What are you doing here? Daisy asked. I could say the same for
you, said Gethin. I might even ask, who's this? This is Claire, said Daisy,
getting up slowly. She's been giving me lessons. Lessons in what? Gethin's tones
were accusing. Hang on. Claire. Claire smiled at him, and seeing all was well,
disappeared. She was gammying, elfin, pixieish, and most definitely the person
Phil said was a skinny little guy. What are you doing here? Daisy repeated. Phil
said. Oh, I might have known Phil would be involved, said Daisy. Well, it's all
ruined now. You might as well come and see, but don't blame me when you haven't
got a surprise on the day. Daisy picked up her bike and wheeled it over to one
of the containers, Gethin scampering after her. It was Claire's idea, said Daisy
once they'd got inside. Inside the container, propped up in a bike stand all on
its own, shiny and new amidst the other battered, muddy and bruised bicycles,
was a brand new tandem. There was a red ribbon tied to its handlebars. She said
a tandem would be an even better way to do it, seeing as how I was doing so well
in the lessons. What do you mean? You can so ride a bike, everybody can.
Couldn't they? Didn't she do that triathlon back in 2016? No, she didn't. He'd
done that while she came out and joined him for the run and the swim, but never
the cycle. That was when she sprained her ankle. That was when she sprained her
ankle and kept blaming it all on Donald Trump. Well, I never got taught, not
until two months ago anyway. That's when I found out about this place. Didn't
think they'd let adult learners join in. You don't know shame until you've
fallen off your bike in front of the other eight-year-olds in your class, but
I've got there in the end. It took ages. Have you not wondered why I didn't go
with you on those cycling weekends? I thought it was because you didn't like
Phil. Well, there was that as well, but a tandem, well, there's only ever room
for two. She leaned in towards Gethin and whispered in his ear, Happy
Anniversary. a working-class Yorkshire woman who failed her 11-plus, but would
go on to become the first woman in Westminster to be appointed Speaker of the
House. Also this week, Motty, John Motsen, the voice of Match of the Day, for
almost 50 years, who had an obsession for football facts. Last word is in a
couple of minutes here on Radio 4. She was in her own world that she had created
herself. Way, way ahead of their time. For all this and more, open BBC Sounds,
click the Music tab and scroll to find Kate Bush's artist op-ed.