TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-09H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 candidates to replace Nicola Sturgeon as the first minister of Scotland. You're
listening to Today on BBC Radio 4. It's eight o'clock on Tuesday the 21st of
February. The headlines this morning. Opposing assessments of the war in Ukraine
will be made by Vladimir Putin and Joe Biden today, with the US president
calling it a battle between democracy and autocracy. Official figures show there
was a much bigger surplus in the government's finances than predicted last
month. And a senior NHS psychologist says online gambling has created a
significant public health crisis. The BBC News is read by Caroline Nichols. The
contrasting realities of the invasion of Ukraine will be laid bare by Joe Biden
and Vladimir Putin as both leaders give major speeches. The US president is in
Poland to meet NATO allies. In Moscow this morning, President Putin will deliver
his State of the Nation address. It was cancelled in December because of a
number of Russian setbacks in Ukraine. Our Russia editor Steve Rosenberg reports
from Moscow. It's almost exactly a year since Vladimir Putin ordered the full-
scale invasion of Ukraine. Russia's president will use this address to
Parliament to try to shore up domestic support for what he still calls the
Special Military Operation. It will be an opportunity for him to repeat, or
rebroadcast the Kremlin's false narrative, according to which Ukraine and the
West started this war and Russia is acting in self-defence. For the Kremlin
leader, the special operation has not gone at all according to plan. What was
supposed to have lasted a few days, at most a few weeks, is set to enter its
second year with no end in sight. As well as bringing misery to Ukraine, the
invasion has resulted in heavy casualties for the Russian military and hundreds
of thousands of Russian citizens have been drafted into the army. President
Biden arrived back in Poland last night after visiting Ukraine. He'll deliver a
speech in Warsaw and meet leaders of NATO countries in Eastern Europe. Here's
our North America editor, Sarah Smith. In his speech, President Biden will
describe the war in Ukraine as a battle between democracy and autocracy and
declare that after a year of fighting, it's democracy that has the upper hand,
as well as confirming his belief in the territorial integrity of Ukraine. The
President's surprise visit to Kiev yesterday, appearing alongside President
Zelensky, was designed to be a vivid, physical demonstration of his commitment
to continue supporting Ukraine, as he often says, for as long as it takes. But
some politicians, on the further extremes of both the left and the right in
America, are now expressing doubts about how long the US can afford to continue
supplying the Ukrainian defence forces and polls suggest public support is also
declining. The message Mr Biden wants to deliver on this trip is aimed as much
at an American audience at home as it is for the people of Poland and Ukraine.
China's Foreign Minister, Qin Gang, has said Beijing is deeply worried that the
war in Ukraine is in danger of spiralling out of control. A senior Chinese
diplomat is due to visit Moscow this week. China has also said it will publish a
plan for a political solution to the conflict. The Prime Minister of Estonia,
Kayakallis, has told this programme that the complete withdrawal of Russian
troops from Ukraine needs to happen. The worry is that every next step is
bolder. If you look back, Crimea, the reaction was weak and therefore it gives
strength to a dictator to move on because nothing really happened. You gained
popularity, you gained territories, you were better off. In an interview with
Ukrainecast on BBC Sounds, Melinda Simmons, the UK's ambassador in Kiev, said
the conflict was likely to last for some time. What's the number one thing I
would say to people who worry about how long this will go on? And I'm afraid my
answer to that is to hold our nerve. This isn't a short war. I wish it was, but
it isn't. And it means that we need to continue to support Ukrainians while they
make their progress and expect that they can push back to the extent that
negotiations in good faith can begin. The public finances were more than £5bn in
surplus in January. The figures from the Office for National Statistics defied
predictions from analysts. Here's our economics correspondent Andy Verity.
Outside of emergencies like the pandemic, January is normally a month when the
government's finances are in surplus as self-employed people pay the tax they
owe under self-assessment. This time, economists were expecting the finances
would instead show a deficit, with £8bn more flowing out of government coffers
than the tax rolling in. Instead, receipts from self-employed people of £21.9bn,
the highest since monthly records began 24 years ago, meant £5.4bn more flowing
into the exchequer than it spent. In the financial year to date, the public
sector borrowed £117bn, £31bn less than forecast by the Office for Budget
Responsibility. The interest on central government's debt was £6.7bn, the
highest amount in January since 1997, but the overall picture is of public
finances under much less pressure than either private sector economists or
official forecasters expected. HSBC has described 2022 as another good year with
a strong overall performance. It recorded pre-tax profits of £14.5bn, a drop of
7% on the year before, citing the lingering impact of Covid as well as the cost
of selling its French banking operation. But profits in the final quarter were
up 92% on the final three months of 2021. A second major search and rescue
operation is underway after another series of earthquakes hit southern Turkey
and northern Syria last night. At least three people are known to have died.
More than 200 others have been taken to hospital. The quakes earlier this month
killed almost 45,000 people. Our correspondent Anna Foster is in the Turkish
city of Adana and told us what it was like to experience the latest tremors. I
was sitting in the lobby of a hotel which was fortunately a sturdy and quite a
secure building, but really the shaking of the ground was very, very powerful.
You could see the light fittings start to swing back and forth. But I think the
most notable thing was the way people reacted because everything that they've
been through these last couple of weeks, the images that they've seen, there was
a real palpable sense of fear. People, they got up and they ran. The head of an
NHS clinic for gamblers in the north of England has said the opportunity to bet
online has created a significant public health crisis. Matt Gaskell says a new
strategy is needed to counter the messaging from the industry. The government is
preparing to publish the first proposals for major change in the gambling laws
since 2005. Our culture and media editor Katie Razzell reports. The last time
significant gambling laws were passed, the smartphone didn't exist. These days
there's instant access to online betting. Matt Gaskell, the consultant
psychologist at the NHS Northern Gambling Service in England, which treats
problem gamblers, says punters have been targeted with habit-forming products
online and is troubled that the messaging about gambling is controlled by the
industry itself. The BBC has been told the delayed white paper is imminent.
Among the proposals, the draft laws expected to force the gambling companies to
pay a levy to fund education, research and treatment. It's voluntary right now.
And to restrict how much can be bet in one go on certain online games. The
Betting and Gaming Council, which represents the sector, says the overwhelming
majority of the more than 22 million people who put a bet on each month do so
safely and responsibly. Downing Street has indicated that Rishi Sunak's focus in
negotiations with the European Union about post-Brexit trading arrangements is
safeguarding Northern Ireland's place in the UK. The Prime Minister is trying to
persuade sceptical Conservative MPs and the Democratic Unionist Party to support
changes to the protocol. Here's our political correspondent Damian Grammaticus.
In the past couple of days, Rishi Sunak's attempt to seal a new deal with the EU
has run into choppy political waters. It's thought the outline has been on the
Prime Minister's desk for some time. The aim is to improve the functioning of
the trade arrangements agreed for Northern Ireland after Brexit. Over the
weekend, the Democratic Unionists indicated they were unhappy about having to
follow trade rules set by the EU, over which Northern Ireland had no say. And
Tory critics of the Prime Minister's plan claim the breadth of opposition to it
within the Conservative Party cannot be ignored. Yesterday, Mr Sunak met some
Tory MPs to try to win them over. A Downing Street source told the BBC Mr
Sunak's central focus has been safeguarding Northern Ireland's place in the UK.
Testing of a four-day working week suggests it doesn't harm the performance of
companies and leaves staff feeling healthier and happier. 61 businesses across
the UK took part in the study over six months last year. It was organised by
researchers here and in the United States, along with the campaign group Four
Day Week Global. Almost all of the firms involved have decided to stick with the
shorter working week. One of them is the environmental consultancy Tyler Grange.
Its managing director is Simon Ursell. I'd be pretty, pretty silly to change it
now, wouldn't I? I've got a happier team, we're making more money, our clients
are happier. It's been pretty revolutionary and pretty wonderful. We are 22%
more productive. In four days, we produce 2% more than we used to in five, which
is pretty remarkable, I think. A meeting will be held tomorrow between the
British Medical Association and health officials to discuss the pay dispute,
which could see junior doctors in England go on strike next month. The health
secretary, Steve Barclay, won't be involved. A BMA source has said it's hoped
the meeting will lead to meaningful talks, which might then be enough to call
off the industrial action. Thank you, Caroline. It is coming up to ten past
eight. Some people ask what has changed since the invasion of Ukraine a year
ago. Come here to Warsaw and you'll find the answer. Today in the Polish
capital, leaders of countries occupied for decades by the Soviet Union,
countries which now relish their freedom, democracy and prosperity, countries
that fear they could be next, will meet with the President of the United States.
When President Biden speaks at Warsaw Castle, thousands are expected to line the
streets to listen as he declares that that war in Ukraine is in fact a war
between democracy and autocracy. Estonia is one of those countries now on the
front line. We'll hear from her prime minister in just a few minutes' time.
First, though, I've been to the Tapa military base in Estonia. 900 British
troops are deployed there. They train with challenger tanks to fight in the
snowy forests as well as in the streets. A reminder, they are not merely there
as a deterrent. They serve alongside French and Danish forces, part of what NATO
calls its enhanced forward presence. My name's Lieutenant Susanna Watts. I'm
currently a tank troop leader within the C squadron of the King's Royal Hussars.
Now here in the hangar we've got what? We've got 14 challenger 2s within each
squadron along with a whole array of support vehicles which allow us to be
combat effective for a prolonged period of time. And that means what operating
in this country? What would these tanks do in the event of a conflict? So in
Estonia the terrain's very flat with lots of wood blocks which is very different
from what we're used to training with. Historically we've trained over big
plains of open ground. So we work a lot in conjunction with the infantry and
also different forces in order to be most effective in this really close-knit
terrain. For years British troops who were deployed to Europe had no real belief
that they might one day have to fight. The Ukraine war has perhaps changed that.
The 900-odd troops who are here in Kamp Taper just outside Tallinn, the capital
of Estonia, are preparing, are training for the possibility of conflict. The
hope is they are a deterrent. They're a symbol of NATO's preparedness to defend
this country. The exercises they carry out in these challenger tanks are a
symbol though that they are prepared to fight. So I'm Sergeant Mark Baalbeck.
I'm a tank troop sergeant within C Squadron, King's Royal Hazards. For years I
think people who were deployed to Europe never thought they'd fight, never
thought they needed to be particularly ready to fight. Has the war in Ukraine
changed that mindset? Yeah, I would say so. I think it's put into perspective
the relevance, the importance of us to be ready at all times just to reassure
the people to say that we are ready, we're good at what we do and the vehicles
and equipment we've got are up to the job and we're good to go. I think the past
six months is something that we've been living and breathing and I'd like to
hope that even down to our most junior level they understand the importance of
just merely being here is achieving a huge amount on a diplomatic and political
scale. Well that is a short distance from the Estonian capital Tallinn. In the
capital I travelled to the Estonian government offices. Outside there is a
plaque, a memorial, a reminder of the leaders of Estonia slaughtered by what was
called the Communist Terror in the early 1940s. That country occupied not just
by the Soviet Union but also by the Nazis briefly as well. I went there to speak
in what's called the State Elders Room just along from the Prime Minister's
office to Kaia Kalas, the Prime Minister of Estonia seen as a leading hawk in
the EU and NATO. I asked her what she hoped to hear from President Biden today.
The message that we have heard many times and really want to hear again is that
our big allies are with us no matter what is happening. And so far it has been
so. It is when I go to schools and describe what NATO is all about, it's all
about when you have a school bully, you are weaker in your physical appearance
then the school bully doesn't bully you when you have big friends. And this is
how NATO works. This is how deterrence works. So it is very important for us
that the US states that this Article 5 in NATO is ironclad and our allies are
with us. That in other words they would come to your defence if Vladimir Putin
was to do to this country what he did to Ukraine. Yeah, but if we wouldn't be in
NATO we would be living through some really hard and dark times right now. But
we are and that's why we don't have a war here. We have peace and we can build
up our societies and do all the things related to this not to deal with the war.
But saying that the war has an effect on all of us. We feel it through
inflation, high energy prices. I mean Ukrainians feel it with the loss of lives.
You warned at the beginning of the war in Ukraine that if Russia was to do to
this country what she has done to Ukraine Estonia would be wiped off the map.
Does that threat still feel a real one to you? What we are seeing in Ukraine
that there is nothing much left if you go and liberate them. Therefore our
stance was that we have to be ready to protect and defend our country from the
first centimetre, from the first minute. And therefore I'm really, really
grateful that during the NATO Summit in Madrid we got very strong decisions and
we moved from deterrence posture to defence posture which means that we are not
waiting to be liberated but we are ready to defend the country from the first
minute. Back then, in fact a year ago, there were plenty of fellow EU leaders,
fellow NATO leaders saying this is never going to happen. Vladimir Putin is not
crazy, he will not invade another country in that way. Do you think they now
understand that they were wrong and you and your warnings were right? On the
21st of February, 24th of February last year, I heard, I saw many shocked
leaders. And I heard a lot that we should have listened to you, we were naive
towards Putin and Russia. And I heard that. And now we are one year into this
war and we hear again, you know, talks and things that, OK, let's draw the line
somewhere. And of course every war ends in peace and of course everybody knows
that war is bad and peace is good. But there's also a difference between peace
and peace. I mean, we are here in the state elders' room and if you look at
their dates of death, they were all killed except for one who escaped to Sweden
when the occupation started. Why I'm telling this is that while you had
prosperity and, you know, peace after the Second World War where you built up
your societies, well-being of people, we also had peace here. But the peace here
meant deportations, my own family was deported to Siberia. It meant really
erasing our elite, killing the elite, trying to erase our culture, trying to,
you know, erase our language altogether. So there is a difference and this is
what will happen on the occupied territories. As we look at these portraits and
each one has the date 1941 for the death of each of these state elders on the
wall, do you feel in a way and as you think of your own family's history that
the past has returned to haunt this country? You can't escape it. When we
regained our independence, when we fought our independence and freedom back, we
decided that we would be never alone again, never with our allies, never with
our friends. And that's why we have also tried to be present and necessary for
allies because if nobody knows about you, nobody knows when you're gone and
nobody misses you. So we have been gone for 50 years and we felt that we weren't
really missed, so we don't want that situation again. President Putin is about
to deliver his State of the Nation address. You want to see him defeated, you
want to see Russia defeated, and yet the end of the war will require him, won't
it? He is the only person in the end who will call off this war. One of the
reasons why the Western leaders thought that the war is not going to happen is
that because they looked at Putin and Russia through this democratic lens. But
in democracy, you are accountable for your actions because you have elections
and you have soldiers' mothers protesting and all of it. Russia doesn't have
that. In dictatorship, the dictator only cares for keeping the cronies around
him happy, keeping the army and the power structures happy so that you could
have the force, and also eliminating all the alternatives so that if the cronies
around you would look that, okay, this guy is dragging us all down, they have
nowhere to turn to because there's no alternative. This is what Putin has done.
I wouldn't talk about the regime change or anything. If you look at the history,
the question for us right now is how to really cut this cycle. And one of the
things that I've been talking about is accountability, accountability what the
Russians have done. Spell out your fear when you warn against peace at any
price. Is your concern that Russia might not occupy all of Ukraine, it might not
even bring down President Zelensky, but they might still win, win by denying
Ukraine a future as a European country, as a modern country, as perhaps a NATO
member? In NATO, we have preconditioned that you don't have any open conflicts.
So while you are waging a war against Ukraine, then so far when this war is
going on, we can't discuss the membership of NATO in terms of the conditions
that we have agreed. And therefore, I think that for the peace in the world,
actually all these kind of grey zones are really sources of instability. So
those people who say, look, let's find a middle way to reassure Russia, let's
find a middle way between Ukraine's membership of NATO and them being a client
state of Russia. You say there is no middle way. Ukraine must follow Estonia and
become a state in NATO. Is that right? I don't think so. There is a middle way,
actually. Russia and Putin hasn't changed his goals. I mean, not once. I mean,
he has been very clear about his goals. Now, you've just come from the big
security conference in Munich, and you heard other leaders like the president of
Brazil, for example, say we want you to concentrate on what worries us, on
inflation, on the cost of living, on climate change. We can't allow this war to
go on forever. What is your message to people like him and people listening to
this program and me think the same? Nobody wants this war to go on forever. I
mean, everybody wants this war to end. It is the way they have always operated.
First, you claim something that has never been yours. Second, you present
threats, ultimatums, you terrorize. And third, you don't give one inch in
negotiations, because there will always be people in the West who offer you
something. So in the end, you have something or one third or even one half of
something you didn't have before. The worry is that every next step is bolder.
If you look back, Crimea, they were ashamed that it's the Russian soldiers. You
know, they removed the tags and said that it's a little green man because they
were afraid of the reaction. But the reaction was weak. And therefore, it gives
strength to a dictator to move on because nothing really happened. You gained
popularity. You gained territories. You were better off. You know that Boris
Johnson announced the doubling of British troops in Estonia, and then they were
undoubled. They went home again. Is that a disappointment? We were grateful that
the troops were doubled here. And it was in the beginning also said that it's
temporary. You know, the question just was how temporary it is. I mean, how long
is temporary? So I hope that temporary couldn't end when the war is going on.
But I understand also the UK's arguments behind it. And for me, I mean, we are
now building the division sized troops together with Great Britain as our
framework country, which means that some of them are stationed in UK, but they
know that if necessary, they will come to help. So more if we could, but you
understand budgets are tight. Yeah, yeah. No, I understand. And also, I mean, we
are expanding our training facilities and all of this that is also needed to
practice. Prime Minister Kaikalas of Estonia, thank you very much for talking to
me. Thank you. in today's papers. Well, Patience Wheatcroft joins us on the
line. Baroness Wheatcroft, former editor of the Sunday Telegraph and Evan Harris
is here in the studio, former director of HACTOF, the campaign group for a free
and accountable press. Morning to you both. Morning. Good morning. Evan, what
are the issues for you? Well, the issues are the difference between the way that
the press and broadcasters, for example, are dealt with. And obviously we don't
know all the facts and I want to preface it with that. But Sky and ITN actually
reported live and since then on the complaints against them, their own alleged
failings. And they're regulated by Ofcom. So there will be accountability. Ofcom
don't have to wait for a complaint. They can investigate their conduct. The
newspapers have failed to report, generally speaking, the allegations against
them. Not a single front page other than The Guardian mentions the attack on the
media. The Mail edited out in text, it says, it said, relatives went on. They
again have taken it upon themselves to run stories about us. And then they don't
include to sell papers to increase their own profiles. Actually, it was profits
that was what the police said. And then they've also taken out, do the press and
other media channels and so-called professionals not know when to stop. And the
video of the press conference of the police on the Mail Online website leaves
out any criticism of the media. It goes straight from, you know, we're sorry
that this has happened to us to thanking people who help them privately. And
finally, newspapers are not regulated. They have voluntary self-regulation,
which is simply complaints handling like the Press Complaints Commission, IPSO.
It hasn't done any investigations in its whole seven, eight year existence. And
therefore, it's never issued any sanction or fine against newspapers. But on
this, there might well be indeed, there might already be complaints to IPSO
relating to exactly what you're saying or indeed to the coverage before. And
they will be dealt with. Well, they'll be dealt with as complaints handling. And
the history of this is even where the stacked against the complainant regulator,
which is not independent of the media, fines against a newspaper. All it gets,
all it can insist on is an inside page correction. I mean, it could go further.
But in the history of IPSO, there has never been a single front page correction
of a front page story. Queen backs Brexit. That was buried inside. And that
means there is no there's impunity, effectively. And we saw this with Grenfell.
We saw this with the Manchester Arena bombing. Every time there's a tragedy like
this, there is criticism of the newspapers and nothing happens. I've heard that
Francois Braverman and Yvette Cooper and Rishi Sunak have criticised the police.
Maybe they're right. Maybe they're wrong. Will we hear a politician get off
their knees to attack the press and the power of the press and their abuse of
ordinary people? I doubt it. Of course, you would be expected to say this given
your own history of your own experience, your own campaigning. But I'll come
back to you in just a moment. Patience, Wheatcroft. Can you see the point in
what? Can you see the point of what Evan Harris is saying? Absolutely. If the
story is about how the papers and the media generally behaved are true, and I
don't know, then I think there's every reason for people to be deeply upset and
perturbed. And it's now up to the regulator, Ipsos in this case, to demonstrate
that it really has teeth. As a former newspaper editor, I'd always hoped that my
reporters respected the people that they were dealing with. And in any situation
like the Nicola Bully case, if the family had said lay off, that they would have
absolutely run a mile. What I've read about this case, people have behaved very
badly, not least, of course, members of the public and social media. So it's
become the most extraordinary feeding frenzy. But I am worried that if the
regulator can't now show its teeth, and it can levy fines of up to a million
pounds, then the media will be looking at perhaps the call for government
intervention getting louder again. And that, I must say, Michelle, would really
frighten me. Because if ever we've needed a free press, it's when you're living
through a time with a government which is challenging human rights to the extent
it is, and trying to bring in the most draconian laws. We need a press and a
media that can be free to report. It's a system of self-regulation at the
moment, acknowledging the point that you're saying, rather than it being
government regulation of the press. I think you're saying that maybe this is a
key moment where should Ipsos then open their own investigation, rather than
react to complaints? Well, effectively, there's a complaint out there. I think
what they should be doing is going to the Bolli family and saying, do you wish
to make a formal complaint? They're a bereaved family. I mean, it's quite a
thing, isn't it, to expect them......to go through the police, and I think all
they need is a yes, because the complaint's already been made. It's been made to
the media. It's been made to the world in general. I find it appalling that the
newspapers involved edited the statement the way they did. Yes, but it's very
common. I agree with much of what you say, Lady Wheatcroft. But the problem is
Ofcom have the ability to self-start investigations, and the Leveson Inquiry
made recommendations that any proper regulator would a, be independent, and b,
be able not to have to float around trying to elicit a complaint from a bereaved
family. You can read what's in the papers, and the fundamental problem is that
we're not talking about freedom of the press. We're talking about freedom of
proprietors. No one is arguing for government regulation. The Leveson Inquiry
called for independent regulation. Nothing to do with Parliament, in fact,
argued there shouldn't be ministers or ex-ministers anywhere near it. The chair
of IPSO is an ex-Tory justice minister who, you know, goes to dinner with Rupert
Murdoch. It's hopeless. I don't think any victim could have confidence in the
puppet regulator, so-called regulator, that the press have. It's time that we
completed the Leveson exercise, completed the inquiry, and that our politicians
actually had the guts to speak up for the victims of this activity, instead of
parroting the lines that they want, that they think that the press proprietors
and the editors will hear. There's just one final point. There's one big
difference between the people on social media, who I condemn, and newspapers.
That's the editor. These purport to be edited, curated product. Therefore, they
can be regulated, and they should be regulated. It's hard to regulate a bloke in
his basement. I absolutely agree that the editors in this case do not all seem
to have behaved as they should. And I think it's the opportunity for Leveson,
not Leveson, sorry, for IPSO to demonstrate that it means business. And I do
agree with you, Pepin, that if it doesn't, then it genuinely is the last chance
saloon, but at a very worrying time. Patience Wheatcroft, Evan Harris, thank you
both very much. 29 minutes to 9, here's Rob with the sports news. Hello again,
Nick. Liverpool against Real Madrid at Anfield in the Champions League tonight,
a first leg tie. Just as well, this game is being played now, after two Premier
League wins for Liverpool, though not in January, when the club couldn't buy
three points, said manager Jurgen Klopp. Commentary on BBC 5 Live. While on 5
Live Sports Extra, you can follow England against Pakistan in the Women's T20
Cricket World Cup. Only heavy defeat will leave England facing holders Australia
in the semis. One o'clock start to that match. For the men, meanwhile, it's
instalment 12, starting on Thursday of the Stokesy and Baz show. Captain Ben
Stokes and head coach Brendan McCullum in charge as England's men prepare for
the second test against New Zealand in Wellington. We've been on the line, a
rather indifferent one, I'm afraid, to England's Olly Pope, part of that
currently solid top and middle order batting line-up. We've always had really
sort of skilled batters going the whole way down, but I think even those guys
coming in at the end, everyone's so clear on their role. I think Baz and Stokesy
have sort of really made even the bowlers feel like batters and they're putting
a lot of time into it. And I think the clarity of role is really, really helping
with that. And beyond, of course, all that, we know that big centuries are
always possible from, well, I suppose anyone in the top six or seven. Even in
the first thing, no one went on to get a big hundred. But I think if you can
have guys contributing the whole way down the order, it puts you in pretty good
stead going forward as well. And then hopefully one day we'll kick on and get
those big hundreds as well. Well, presumably the arrival beyond that of Harry
Brook, the re-emergence of Ben Duckett, the regular appearances of yourself, it
must mean that there's surely some fierce competition now, not only to break
into the current side, but also to hold your place. Yeah, a little bit of that.
But I think what Baz and Stokesy have done is they've really allowed guys to
have a good run. And I think that's the important thing. They sort of realised
the type of player they want in the team. If they do back you as a player,
they're going to give you that extended run, even if you do have a few low
scores, which as a batter, that can happen. So I think having that can really
sort of take the pressure off a little bit. And that's probably why that success
has sort of happened over the last 11 tests. Yes. And there's no fear that this
ultra-aggressive approach will suddenly come crashing down around your ears and
that the team will suddenly suffer a good old-fashioned collapse? I mean, we've
kind of said it as a group. We said, look, it might happen at some point, but
that's OK. We've won 10 out of 11 tests winning this way. We've won, obviously,
in Pakistan, now won in New Zealand as well. And we've played some seriously
good opponents too. So I think we can accept it if it does happen. Obviously,
we're going to try and avoid that. I think we've sort of made it pretty clear
that it's almost bigger than winning what we're trying to do to test cricket
now. I think the franchise leagues with T20s going on around the world, we want
to make sure that test cricket is still the most exciting thing to watch. So
that's part of what we're doing. But obviously, when it's not going well, it's
not that fun. So I think, yeah, it's a mixture of the two. But of course, you're
going to take winning ugly. We've not put in the perfect performances yet. So I
think that's the most exciting thing as well. Would you say that you're almost,
as it were, campaigning on behalf of test cricket as a team? Yeah, absolutely. I
think so. I think we're lucky enough in England that we get these amazing crowds
pretty much every game of the summer. We get a packed house. But there's some
countries where it's not at the forefront of a lot of the country's mind. So I
think that's what we're trying to do is we're trying to really get the whole
nation to potentially follow how we play in the long term, but also get people
wanting to tune in. And a couple of quick final questions for you. One more test
to go, of course, before the English summer. Is anyone allowed to talk about the
Ashes? Naturally, it's in the back of all of our minds. The Ashes is, that's the
pinnacle. It's what everyone wants to be a part of and everyone wants to get
their hands on the urn. We're not really talking about it. But of course, it's
going to be on people's minds. And it's just something to really look forward
to, to be honest. This summer, I think a home summer, it's got the potential to
be amazing and really entertaining like that 05 series, which is sort of what
made me fall in love with cricket. So I think that's just the prospect of that.
It's just really exciting. And what about you, finally? Are you allowing talk
about being the FEC, the future England captain? I think I'm just going to keep
focusing on my batting. I think, of course, naturally, I'm going to watch how
Stokesy goes about his stuff because he's been amazing so far and keep sort of
trying to develop my cricket brain as much as I can. But at the same time,
realize that I need to keep scoring my runs and keep on driving that forward and
making that number three spot my own. Yeah. And if that happens in the future,
great. If not, then I'm loving every minute of just batting three in this
England side. And what we've got going on is pretty awesome thing to be a part
of. Olly, it's the diplomatic answer I expected. Olly Pope, thank you very much.
Exactly. No other way. Cheers. Thank you. And here are the tips then. Market
Raisin, 315, number three, King of the West, Taunton, 330, number six, Amelia's
Dance. Thank you very much, Rob. And now to 9 o'clock and Professor Jim Al-
Khalili. Hello. This morning on The Life Scientific, I'm talking to a world
expert in cosmic dust. Hayley Gomez grew up on a council estate in Barry, South
Wales, and entered a world that was utterly alien to almost everyone she knew.
It's an inspiring personal story of succeeding against the odds and an eye-
opening introduction to our new infrared view of the universe. Do join me if you
can for a cosmic edition of The Life Scientific after the news at 9. Thanks,
Jim. Let's look at the weather. Today will be mainly cloudy with some rain in
the far north. Tonight, a band of rain moves south eastwards. Here in Warsaw,
people are hoping there will not be rain as the president, President Biden, will
be speaking to a crowd of thousands outside Warsaw Castle. You're listening to
Today on Radio 4 with Nick Robinson in Warsaw, Murshal Hussain in London, and
Caroline Nichols with the news. President Putin will give a speech in the next
hour updating Russians on the state of the conflict in Ukraine. The State of the
Nation address was due to take place in December, but it was cancelled because
of a series of military setbacks. President Biden will speak about the war
during a visit to the Polish capital, Warsaw. He will describe it as a battle
between democracy and autocracy and will say democracy has the upper hand.
China's Foreign Minister, Qin Gang, has said Beijing is deeply worried that the
fighting in Ukraine is in danger of spiralling out of control. Official figures
show the government recorded a surplus of more than £5 billion last month. This
was despite substantial spending on energy support schemes and one-off payments
to the EU. Economists had anticipated the government would need to borrow around
£8 billion to cover the gap between its income and its spending. The head of an
NHS clinic for gamblers in the north of England has warned the opportunity to
bet online has created a significant public health crisis. Ministers are
expected to publish plans soon for the first significant changes to gambling
laws since 2005. Thank you, Carolina. It is now 22 minutes to nine. It is 60
years since an American president declared Ich bin ein Berlin. President
Kennedy, of course it was. He went on to say that people who did not understand
what he called the great issue between the free world and the communist world
should come to Berlin. Today, thousands will gather on the streets again in
Europe to hear an American president. He will spell out the choice between what
he will call democracy and autocracy. This time, the venue, Warsaw, the
president, Joe Biden, a day after his historic visit to the Ukrainian capital,
Kiev. Like me, Sarah Smith is in Warsaw and will be at President Biden's speech
in Royal Palace Gardens this afternoon. Morning to you, Sarah. Are they
comparing that speech? Are they hoping others will compare that speech with the
speech that JFK made all those decades ago? Nobody has been so hubristic amongst
the White House team to actually directly draw our attention to that. But yes,
of course, they would be delighted with those kind of comparisons, not least
because President Biden will make a speech which similarly has a long term
vision for what the future of Europe as democracy confronts an autocratic
aggressor from the east. Yesterday's trip was, of course, very much about
demonstrating visibly that Joe Biden wants to send the message that the US will
stick with Ukraine for the long term, for as long as it takes, as he always
says. He's going to have a wider message today, speaking to more people around
the world, to Poland and to the rest of NATO, to the allies, celebrating the
unity that they've demonstrated so far, which he is convinced is not what
Vladimir Putin expected when he invaded Ukraine, and also making the point that
they do have the stamina and determination to remain united, regardless of
whether Vladimir Putin thinks that ultimately they will be weak and easily
divided. But he also wants to speak wider to Russia to send the message that the
US will, of course, carry on backing and arming Ukraine. But he'll talk also
about Russian war crimes and atrocities in Ukraine and demand that Russia be
held to account for that. And that's an important new message that we've been
hearing from the US. The vice president talked about it a couple of days ago,
and he's also going to be talking to the American public. Paul suggests that
they are growing slightly weary of this conflict and what it's costing America.
So he will lay out for Americans as well as for the rest of the world why it is
in their interests to continue to back Ukraine, not just because of the
principle of democracy and standing up to Russia's aggression, but about
defending a rules based world order, which he sees would be under threat if
Ukraine were to fall to Russia. Now, you and other reporters in the White House
pool were expecting to travel with him on Air Force One to Warsaw, to Poland.
They managed to keep it a secret from you, although, interestingly, chose not to
keep it a secret from the Kremlin. Yes, and there is some disgruntlement, shall
we say, the journalists who've just come off the same special 747 that's usually
used as Air Force One, but they only call it that when the president's on it. So
I actually have just landed in Warsaw for what was known as Special Air Mission
28. But they did tell us about informing Moscow several hours before they told
us that the president was coming. And, of course, they claim there were great
security concerns around this. But when we pressed them on it, why the president
would take a 10 hour train journey if the security was that much of an issue?
They said, well, the thing is, the Russians suck at dynamic targeting. In other
words, they're not capable of hitting a moving target, even a train. And yeah,
that's an official quote from the White House on background. The Russians suck
at hitting a moving target. And the secret code for this was that it was called
the Gulf Journey. Yes, yes. The journalists who were allowed to fly with the
president, a very small number of them, were told to look out for an email
telling them that they were going to be on a Gulf Journey, which, of course, I
mean, it all sounds terribly amusing and there have been jokes behind the scenes
about all of this. But, of course, I mean, it is deadly serious, both the
security implications behind this and the message from the trip. And what's
interesting when you travel behind the scenes and you're able to talk to
security officials, you do learn a little bit more about what they're thinking.
And I believe you're not going to hear much about China from the president
today, necessarily. But watch out later this week for what the US administration
starts saying. They are very worried that China is gearing up for an
intervention that they could be about to start providing Russia with lethal
assistance in this war. And expect soon to hear some very explicit warnings of
the consequences if China does get involved like that. Sarah Smith, our North
America editor. Thank you. The time is now 17 minutes to nine. Kate Forbes, the
Scottish government's finance secretary and a candidate to replace Nicola
Sturgeon, has lost support this morning from some of her senior colleagues at
Holyrood, including an MSP who nominated her and three Scottish government
ministers after she spoke last night about same-sex marriage and revealed she
would not have voted for the bill legalising it had she been in the Scottish
Parliament at that time in 2014. She is on the line now. Good morning. Good
morning. Can your campaign survive this? It can because we have a large party
membership, most of whom are not on Twitter. They are ultimately the voters and
they are as diverse as the Scottish people are. And ultimately, my leadership
campaign is based on competence, on vision, but also on a willingness to reach
out across Scotland and to ensure that we live in a pluralistic and tolerant
society where freedom of speech is a cornerstone. You are in a battle, though,
to lead a progressive party, one with a young base. How can you command enough
support across that party and have authority after this? Well, of course, I am
one of the youngest MSPs myself. So in terms of reaching out to that youth
voice, I think, again, our approach to doing that means that we need to be
clear, honest and upfront. I think people long for straight answers to straight
questions. But we also need to recognise that in a diverse society, my approach
is to defend to the hilt your right to live and love free of harassment and fear
in the hope that you would afford me the same right as a person of faith. And
surely that's what progressive values are all about. But somehow it's not
mutually exclusive for me to defend your right whilst you defend mine. OK, so if
that vote, the one that happened in 2014, was happening today, if same sex
marriage had not yet been legalised in Scotland, how would you vote on that
issue today? Well, I've already answered that question yesterday. I'll answer it
again just now. But, you know, we have always viewed marriage as a question of
conscience. And in that regard, if you look at Angela Merkel, Angela Merkel is a
case in point. She voted against equal marriage according to her conscience
whilst chancellor. But it was under her leadership that the vote was held and it
was under her leadership that the vote was implemented. So the answer to my
question about how you would vote on it today is that you would not be able to
vote for same sex marriage today. Sorry, I think that's shocking. You would not
be able to vote for same sex marriage if that vote was happening today. As a
question of conscience, I would have voted alongside mainstream Christian
teaching that marriage is between a man and a woman. But equal marriage is a
legal right today. I am a servant of democracy. I'm not a dictator. And I would
respect and defend that democratic choice. If I could just make one last point.
If we're seeing, as I think we hear in the public discourse, that high public
office is barred to people of faith or only to people with the right kind of
faith or only to people with the sort of socially accepted faith, then we're
moving into very dangerous days in Scotland, considering some of the positions
that I have outlined are common across all major faiths, including Islam,
Christianity and Judaism. It is generally the case, isn't it, that to command
support in your own party, you do need to be largely in tune with the views of
that membership or you can run into difficulty. I want to put to you what Tim
Farron said when he was stepping down as leader of the Liberal Democrats in
2017. He said to be a political leader, especially of a progressive liberal
party, and to live as a committed Christian, to hold faithfully to the Bible's
teaching, for him felt impossible. You're saying you could reconcile it. Well,
I'm saying that I have been able to reconcile it over the last six years of
serving in frontline politics and indeed serving in one of the most significant
roles in government as finance and economy secretary. But ultimately, this is an
election. Ultimately, it will be the SNP members that vote. And whilst obviously
we're quite focused on a storm that is gathering in the Twittersphere, the
diversity of SNP members reflects the diversity of the Scottish population. And
if they choose to, through this democratic process, to vote for me because they
too believe in a pluralistic and tolerant society, then that would mean that I
would be proposed as a leader and it would be my job to ensure that I built a
team around me of competent and talented individuals to govern Scotland in a way
that reflects the wishes of the people of Scotland. It's not all in the
Twittersphere. There are, as I said, people who had supported you who've
withdrawn their support this morning, including an MSP who nominated you. On
independence, how do you believe it can be achieved? So I think there's three
elements to this. The first is that we need to reset the whole approach. We need
to ensure that we are speaking to people across the SNP, across the Yes movement
and dare I say it, controversial, also talking to people who haven't yet been
persuaded of independence. I think to date, decisions about strategy and the
approach have been taken by too few people in the SNP and we need to widen that
out further. I think the second thing is that we need to get to grip with the
issues that really matter. I have been serving as finance and economy secretary.
We have absolutely, absolutely got to deliver a step change in our economic
handling to ensure that we have a growing economy, we have economic prosperity,
that we have secure, well-paid employment. And I think when people see that and
they see competent government, they will be more persuaded. But just when you
say a reset and putting it at the heart, you have said putting it at the heart,
independence at the heart of the next election. Does that mean it would be a
central part of the manifesto? Nicola Sturgeon had at one point talked about it
being a one issue campaign at the next general election. Yes, so my approach is
that it would be front and centre and we would use that election to put pressure
on the UK government. I would hope that people in Scotland would vote again for
the SNP, knowing that independence is front and centre of that manifesto. And
that would demonstrate, I think it's demonstrating the weight of support that
will push the UK government's hand. They are standing in the way of democracy,
but they think they can get away with it. And we need to build that support,
make the case and ensure that it's quite clear that there is that weight of
support for independence. Kate Forbes, thank you very much. It's now 10 to 9.
The last time Parliament regulated the gambling industry, the smartphone had yet
to be invented and we had not seen the explosion of online gambling. Well, new
proposals to reform gambling are due to be published in a white paper by the
government soon. Ministers are therefore subject to intense lobbying by a hugely
profitable industry and by those who've watched lives being destroyed by
gambling. John Myers' son Ryan killed himself after becoming addicted to
gambling. John says he wants that white paper to change the rules on
advertising. TV adverts that show everybody happy, everybody raving, you know,
groups of men and women going out, having a great time, having a great laugh and
nobody ever loses. Let's show the downside like they did with the tobacco
adverts, like they did with the alcohol. Let's show the families who are
devastated by this terrible addiction. Listening to that, our Culture and Media
editor Katie Rezell. Morning to you, Katie. Do you think he's likely to get what
he wants? Morning, Nick. Well, it's a question, isn't it? I mean, as you have
probably reported many times, you know, this white paper has been often delayed
and is long awaited. So we you know, what we think is that it's going to come
out in the next couple of weeks. That's what I've been told. So imminent is the
word that's being used. As you said, Gambling Act predated the smartphone. So
it's a review of the Gambling Act of 2005. So once the smartphone came in, it
was obviously a game changer. You can bet wherever, whenever now. And the laws
in Great Britain just haven't caught up with that changed world. So, you know,
people say people like John Myers there who you just heard from, you know, his
son, Ryan, was one of Britain's several hundred thousand problem gamblers. And
reformers say they don't want to stamp out betting, but they do want to protect
people who are susceptible to gambling addiction. So, you know, for example,
when it comes to football, you know, there are eight Premier League clubs
sponsored by a gambling company. Fans are bombarded with messaging. You know,
it's on the shirts, it's in the stadiums. You can bet in real time. You can bet
on who's going to score the next goal, when it will be, how many minutes of
extra time, you know, and it goes on. So it feels like football has normalized
gambling, they say. And they claim, reformers, that it's targeted the most
vulnerable people. So there's been, as you said, a lot of lobbying going on.
Things have been in, things have been out in terms of this white paper, as I
understand it. Because, you know, MPs and peers are on both sides of the
argument, on all sides of the argument, as well as charities, clinicians, who
obviously want changes and want tighter regulations. I mean, when it comes to
advertising, they are looking at tightening it up. And that will be what, in a
sense, John Myers will be happy if he gets that. Katie Razzell, our Culture and
Media Editor. Thank you very much indeed. And the time is now seven minutes to
nine. When President Biden speaks here in Warsaw, at Warsaw Council, thousands
will line the streets to watch the speech in person on huge screens that have
been erected on the streets here. It would be a significant moment, even if he
had not just been to Kiev, even if we were not on the eve of the anniversary of
the invasion of Ukraine. But just what does it mean to Poles who, like
Ukrainians, like others, were occupied by the Soviet Union for decades and now
celebrate freedom and democracy? We're joined here in Warsaw by Pavel Pavlovsky,
chairman of the Foundation Council, at a think tank called the War Store
Institute. And also by Jenny Hill, our Berlin correspondent, who's covering the
speech and Biden's talks with East European countries here in Warsaw. Jenny, you
know this city well. It's going to be quite a moment. I think so. And I think
there is a real sense of excitement out there. You know, everyone I've met
telling me he's coming, he's coming. You know, it doesn't carry quite the same
potent symbolism as his visit yesterday to Kiev, of course. But nevertheless,
this carries a big significance for a lot of people here. And I think that's
partially because it's interpreted by many as a recognition of the shifting
centre of gravity within Europe. Poland is increasingly an important ally for
the US as a result of this war, as we know. But it's also about reassurance for
people here. You know, they've got a war in effect on their doorstep. They've
been telling the world for years Russia is a threat. No one really listened. Now
they were proven right. And I think that they want those kind of security
guarantees from the US, not just for Poland itself, but for Ukraine. And that's
something which will be coming up as a subject when President Biden meets
President Duda later on. There will be countries in the meeting today, nine
leaders who are meeting President Biden, who say we quite like what Ukraine's
got in terms of their degree of support. We haven't got it for the potential
invasion of our country. Yes. And that, I think, is going to be very difficult
for President Biden. There's a lot of discussion around whether the US should be
offering, for example, some kind of binding guarantee similar to what it has
with Israel, that it offers some kind of security assurance to Ukraine. As you
say, if he goes ahead and does that, then those other countries may very well be
asking for that, too. He's well aware of that. Paweł Pawłowski, forgive my
stumbling over your name a little bit earlier on. What do you think that the
politicians here in Warsaw want to hear from the president? I believe that we
are waiting for the recognition of the Polish huge support for Ukraine that was
vital to this country on different levels. Because that's the political level,
the diplomatic level. Our government, our president were extremely actively
supporting Ukraine in the European Union, in NATO. And I think that's very
important for the governing party. That's also very important for the Polish
people, people who themselves supported enormously Ukrainian refugees. And we're
talking here about millions of people, over 9 million Ukrainian refugees crossed
the Polish border. Of course, not all of them are staying here, but still that's
more than 3 million people. And it was worth 1% of Polish GDP to support them
this last year. So that's an enormous support and a huge effort of the whole
country. When you talk of the threat coming from Russia, people might say, well,
hold on, Poland's in the EU, Poland's in NATO, unlike Ukraine, for example. It's
a very different threat here, isn't it, from the one that was experienced in
Ukraine? Yes, surely that's different. But, you know, not so long time ago, and
though there are only few people who are now remembering it, but in 1939, there
was a huge question, is it worth to die for Gdansk? And of course, NATO is
working in a different way, but it's still remembered here that, you know, you
may have the guarantees, but what will happen really, we'll see. That's the
first thing. The second thing is that, well, we don't know what type of actions
Russia may take here. It might not be directly the military invasion, you know,
there are different sorts of active measures that Russia wants to practice in
Central and Eastern Europe. Or try to shape the politics here, for example,
sponsoring Russian-backed parties. Russian-backed parties, yes, I think that,
you know, Poland is so sceptical about Russia that it's impossible to have an
openly pro-Russian party here. But they are supporting radicals both on the left
and on the right. But not every leader, Jenny, in Eastern Europe has been as
clear as the Estonian Prime Minister I spoke to just a few minutes ago on the
programme. Orban of Hungary, for example, said, time to give some territory up,
time to talk. Yes, indeed, and that is no doubt going to be problematic and
something which I suppose will be part of the discussions today. That is why
President Duda and indeed the other leaders who he'll meet, President Biden,
will be trying to be very clear. And that's why I think, you know,
overwhelmingly here we're seeing the message of please keep sending more weapons
to Ukraine. You know, just around the corner, there's a massive sign on the
wall. President Biden's motorcade must be driving past it at some point saying,
please send F-16s. So that I think is going to be more the focus. And I think
the voices of those like Mr. Orban will probably be drowned out amongst amounts
that. Jenny Hill, our Berlin correspondent, Pavel Pavlovsky. We are making
changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third party services and
platforms. And the BBC stream you are currently listening to will stop working
by mid 2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing
this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or
mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds. They will be telling
their grandchildren about what they remember the last time a US president spoke
to the BBC.