TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-05H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Chetzky with the power of my mind. This is the BBC World Service, the world's
radio station. BBC World Service, this is Rital A Shah with the real story. One
topic, one hour every week. And this week, an earthquake in Turkey and northern
Syria has taken tens of thousands of lives and left hundreds of thousands
homeless. In Turkey, buildings have collapsed despite regulations that should
have made them quake-proof. The Turkish government's response has been
criticised for being slow and patchy. But will the disaster response dent
President Erdogan's grip on power? An election later this year is a chance to
test public opinion. Richard Tayyip Erdogan's been in office as Prime Minister
or President since 2003, accruing power and defeating a coup. His supporters
point to the growth and development enjoyed by the country. But critics say he's
an autocrat who's grown the economy at the expense of democracy and they point
to the high inflation and collapsing currency of more recent years. So what is
President Erdogan's future after the earthquake? That's the real story from the
BBC, after the news. Hello, I'm David Harper with the BBC News. Restrictions on
the movement of vehicles are in force in Nigeria, where elections begin in a few
hours. The legislative and presidential vote comes at a time of heightened
insecurity in Nigeria, with insurgency in the northeast rising crime and
shortages of cash and fuel. Here's our West Africa correspondent, Mayeni Jones.
There's nervous anticipation on the streets of Lagos, Nigeria's commercial hub.
On the eve of the elections, the city's infamous traffic evaporated, as many
headed back to their home states to vote. There are 18 candidates in the
presidential race. The free front-runners are the ruling parties Boletinubu,
former Vice President Atikwa Bubakar and the surprise story of the campaign,
Peter Orby. He's offered an unprecedented further alternative for those,
especially young people, who are frustrated with the two parties who run the
country for the past 24 years. Whoever wins will have to tackle rising
insecurity and a failing economy. Russia is facing another round of Western
sanctions a year after launching its invasion of Ukraine. The European Union
announced a tenth set of measures, targeting those spreading propaganda in
support of Moscow or delivering drones. The agreement was announced by the
Swedish Prime Minister Ulf Krist√∂schen, whose country currently holds the EU
Council presidency. Russia has reminded us of the barbarism of war. There's a
path to freedom and democracy, but there's also a path away from freedom and
democracy. And faced with that choice, neutrality is no option. Therefore,
Sweden and the European Union will act with determination to support Ukraine and
for a Ukrainian victory. Earlier, the United States, Canada and Britain imposed
further restrictions. The number of people killed in the catastrophic
earthquakes that hit Turkey and northern Syria this month has passed 50,000.
Most are in Turkey. The figure for Syria is just under 6,000. Canada's Prime
Minister Justin Trudeau has announced an increase in financial aid for those
affected. Canadians have been heartbroken by the images they've seen and they
want to help. So today we announced that Canada will match $10 million in
donations raised by the Humanitarian Coalition and its members. This is in
addition to our commitment to match donations to the Canadian Red Cross,
earthquake in Turkey and Syria appeal. Police in Tunisia have arrested another
critic of President Khais Saeed, the latest to be detained as a lawyer, Khazi
Shahashi, who previously led a political party. He discovered that he was wanted
by the authorities when he went to see clients who faced charges of conspiring
against state security. More than a dozen people, including politicians, two
judges and the head of an independent radio station, have been detained this
month. This week Mr Shahashi accused Mr Saeed of presiding over injustice in
Tunisia. BBC News. A first group of suspected gang members in El Salvador has
been moved to a huge new prison that is the centrepiece of President Nayib
Boukele's self-declared war on crime. Video tweeted by the president showed the
first 2,000 inmates, tattooed and barefoot, left sitting on the floor with their
hands behind their shaven heads. The jail will eventually hold more than 40,000
people. Anthony Albanese will shortly become the first serving Australian Prime
Minister to march in the gay and lesbian Mardi Gras in Sydney, one of the
world's largest such events. Mr Albanese says he's committed to removing
inequality and celebrating diversity. His critics accuse him of pandering to a
minority that's hijacking Australia's social agenda. President Biden has
defended his administration's response to a train derailment in the state of
Ohio, which caused a major chemical spill and a political row. The crash, three
weeks ago, prompted the evacuation of the town of East Palestine. Mr Biden had
been criticised for not visiting the site while finding time to go to Ukraine,
but he told reporters that members of his team were there within two hours of
the crash and he was in touch with local officials and monitoring events
closely. Researchers have said toxic air pollutants at the site could pose long-
term health risks. It's snowing in Southern California, with the Los Angeles
area braced for its first blizzard since 1989. Snowflakes and sleets swirled
around the Hollywood sign in the mountains behind Los Angeles, as David Willis
explains. Normally by this time of year, Los Angeles is done with winter and you
can see the Hollywood sign from miles around, but today it is blanketed by a
wall of fog and dense and very heavy rain that's expected to continue over the
weekend. David Willis reporting from Los Angeles. And live from London, that's
the latest BBC News. This is the real story from the BBC. I'm Ritala Shah with
your weekly deep dive into a story that's making news and changing lives. And
this week, earthquakes bring death and destruction to a large swathe of Turkey
and Syria. We begin in Turkey and Northern Syria, where in the early hours of
the morning, a series of powerful earthquakes have caused widespread damage and
killed almost 1,500 people. My two floors building was going right and left and
right and left and everything was falling. I immediately went to my sleeping
children and I could do nothing actually. I just, I was waiting and actually for
my death. More than 20 million people are now said to have been affected by the
earthquakes. The number of confirmed dead has risen to over 33,000 people,
although even today, survivors were still being pulled from the rubbles of
collapsed buildings. The earthquake struck in the early hours of Monday the 6th
of February. Most people were fast asleep. Tens of thousands have died, with
many more still unaccounted for. For those trapped under the rubble, rescue
comes too late or not at all. He was under the rubble for the last 48 hours and
he was alive until the very last minute that we actually rescued him. And we
were just so late, too late. The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan,
insists his government is doing everything it can. All state institutions are
working on the earthquake at the moment. On the first day, we experienced some
issues, but then on the second day, and today, the situation has been taken
under control. We shall never allow our citizens to be left out on the streets.
I'm asking our people not to give the provocateurs an opportunity and only pay
attention to the statements coming from the disaster management authority. Today
is a time of unity and solidarity. But as the death toll rises, is that unity
fraying? How efficient and effective has the government's response been? There
are suggestions politics got in the way of practicalities, and there's
widespread criticism of President Erdogan's relaxation of building regulations,
something the Turkish government seems to reject. These are cities built on
earthquake faults. You should have never built these cities on these faults. And
that is what I think the major problem, because you can have any building code
you like, but if it's a killer quake, I mean, that building is going to
collapse. So could Turkey's response to the earthquake have been better? With
elections on the horizon and an economy in trouble, will the shock of this
earthquake loosen President Erdogan's grip on power? In the aftermath of one of
Turkey's deadliest earthquakes, what does the future hold for President Erdogan?
The human cost of the earthquake has been broadcast around the world, and it's
made for harrowing pictures. The loss of life, the devastation of homes and
livelihoods, all of that is something that many of us have watched and wept
over. It has been difficult and terrible. And for the people who are suffering,
those difficulties continue. But on this week's Real Story, I want to delve into
the backdrop and the consequences of this terrible disaster, both political and
practical. Let's meet the panel who will help us to do that. Sinan Algen is a
former Turkish diplomat and director of the Center for Economics and Foreign
Policy Studies. That's an independent think tank based in Istanbul. He joins me
from Ankara. Welcome to the Real Story, Sinan Algen. You're speaking to me from
Turkey. It was just after 4am local time when the first earthquake struck. Where
were you when you first heard about it? I was in Ankara. I got up at like 7am in
the morning and then there was already news about the earthquake. At the time we
knew the magnitude, but we didn't really know about the size of the destruction.
And then when the second large earthquake happened, that we felt in Ankara. We
didn't feel the first one, but the second one we did. Was that the moment when
you realized that perhaps this was an enormous tragedy? Yes, but also I've
experienced the 99 earthquake at the time I was in Istanbul. And we knew from
that experience that the early numbers of casualties wouldn't give us the true
picture of the size of calamity. And this was like that then. It was
unfortunately like that now as well. To this day, the numbers are rising,
unfortunately. The numbers are indeed rising and the human tragedy, the human
toll is enormous. Let's meet our next panellist. Tariq Oghuzlu is Professor of
Political Science and International Relations at Istanbul, Aiden University. He
joins me from Istanbul. Welcome to the Real Story, Tariq. You were in Istanbul
when the earthquake struck. How did you learn about it? I was in Istanbul.
Actually, at that time I was sleeping. I got up at 8am in the morning and my
wife told me that we had a very important earthquake in the Karharma Mirage
region. We just toured the TV programs and got shocked by the scope and degree
of the calamities. We were planning to have some debates at the university
concerning how we are going to structure the new academic term. When we came to
our offices, we sat together with our colleagues and began actually discussing
the next academic program. But we couldn't do that. We couldn't go further on
that. We were really lost because none of us had expected that the ultimate
outcome of this earthquake would be this decisive. You couldn't concentrate, I
can imagine, because it was huge. It was huge. Difficult news to digest. Let's
meet our third panellist, Isla Jean-Yakli, is a freelance journalist who's been
covering the earthquake for the Financial Times newspaper. She's been living in
Turkey for two decades and is based in Istanbul. Welcome to the Real Story,
Isla. For you, when and how did you learn about the earthquake? I was actually
outside of Turkey. I was visiting my family in the United States and I noticed
at about 7 p.m. that my WhatsApp was lighting up. Groups that I'm a member of,
journalist groups and others, were uncharacteristically for that hour of the
day, were sharing initial reports about the earthquake. I did hear about it
quite soon after it happened. Because Turkey is covered quite unfortunately in
fault lines, tectonic shifts of much smaller magnitude are pretty regular
occurrence. So it wasn't until the interior minister spoke live on television
and said that Turkey would accept international aid that I realized it had to be
quite severe because that was such a dramatic thing for him to do at a very
early stage. So I started writing about the earthquake from Chicago. Really
interesting. Well, I want to begin actually with what you've alluded to there,
that is Turkey's location. It lies on two geological fault lines. Earthquake
building codes actually date back more than 80 years. But last Monday's double
earthquake was far more intense than anything that's been seen since 1939. The
first quake registered a magnitude of 7.8. That was at 4.17 in the morning local
time, followed by another of 7.5, which was dozens of kilometers away. So why
has the impact of this earthquake been so severe? And could any of the
devastation have been avoided? Ilan Kelman is professor of disasters and health
at University College London. Just how severe was this earthquake from a
geological point of view? In geological terms and seismic terms, it was
definitely one which would be felt. It was very high magnitude. It was shallow.
The ground is going to move. But it's also not that unusual. In fact, this area
of Turkey in Syria experienced almost exactly the same magnitude and intensity
of earthquake in 1939. And because the fault had been mapped, we knew it was
going to happen. So when we know that there is a hazard there, when we know that
an environment can produce this sort of event, but we choose not to deal with
it, then we get the disaster. So you talk about not natural disasters, but
natural hazards. What's the difference? So this is exactly why we try and avoid
the phrase natural disaster. The difference is that the hazard comes from
nature. An earthquake is perfectly typical. They happen and they should happen
and we know they happen. But the disaster is how we build our infrastructure,
which means it is our choices over the long term. The disaster is our choices,
not nature's choices. Once something like this has happened, then, how important
is the response in the aftermath? We would much prefer to prevent the
devastation, but unfortunately it does happen and it did happen. This means that
we need to be ready for immediate response. We can save so many lives if we are
prepared for what could happen. This means having people trained in the area,
having the equipment and being ready to go immediately. In this case,
unfortunately, because of long term issues of conflict and corruption and
marginalization, people did not have the opportunity to be ready for themselves.
So we had to bring in national and international teams with the training and the
equipment that takes time. And very sadly, over 90% of people after earthquakes
are pulled out of rubble by locals using no more than their hands and shovels.
By the time the heavy equipment is on site, it's too late for the vast majority
of people who could have been saved. But as I understand it, there is a very
high level of national disaster training in Turkey. Turkey is actually a leader
in the world and their researcher and rescue team is one of the best in the
world. There were political issues in terms of getting them on site and also
Turkey is a big country. So there were not many people or much equipment based
in the area which was shaken by the earthquake. This is the importance of
ensuring that as many people as possible in the area know what to do and are
trained and ready to go with the equipment. Because otherwise, even if it's a
two hour flight away, they have to be mobilized, the transport links have to be
up, the airport has to be ready, and people have to be willing to go into a
different area than they live. Is there an example of another country in the
world which is prone to earthquakes but you would say has taken on board the
kind of mitigation that you're describing? What we've seen is that Japan and the
West Coast of the US are very good examples of experiencing large earthquakes
but being able to avoid major earthquake disasters. Japan has had earthquakes
which are five to ten times more powerful than what we saw in Turkey and Syria
with almost no deaths from the earthquakes. California and Seattle in particular
have had a lot of major shakings but no major disaster recently. Even when high
rises are swaying back and forth in huge shaking, they do not need to collapse
if they are engineered properly and therefore the hundreds of people in those
buildings, their lives are safe. Ilhan Kelman, Professor of Disasters at UCL.
Professor Kelman is clear, Turkey is prone to earthquakes and should have been
well prepared. Sinan Ogun is also not the first time the country has been
blindsided by a major earthquake. In 1999, the government was caught off guard
in an earthquake that killed more than 17,000 people. Do you think the lessons
of that quake were learned? Yes, there were some lessons that were learned and
then some of these lessons were unlearned. I think that's the best way to
describe the situation because on the one hand, when we look at the lessons
learned from the 1999 earthquake, one big area of progress has been in terms of
the building regulations. Since 1999, Turkey has greatly overhauled its building
regulations in order to prevent exactly the tragedy, the calamity that happened
with this earthquake. That was the part of the lesson learned. The lesson
unlearned is that again, after the 1999 earthquake, the government established a
special tax called the earthquake relief tax. That revenue was to be exclusively
used to build more resilient cities, to transform the city infrastructure and
the buildings, and that has not been done. At least it has not been done to the
scale that it was required. As a result of which, Turkey was caught one more
time with a stock of building that was not resilient. That's the tragedy because
ultimately, yes, earthquakes will happen. Ila-Jean, Ila-Jean, if I can bring you
in. If there were these extensive building codes, I know it's something that
you've looked at. How do you think they came to be ignored? That's one of the
most important questions that we're struggling with. The regulations were on the
books. There was an extensive bureaucracy, usually at the local level, that was
to issue construction permits and licenses, conduct inspections, both during the
period of building, but also after a building went up. What we're learning now
is that buildings that had been approved are also among those that came down.
There are systemic problems that we're seeing now. It has a lot to do, I think,
with the fact that there's been unsafe buildings for some time, even before the
1999 earthquake, but the numbers are so vast. By some estimates, half of the
housing stock in Turkey isn't safe. When you're trying to overhaul or
rehabilitate that much building, it's just a huge, huge task. Dr. Tarek Oguzlu,
do you think the government should take the blame for having ignored its own
building codes? I think it is an open-ended question. That's not really easy to
answer and say that the main culprit, the main responsible party in this
earthquake is the government. If we had another political party ruling the
country, I think we would have experienced similar the same results. But I think
there are two significant reasons that might successfully account for why we
have this degree of calamity. On the one hand, the people are not putting strong
pressure and claims on the political leaders in such a way to push them to pay
the way for constructing buildings in a much more human way, much more efficient
way, resilient way. And on the other hand, the government itself is putting so
much analysis on the idea that Turkish economy is very much on the construction
sector. If you put construction sector at the center of Turkish economy, growth
and development, this is the outcome we are supposed to have. And that's why we
had this experience. And we'll talk about the economy some more, but Sinan
Algen, in a sense, the implication of that is people have enjoyed this
construction boom. Therefore, arguably, if the building codes were dodged, then
sort of the public is to blame. Well, in that sense, Turkey has a social
contract that needs to be revised. Now, there are other countries in the world
like Japan or Taiwan that experience even bigger earthquakes. But their social
contract has allowed for a governance that protects them from the destructive
impact of these earthquakes. Well, let's just hear a bit of President Erdogan
there, because I mean, he insists it was the scale and the location of the
earthquake instead of the buildings themselves that led it to being so
catastrophic. The disaster that occurred in an area larger than many countries'
territorial integrity happened closer to the surface, seven kilometers, compared
to other earthquakes in history. And this increased the destructive impact,
bringing an energy equal to hundreds of powerful atomic bombs. Most of the
biggest earthquakes in the world occur in oceans and affect areas of dry land.
But the earthquakes in Kahraman, Marash happened directly under residential
areas. Ayla, do you think that the public will accept that explanation? There is
some truth to the fact that the just the sheer expanse of territory that was
affected was always going to complicate the response. But some of the delays
were so long and so severe that it doesn't go far enough in explaining it. I was
in one province that was especially hard hit, Hatai, and three, four days had
passed before rescue teams were able to reach that area. So that's an extreme
amount of time. Do you think that there are some suggestions that it was the
centralization of the response and disaster agencies that may have made them
slower to respond? I do. I think that that is one of the things that we're
seeing here, that there really needed to be much more localization. There isn't
too many good reasons why you can't have a kind of warehouse in every province
that has an active fault line where tents are kept, for instance, and basic
relief supplies and rescue equipment are kept. And there's also a speculation
that even rivalries between some institutions might have prevented more aid from
getting there sooner. We saw some examples of that between the response from
opposition controlled municipalities sending firefighters and rescue workers and
how they had trouble getting their trucks through or the right permission to go
in and to help at a site where a building had come down. So there does seem to
be an issue here over the centralization of both power and equipment and
supplies and all of it. Tarika Ghuzlu, do you recognize that? I am of the same
view, actually, to some degree. But I should also make it very clear that
President Erdogan is also referring to a very important factor. The area was
really so huge, and no one expected these two decisive earthquakes to take place
in a very short period of time consecutively. And as the Minister of Interior,
Surya Mansoulou, had underlined in one of his speeches that they had done all
kind of contingency planning for Istanbul. So even the government was quite
unaware of how such kind of an earthquake might cause huge consequences in
Karaman, Maras or Hatai region. Even there was a problem with contingency
planning because the government and the people were expecting that we would have
soon an earthquake in Istanbul or Marmarah region. I think that the government
authorities, just because of the centralization dynamics in public
administration and just because of short-term political considerations, have
ignored the councils and scientific advice of many experts on this issue and
many scientific people, geologists, seismic experts have been warning the
government to take up all kind of precautions much before we end up with such
kind of coefficient. But for political motivations, I think these warnings have
been underestimated or ignored. And briefly, if I can ask you to respond to a
point that Sinan made, there was this tax that was introduced after the 1999
earthquake. People talk about billions of dollars worth of money having been
collected. Where do you think that money has gone? I think we have been going
through a very problematic situation concerning the Turkish economy for the last
six years since we shifted to this presidential system and government is in need
of money. They are trying to find each and every kind of opportunity to cover
their expenses inside the country. I am of the view that even this tax collected
for this specific purpose might have spent on many other issues. But again, let
me come back to my original idea. If we had another government, I think we would
have the same conclusion. Briefly, Sinan Algen, do you accept that? That any
Turkish government would have struggled to cope, would have perhaps misspent the
funds? No, I don't. That's a counterfactual. This government had 20 years to
prepare Turkey for this earthquake and possibly to the one that might hit
Istanbul. It's basically a matter of political priority. That's what it is
about. That money was spent somewhere else. So we can't conclude from that that
another government would do the same thing. On the contrary, now you hear the
opposition criticizing the government for having misspent this money. On top of
that, we have seen seven amnesty laws for the unlicensed buildings that were
passed by this government. Now, to be fair, a different government might have
done the same with regard to amnesty laws because it's seen as a populist
measure. This is what I wanted to refer to in my previous remarks, where I say
that Turkey's social contract is broken because this is a vicious circle where
consumers want cheap housing, collectors cut corners to deliver that cheap
housing, and regulators turn a blind eye to all of that. This needs to change.
So that's why the social contract needs to be revisited. I'm going to ask you to
hold that thought. There's a lot more to talk about. We need to pause for a
moment to take a short break. Sinan Olgen from the Center for Economics and
Foreign Policy Studies, Dr. Tarek Oguslu from Istanbul-Aiden University and Ayla
Jean Yakli, a freelance journalist and longtime resident of Turkey. Stay right
where you are. We'll pick this up after the news when the real story continues.
This is the BBC World Service with the story behind Louis Armstrong's concerts
in the former German Democratic Republic. In post-war communist East Germany,
loving jazz was dangerous. If you wanted jazz, you know you have to speak with a
special person. You were willing to take that risk. Yes. So how did the famous
American musician come to play a series of concerts behind the Iron Curtain in
1965? I know we're going to have a nice stay here because I have a lot of
friends right here. Armstrong always told stories of performing in West Berlin,
and people would come from East Berlin, they would come from Russia, and that
always impressed him that these people would kind of put their lives on the line
just to go see him. I'm Kevin Lejand. I'll find out who pulled the strings to
make these legendary concerts happen. Cold War in full swing at
bbcworldservice.com slash documentaries. Coming up on the real story in the next
half hour, the official response to the earthquake in Turkey has been criticized
for being slow. The government says they did their best in the face of a massive
disaster. But it's taken place at a time when the country's enduring high
inflation and there's a squeeze on family finances. So will this dent the
government's popularity ahead of an election? After the earthquake, what does
the future hold for President Erdogan? That's all after a summary of the news.
BBC News with David Harper. Nigerians are due to begin voting for a new
president in the next few hours. The race to succeed, Mohammed Ubuhari, who
served near the maximum two terms, is the most competitive since the end of
military rule in 1999. The campaign was marked by unrest, caused by the
government's chaotic efforts to introduce new banknotes. The United States and
the European Union have imposed more sanctions on Russia a year after President
Putin started the war in Ukraine. Poland had delayed the introduction of the
latest measures by the EU, complaining they were not strong enough. France
ministers from the G20 leading economies have been discussing relief for
indebted countries. The head of the IMF said disagreements remained, but she
said there was a commitment to overcome them. A prominent Tunisian lawyer and
critic of President Khais Saeed has become the latest to be detained during a
wave of arrests. Khazi Shao-e-Shi recently accused Mr Saeed of presiding over
injustice and failure. Suspected gang members in El Salvador have been moved to
a huge new prison as part of what President Bukele calls a war on crime. Large
numbers of people have been rounded up under a state of emergency. Rescuers in
Sao Paulo State in Brazil are searching for survivors of floods and landslides,
which have killed more than 50 people. President Biden has defended his
administration's response to a train derailment in Ohio. He has been criticised
for not visiting the site. Anthony Albanese will shortly become the first
serving Australian Prime Minister to march in the gay and lesbian Mardi Gras in
Sydney, one of the world's largest such events. He'll be joined by the Foreign
Minister Penny Wong. She's the first openly gay woman in Australia's parliament.
A winter storm has brought rain and snow to southern California. There's a
blizzard warning for parts of Los Angeles County. For the first time since 1989,
forecasters are predicting high winds on Saturday. BBC News You're listening to
The Real Story from the BBC World Service with me, Rithala Shah. This week we're
looking at the earthquake in Turkey, which has taken tens of thousands of lives
and left hundreds of thousands homeless. What will be the political price for
Turkey's long-time president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan? We're joined by Sinan Algen,
a senior fellow at Carnegie Europe, a former Turkish diplomat who runs an
independent think tank in Turkey. Dr Tariq Okuslu is from the Department of
Political Science and International Relations at Istanbul-Eidin University.
Anilajeen Yakhli is a freelance journalist who's been covering the earthquake
for the Financial Times and has been living in Turkey for two decades. Welcome
back to you all. We've been talking about the rescue operation and how vast it
was. It spread across ten of Turkey's 81 provinces. But it's fair to say the
response to the earthquake could have been quicker. The initial hours are
critical, but roads were damaged and search and rescue teams struggled to get
through until day two or day three, a delay President Erdogan himself
acknowledged. Ilno Cheviƒá is a special adviser to President Erdogan. He spoke to
my colleague James Menendez a few days after the earthquake. Did he agree with
any of the criticisms circulating that the Turkish government's response to the
earthquake had been too slow? No, because the terrain was impossible at that
time. The main major roads leading to the earthquake zone had all been
destroyed. For instance, the Hatay, there's only one entrance to Hatay and that
road was gone. The airport, the tarmac and the runway was gone. So I mean, you
know, approaching the city became impossible. And for instance, in Hatay, the
disaster management teams were also under the rubble. So, you know, there was
nobody to rescue to help rescue the people. What about mobilizing the armed
forces, as some have suggested, in greater numbers? Was that considered? OK. You
can mobilize anything you want. If you can't get them there, it's just
theoretical. You know, you have to get them there. The approaches were
impossible at that time. What about what about helicopters, though, for example?
Could they have been used? Well, some helicopters, yes. But I mean, how many and
how many people can you bring in? The devastation is widespread. And where do
you go? OK, you land. If you have 100 helicopters, you land them in 100 places.
But there are 20,000 collapsed buildings. Which one do you send the helicopter
to? How many people can you put? Indeed. And no one's doubting that the vast
scale of this disaster. Can I just ask you about this question that has been
raised with us, people in Turkey and others? Just let me finish, sir. The
earthquake tax, which has been imposed since 1999, raising billions of dollars.
People are telling us that it's been spent on other things and hasn't been spent
on preparing for something like what happened on Monday. No, it has been. I
think that is wrong. First, it's not billions of dollars, but it is quite
sizable money. However, they have been used. This is not the first earthquake
that we have had. We have had dozens of earthquakes in the past five, six years.
And people have had to rush for those. All these resources have to be spent on
those new housing have to be built. This is not the first or the last
earthquake. Yeah. And just on the new housing, there have also been complaints
that much of the housing built since 1999, when a new building code was brought
in, that that wasn't enforced. I think there was even an amnesty for illegal
construction. People could just pay a simple fine and they'd be allowed to keep
their buildings up to a certain extent. That's true. But I think, to be honest,
these are cities built on earthquake faults. You should have never built these
cities on these faults. You see, I mean, it is an image of the disaster. Usually
the geology chamber has also announced that the cities should have never been
built on these faults. And that is what I think the major problem, because you
can have any building code you like, but if it's a killer quake, I mean, that
building is going to collapse. That's Ilne Uchevik, who's an advisor to
President Erdogan. Tarago Guzloo, do you think that denial of responsibility to
some extent is politically problematic? It might prove to be politically
problematical, because we are soon having a very important presidential and
parliamentary election. Most likely, we will have the elections in June. And
people are quite angry with such kind of government policies. People are quite
angry with whenever politicians, high-level politicians, try to deflate the kind
of responsibility on themselves and divert the topic of discussion to another
issue. But we should also make it very clear that just because many issues have
already been politicized in Turkish politics, I think this particular event will
also be politicized. And when people go to ballot backs this summer, many of
them wouldn't take into account how government performed in this disaster. Most
likely, if they are die-hard supporters of our party, I think they will go and
vote for the party. If they are die-hard opposition circles, very much critical
of our party policies over the 20 years, they will go and vote against our
party. Sidan Al-Gendr, the polarization of Turkish politics means that people
are unlikely to have their minds changed. Sidan Al-Gendr, the political
revolution of Turkey, is a very polarized country. However, as in all democratic
societies, what will determine the outcome of this is going to be the swing
vote. There are people who are at present undecided, more than 10% of the
electorate. The way they shift their political preferences will determine the
outcome of the Turkish vote. And in that sense, the earthquake is likely to be a
big political issue, because that's going to necessarily impact how people view
Turkey's next government and what sort of government they want. Was this an area
that had major support for President Erdogan's party, the AKP party? Well, the
scenario of support would be where the government does an excellent job on the
disaster relief side in coming weeks and months. But in the past, is this an
area where the government has had substantial support? Yes, this is by and large
a socially conservative area of Turkey, where the ruling party gets above
average support. Ila, you've been reporting from the earthquake zone. Do you
think there was a sense from survivors about the government's response? Was
there anger? Was there a sense of resignation? There were both. And it really
did seem to fall along lines that were drawn well before the earthquake. So
opponents of Erdogan, people who haven't voted for him in the past were
particularly outraged, really angry, and laid the blame for the scale of the
disaster at Erdogan's feet. But I also meant people that echoed some of the
language that Erdogan has used. He blamed fate for the disaster. And I heard
that from people who expressed support for him. It does really come down to how
you have voted in the past. But Sina is right. It's a swing voter who will
determine this election. That was true before the earthquake. And I'm sure it's
going to be true when this election is held. And it's hard to imagine that the
AKP and Erdogan will necessarily pick up a lot of votes over the way that
they've handled the response. So that's an organ. If you think about 1999, there
are plenty of people who'd argue that part of the reason the AKP, the AKP party
came to power was partly fueled by anger about the then government's response to
that earthquake. Absolutely. And that's basically also the risk facing AKP now.
Indeed, the incapacity of the state that was demonstrated in the wake of the
1999 earthquake was essentially the preview to the political shock in Turkey
that brought AKP to power. There is indeed a speculation that history might
repeat itself. One significant difference, though, that people might point to
was that this time the government was quick to allow foreign agencies in to say,
we can't do this alone. Yes, correct. And the foreign agencies, the mobilization
of international actors, have made a difference. But nonetheless, again,
compared to the vast scale of the devastation, the number of people that have
been affected and then continue to be affected for a lack of shelter, food,
basic services, that's going to create necessarily a reaction. So ultimately,
it's about how you prepare the country to this disaster rather than the post
disaster relief efforts. And Tariko Guizli, something that people picked up on,
which might seem like a detail, but if it is, it's an interesting one, was that
the social media platform Twitter went down in the immediate aftermath of the
quake. And it was being used to sort of organize relief and for appeals for
money and so on. And there was a deep suspicion that it wasn't so much a
technical outage, but the government had taken it down because they said it was
being used to spread disinformation. What does that tell us about the
government's kind of concern about criticism and alternative means of if you
like challenging its power base or challenging its ability to tackle the quake?
I think the picture is quite clear. The government is not so much happy to see
that some non-governmental organizations or civil society organizations or
celebrities are taking too much important initiatives in such a way to find
solution to the daily needs of the people. The government wants to be at the
center of everything in the long line of this risk-use and aid-delivering
operations. That's without any question. But a functioning democracy, in a
liberal democracy, in a democracy where people go to elections for racial
motivations, they conduct a racial analysis, they go to a racial analysis and
decide on their final vote based on facts or scientific reasoning. The kind of
expectations they had offered would likely appear. But we are living in Turkey
and in Turkey politics is very much populist and people are extremely polarized
and people go to ballot boxes to vote from a psychological and emotional
perspective. If they think that President Erdogan is doing his best to help
mitigate the negative consequences of the crisis, they would feel quite happy
with that. Sinaldan, do you think that actually that if you like the populist
nature of the government, if that's what it is, probably this isn't going to
make that much difference to the balance of power? Well, we don't know yet that
yet. Firstly, we don't have new poll numbers after the disaster. I think it
would be in a better position to be able to talk about the prospect of political
change had we had some polling numbers. Yes, there is a part of the electorate
that are bound by their political identity and they will vote for Erdogan no
matter what or they will vote for the opposition no matter what. But there is
another part of the Turkish electorate that vote on the basis of the service
that they receive. Okay, so let's talk about that some more because I mean
President Erdogan's popularity has rested at least partly on the fact that
during his first 15 years or so in power, the Turkish economy grew, right? He
pursued liberal economic policies, there's a construction boom, people felt
better off. But recently, of course, you've seen rampant inflation spiraling
living costs. I think according to the FT, the Turkish lira fell by almost 30%
to a record low in 2022. And people would point to the central bank, which is
effectively controlled by President Erdogan and say, look, these are problems
that the government has to take on board. And he chose to cut interest rates,
even as inflation was going up. And I think it reached more than 85% back in
October. How much is that going to affect people's decision making? Sinan? Well,
it has affected people's decision making compared to the outcome of the last
elections, 2018 elections, when the ruling party received 42% of the vote.
Because of this economic hardship, the vote share of our party fell considerably
by more than 10 percentage points. Since then, there has been a rebound on the
basis of some populist measures like an early retirement age and the raise of
the minimum wage. But nonetheless, this demonstrates that there is a share of
the electorate that shifts their political allegiance based on economic
circumstances. And that's normal for any democratic society. Tariko Ghuzlu? We
have been in the middle of economic earthquake over the last five to six years.
Imagine the economic earthquake and the voting shares of the ruling party
together with Nationalist Action Party did not change decisively. Even under
these severe conditions, at least 40% of Turkish people support this ruling
coalition. I think this shows that economic considerations, yes, they are
important. Yes, that might play a role in some people's voting decisions. But
speaking from a larger perspective, the back of the Turkish society wouldn't go
to elections for economic purposes. And I wish they do, but not that much of
them is on this particular point. Ayla, how do you think these economic
questions play out? Well, it certainly had made this election even before the
earthquake more competitive than any of the others that Erdogan had won. But it
was, as Tadek pointed out, still quite close. One factor is that the opposition,
which is in the lines of six different parties of very different political
stripes, they hadn't yet announced who their challenger to Erdogan would be.
That announcement was expected about 10 days ago. But once the earthquake hit,
they said that they were postponing it. So even if you have a very disaffected
population, be it over the economy and now the earthquake, they don't quite have
a clear alternative to even vote for. And Sinan, in terms of the future of the
economy, there's a multi-billion dollar reconstruction bill that will need to be
footed. What impact is that going to have on Turkey's economy? Well,
fortunately, Turkey has fiscal space. What I mean by that is that compared to
many other countries in Europe, including the UK, Turkey has a low public debt.
The public debt GDP ratio is about 36 percent, which means that the government
has the fiscal space to engage in government spending for disaster relief.
Turkey's problem is not on the side of the fiscal. Turkey's problem is on the
side of monetary policy, misguided interest rate policy, which has led to high
and chronic inflation, and also on the side of balance of payments, the lack of
foreign reserves. Those are the main stumbling blocks for the Turkish economy.
But those will also be negatively affected by what has happened because more
fiscal spending will necessarily have an impact on inflation and on imports. And
Tarek, you mentioned this election that's due to take place later this year.
There has been some suggestion that it should be delayed, given that there is a
great big area of the country that may not be really in any position to vote. Is
that not possible? Actually, according to Turkish constitution, the elections
can be postponed for only one specific purpose and reason if we are in the
middle of a war. This is not a kind of war in traditional sense. So technically
speaking, it is impossible to postpone the elections. But politically speaking,
everything is possible in Turkey. Even the Supreme Court or the court in charge
of overseeing this elections might take a decision to postpone the elections.
But I think from a political perspective, it will be committing suicide on the
part of the Turkish government to postpone the elections three or four months
beyond the usual schedule. Three or four months, postponement might be
considered as a potential outcome. And the government might also insist on it
for some specific reasons, because during this time period, all states, eight,
will go to the region and the state will do its best to make everything much
better for people in terms of their lives. So they might consider potentially
speaking postponing the elections for three or four months. And just thinking
about the political consequences of what's going on, Sinalgan, one of the
criticisms that's been leveled at President Erdogan in the past is that he's
centralized power to such a degree that he's becoming more and more of an
autocrat and Turkey's democratic credentials are being undermined. Now you can
disagree with that assessment, but to what extent will that centralization, will
that perception of centralization actually be a disadvantage or an advantage? It
may be that in a moment of crisis where there's been this big earthquake, people
think actually what we need is a strong leader. That's basically how the
presidential system has been advertised, that it would allow for fast decision
making, unbridled decision making. However, in reality, Turkey has essentially
undermined the fundamental checks and balances to the detriment of Turkish
democracy. So you really have a trade off between this unhindered decision
making. President Erdogan can rule the country without even consulting
parliament by way of presidential decrease, but at the same time, the normal
tradition of democratic deliberations with parliament discussing bills with
different society actors being able to bring forward their viewpoints has now
been unfortunately undermined. Isla, do you think that actually this earthquake
could be an advantage for President Erdogan? He's also shown that he can win
support, he can win help from the neighbors. Countries like Greece, Armenia, not
natural allies of Turkey have actually come in to help. Yeah, I think that that
is a distinct possibility that people who have been traumatized, who have lost
loved ones, their homes, can't see how they're going to make a new life, that
the stability that a strong figure like Erdogan offers, they may find that
reassuring at this time. So it could very much be a vote for continuity could be
part of it. And another thing that he has is incumbency powers. He toured part
of the region again this week, where he announced that the government would
begin building 200,000 new homes by next month. And these are pre-election
pledges, as well as promises to people who've just survived an earthquake. So he
does have a lot of influence, obviously, at sway. And so that could be something
that resonates with voters. Tariq, I wonder if this earthquake, which obviously
also affected northern Syria, which we haven't talked about, we focused very
much on Turkey, do you think this disaster could actually change Turkey's
relationship with its neighbors? Potentially speaking, yes, because we had seen
Armenia, for example, came to Turkey's aid. The border between Turkey and
Armenia was opened. Even in the past, we experienced quite positive improvements
in Turkish curriculum relationship in late 1990s, when both countries
experienced simultaneous earthquakes, so that paid the way for Greece, for
example, lifting its veto over Turkey's EU membership candidates' status. So
such kind of positive things might take in terms of Turkish foreign policy. But
I am not that much optimist in the sense that Turkey has received so much
international aid, will truly revolutionize the way Turkish foreign policy is
conducted, and really change Turkish foreign policy in a much more pro-
globalist, pro-internationalist sense. Because Turkey has really very important
problems with international actors, in particular, Turkey's partners within
NATO, the United States being the most important one. Also, Turkey's problems
with its neighbors are quite structural. So there are very important structural
causes of those tensions. And don't forget the fact that we are in the middle of
a political election season, so Turkish government might consider deflecting
negative consequences of economic situation at home and is quick by adopting a
much more assertive and nationalistic approach abroad as well. Interesting.
Well, let's build on that as we wrap up, if I may. Sinan Algan, it seems that
President Erdogan has a fairly strong position for many reasons that we've been
discussing, but he also seems to be the only candidate who could serve as a
peace broker between Russia and the rest of the world, with the war in Ukraine
playing out. As Tariq has just pointed out, that has, in a sense, posed some
problems with NATO, of which, of course, Turkey is a member. But on the other
hand, he's a clever operator, a shrewd operator. He's going to be a hard act,
really, for any opposition to either challenge or follow. Yes, absolutely.
Especially as you pointed out, one of the components of Erdogan's popularity is
his activism on the international stage, which has been emphasized by the
constructive role, influential role that Turkey has played in the Ukraine war.
Having said that, the electorate is more interested on the economic side.
Basically, therefore, the outcome of the elections will be determined by whether
Erdogan and his ruling coalition or the opposition will be able to convince the
electorate that they will provide for a better future and better economic
outcomes for the country. Eilogine Yatli, if you were weighing up the damage or
perhaps the positive force that some of this could have on Erdogan's contest in
the next election, how would you weigh up his chances? There are pretty rigid
divisions among Turkish voters. This is a polarized society. But I do think that
for many in the earthquake zone, it will be one in which their disappointment
and their sense that help came too late could sway their vote. I think an
important question is what about the rest of the country? Most Turks get their
news from television, and most television channels have made great efforts to
show the state's response. It's mobilization of relief and rescue teams. There
was a lot of coverage of rescues from the sites and quite literally turned their
backs when somebody would express their grievances over the arrival of help that
was laid. This is a country where the media is tightly controlled. It also
depends on how much of the real story gets out and reaches people in the rest of
the country. Tarika Ghuzlu briefly. The Turkish people might decide to punish
the government for his lack of competence in dealing with the crisis. But if
people see that the government is doing something good on the ground, helping
alleviate the concerns of the Turkish people, they might again vote for the
ruling party. It is an open-ended question. It's not that much easier to expect
the results of upcoming political elections. It's a very important issue. Some
staring into a crystal ball I called for there. But thank you all very much for
your thoughts and, well, yes, some predictions, I think. Dr Tarika Ghuzlu from
Istanbul Iden University, Sinan Algan from the Carnegie Europe think tank, and
Ayla Jean-Yakli, freelance journalist and long-time resident at Turkey. Thank
you all very much. That's it for this week on The Real Story. From me, Ritala
Shah, and the whole team, that's The Real Story. Thanks for your company and do
join us again next time. This is the BBC World Service with No Place Like Nam.
On the 29th of March 1973, all American forces will be withdrawn from South
Vietnam. 50 years later, a small group of US veterans have returned to Lipdag
permanently. We'll be finding out why. No Place Like Nam, today at 12 GMT. In 30
minutes, the explanation with Claire Graham. Calcadon Yibaldhal is an Ethiopian
writer and journalist based in Addis Ababa, and I'll be talking to him about
Ethiopia and Eritrea, the road from war to peace. The newsroom is next. This is
the BBC.