TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-14H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This is BBC Radio 4. Hello and welcome to The World At One with me, Sarah
Montagu. The Prime Minister is in Belfast trying to win over Unionists to his
new EU deal. We did something really special yesterday. We created this new
thing called the Stormont Break. Your Assembly is going to be able to have a
look at any of the new EU laws that come down the pipe and say, hang on, if
there's something that's really serious, then we have the ability to say no.
We'll look at how it would work in practice. The Brexit deal should also mean
the UK is back in horizon. The EU's science funding programme will speak live to
Nobel Prize winner Sir Paul Nurse. A row intensifies over the Scottish
Government's controversial bottle deposit return scheme. Our customers are
already less well off than they've ever been, whether that be people in their
own homes who are buying things online or pubs who are finding it increasingly
difficult to remain in business. People are going to really feel this one. And
the surprising secret to a long, healthy and happy life. That was the shocker
for us. And then many other studies began to find the same thing and we began to
have quite a bit of confidence in our findings. Professor Robert Waldinger will
reveal all. The BBC News is read by Jane Stale. The Prime Minister is meeting
the mainstormant political parties after he announced a new deal with the
European Union for post-Brexit trading arrangements in Northern Ireland. Rishi
Sunak has said the Windsor framework will make a positive difference, but the
Democratic Unionists who are blocking a return to power sharing are still
examining the extent to which the European Court of Justice will be involved in
trade issues. Our Ireland correspondent Chris Page reports. The Prime Minister
is trying to sell his deal to politicians, businesses and the public in Northern
Ireland. At a factory in County Antrim, he outlined what he called the prize of
restoring a devolved administration at stormont. Mr Sunak said it could lead to
Northern Ireland becoming the most exciting economic zone in the world, because
it would have full access to both the British and EU markets. The DUP leader Sir
Geoffrey Donaldson made clear again his party would look at the detail of the
agreement before deciding whether to lift its veto on power sharing at stormont.
He wouldn't be drawn on how long that could take. The party will closely examine
a measure known as the stormont break, which Mr Sunak said would enable members
of the devolved assembly to block EU regulations. A transgender woman has been
jailed for eight years for raping two women when still a man. Isla Bryson, who's
31 and from Clydebank, committed the crimes in 2016 and 2019, while known as
Adam Graham. Last month the case sparked a heated debate over where Bryson
should be held. Our correspondent Lorna Gordon reports from the High Court in
Edinburgh. Isla Bryson was initially sent to a woman's prison, but days later
moved to a man's prison after the case attracted political controversy. Today at
the High Court in Edinburgh, Bryson's defence lawyer said private and personal
decisions on gender should have no bearing on court proceedings and that since
being found guilty of double rape, Bryson had been subjected to ill-judged, ill-
informed and ignorant comments. The judge, Lord Scott, said he took no account
of anything said outside court, but that Bryson had preyed on the two vulnerable
women, raping them in their own homes where they were entitled to feel safe. He
added that Bryson posed a high risk of re-offending. The case led to an urgent
review of policy. All newly convicted or remanded prisoners in Scotland will now
initially be placed in jails, according to their sex at birth. A huge search is
underway for a two-month-old baby after a missing woman and her sex offender
boyfriend were found and arrested in Brighton. The couple had been hiding from
police and sleeping rough since the child was born early last month. From
Brighton, our Home Affairs correspondent Daniel Sanford reports. It was a member
of the public who ended the search for Constance Martin and Mark Gordon, dialing
999 at around 9.30 last night to alert the police after they recognised the
couple. They were subsequently arrested on the street, heading in the direction
of some allotments and a golf course and the South Downs beyond that. But
there's no sign of the baby, who's thought to have been born in the couple's car
in early January. Police officers have spent the morning searching every shed
and greenhouse on the allotment and pouring through the nearby woodlands. The
officer leading the investigation said he was extremely concerned and that this
operation was now all about the baby. The owners and managers of more than
12,000 high-rise buildings in England have been told they have until October to
register with new safety regulator or risk prosecution. The new rule, which has
been introduced as a result of the Grenfell Tower fire in 2017, will make a
named person responsible for the safety of each building. Our Home Affairs
correspondent Tom Symons reports. The public inquiry into the Grenfell disaster
is likely to criticise the management of the West London Tower block when its
final report is published later this year. The fire was followed by a building
safety crisis and a new regulator was set up to enforce stricter rules for those
higher than 18 metres or around seven floors. The requirement for a named person
to register as legally responsible for each high-rise block will allow the
regulator to act if the rules aren't followed. The aim is to remove confusion
and buck-passing in both the construction and maintenance of buildings. Owners
or managers will have six months from April to register. Almost all state
primary and secondary schools are shut in Scotland as teachers who are members
of the EIS union take part in a 48-hour strike about pay. In the north of
England, a one-day walkout by the National Education Union is disrupting
classes. The number of people sleeping rough in England last year increased by
more than a quarter. Government statistics show there were more than 3,000
people found sleeping outside on a single night in the autumn of 2022. It's the
first time the figure has risen since 2017. Our social affairs correspondent
Michael Buchanan has the details. This increase comes after four years of the
number dropping, with the included exceptional measures introduced by the
government to take people off the streets during the pandemic. Most of those
rough sleeping are from the UK, Mayo and aged over 26. Although all areas of
England saw a rise, almost half of rough sleepers were found in London and the
south-east. Charities say they're seeing people being made homeless due to cost
of living pressures, including rising rent levels and stretched support
services, particularly in mental health. Ministers point out that rough sleeping
is below pre-Covid levels and that they're spending Â£500 million tackling the
problem. The BBC has announced it will suspend the licence fee for the King's
Coronation weekend in May. The move will allow some community and commercial
venues, such as churches, town halls and cinemas, to screen the ceremony for
free. Jane, thanks. The Prime Minister said he was over the moon this morning
about his new deal with the EU. He's in Belfast as we speak, meeting political
leaders and publicly selling the agreement known as the Windsor Framework. He
chose for his pitch Lisbon's Coca-Cola factory, rather appropriate for a man who
loves the drink, and he appeared flanked by two giant pallets of red Coke cans,
where he made much of the virtues of Northern Ireland's position in Great
Britain and the European Union's single market. Northern Ireland is in the
unbelievably special position, unique position in the entire world, European
continent, in having privileged access, not just to the UK home market, which is
enormous, fifth biggest in the world, but also the European Union single market.
Nobody else has that. No one. Only you guys. Only here. And that is the prize. I
can tell you, when I go around the world and talk to businesses, they know that.
They're like, that's interesting. If you guys get this sorted, then we want to
invest in Northern Ireland. But of course, one of the tests of the deal will be
whether it convinces the DUP to end their boycott of this Stormont Assembly.
Although it's understood that the new deal will go ahead, whatever they say
about it. When the DUP leader Geoffrey Donaldson was asked how long it would
take for his party to reach a conclusion, he said it will take as long as it
takes. One of the more interesting and surprising elements of the Windsor
framework that it's hoped will win the DUP over is the Stormont break. The Prime
Minister insisted it would ensure Northern Ireland's Assembly had a real say.
Well, the Stormont break is an incredibly powerful new cross-community safeguard
that we've been able to negotiate with the EU. And what it means is that the
people and institutions of Northern Ireland are in control of their destiny. And
if there's a significant EU law that comes along that will have lasting and
significant impact on the everyday lives of people here in Northern Ireland,
that the Assembly will be allowed to pull the emergency break. And once that's
done, it's crystal clear the UK government then does have an unequivocal veto.
And what I've said is that the UK government wants to sit down with the parties
in Northern Ireland, the Assembly, to codify how the UK government would use
that veto to make sure that everyone has reassurance that it will work properly.
And that's what I'd like to engage with, with the parties. That was the Prime
Minister this morning. Well, just before we came on air, I spoke to Catherine
Barnard, who's a professor of EU law at Cambridge University and deputy director
of UK in a changing Europe. I asked her about the circumstances under which the
Stormont break could be employed. The conditions for its use are extremely
strict. And it may be that the break isn't ever actually used because the
conditions are not made up. There are four main conditions on the use of the
break. First of all, it's got to be triggered at the request of 30 MLAs, members
of the Legislative Assembly, across two parties. Secondly, it can only be used
in the most exceptional circumstances. That's the language of the text. Thirdly,
it's got to be used as a last resort. And fourthly, it's got to concern matters
which will have significant and lasting impact, specifically everyday lives of
communities in Northern Ireland. Now, that's already a very high threshold. And
so it may not be satisfied. But what you do see here, and I think this is in
practical terms more positive, is that there'll be a lot of consultation with
the Northern Ireland Assembly and Northern Ireland Executive about new laws
which the EU is going to produce which will apply to Northern Ireland and
likewise with the UK as well. And if there is a much greater consultation, you
may well avoid ever having to use the legislative break. OK. So it's what? An
acknowledgement that Brexit is never ending, that it will be managed on an
ongoing basis by both the EU and the UK and obviously critical at any point the
law is changed? Absolutely right. And for anyone who thinks that this means that
Brexit is done, it's not because in reality we have ongoing relationships with
the EU, our nearest and largest trading partner, and specifically in the case of
Northern Ireland. Northern Ireland, of course, has a foot in two camps. It's
part of the UK single market, but it's also part of the EU single market for
goods. And therefore, there will be ongoing discussions between Northern Ireland
and the Northern Ireland Executive and the EU. But the clever thing about the
storm break is it's conditional on the Northern Ireland Assembly being up and
operational again. And so this will put significant pressure on the DUP to re-
enter the power sharing arrangements. OK. If it were triggered, what happens
then? This is where the agreement is somewhat lacking in detail. But what we
know is it can be triggered, but the veto is actually exercised by the UK, not
Northern Ireland. And what we do know is that, of course, if it is triggered and
it does mean that matters can't be sorted out via probably the joint committee,
you will have a divergence in rules between Northern Ireland and the rest of the
EU. And the White Paper says that the EU would be able to take remedial
measures, which would be likely to be tariffs of some sort. But that's quite a
long way down the line. Could you imagine it ever being used? It's hard to think
of a circumstance where it would be used. But, of course, it's always reassuring
to know that these mechanisms are there. Catherine Barnard. Well, the DUP
leader, Geoffrey Donaldson, has denied that his party is split over the protocol
deal. His fellow MP, though, Ian Paisley, said it doesn't cut the mustard.
Whilst this morning on Today, Mr Donaldson sounded less intransigent. Progress
has been made. We continue to have some concerns. We will examine the legal
text. We'll look at all of this in the round and come to a decision. We're
reasonable people. But we want to ensure that what the Prime Minister has said
is matched by what is actually in the agreement itself. Well, Stephen Farrie is
deputy leader of Northern Ireland's Alliance Party and an MP for North Down.
Good afternoon. Good afternoon. Do you think that ultimately the real test of
this deal will be if the DUP return to the Assembly? Well, the DUP is only one
voice in Northern Ireland. I think it's important to bear in mind that most
people in Northern Ireland, first of all, oppose Brexit, but then subsequently
have been pragmatic in relation to the protocol. They understand why it does
need to exist. To manage the fallout of Brexit on Northern Ireland, given our
unique politics and our very particular geography and to give us that dual
market access. That said, I think the DUP do now need to be pragmatic in
responding to this deal. They should never have collapsed the Assembly in the
first place. These talks could have happened in parallel. Ultimately, the DUP
have to make a decision. Do they want to see Northern Ireland working? That does
mean having a functioning Assembly. Because if we don't have a functioning
Assembly, that will just tear Northern Ireland apart and will actually
accelerate the demands for a united Ireland and moves in that direction. So for
a unionist, if you want to preserve the union, and I'm not coming to this as a
unionist per se, but you have to be pragmatic on this. But if people dig in
around what's been agreed and keep saying no in defiance of virtually every
other political voice and commentator, they're going to be very isolated. And
yet people are sort of amazed at the deal that the Prime Minister has struck.
Isn't that in a way a vindication of the DU's position thus far? It has worked
to get the EU to move as much as they have. I think we've actually wasted a lot
of time over the past couple of years in this. I think we could have reached
this point a lot more quickly. I don't think the DUP boycott helped the
situation. I don't think particularly what Boris Johnson did over his
premiership helped to get a deal because what we saw was actually trust being
eroded. And to give some credit, clearly a different approach has delivered huge
results in a relatively short period of time. And the key to that one is
actually acting as a grown-up and acting responsibly and doing things around
agreements and data sharing, which has opened up a much wider agreement. By that
said, Sarah, this is a positive agreement in the main, but there will be some
issues. I heard what Catherine was saying around the storm and break. We have
some concerns in regard to that. We may see a situation where ultimately
Northern Ireland does remain aligned to EU law, but the processes themselves I
think may create some extra instability in the restored Assembly, which we don't
really need, and in particular for businesses looking to invest in Northern
Ireland, if there's uncertainty over the ongoing compliance with certain aspects
of EU law, that may just create a certain question mark in terms of what is a
very competitive investment market internationally. Do you mean because of the
threat of a veto and one presumes a unionist veto? That's what you're nervous
about? We are nervous about that from a political point of view and also then
from the business point of view if there's even a delay. So if, for example, the
European Union was to update European law in a certain area and a business was
interested in making an investment decision, if that was delayed in Northern
Ireland, say for example by six months, they may decide to go elsewhere with
their investment and that would lead to the damage of Northern Ireland. So we're
slightly fearful that Northern Ireland could be slightly blunted in terms of our
dual market access because of this. Okay. Just on that, do you agree with the
Rishi Soon Act that Northern Ireland has the best of both worlds at the moment?
Well, I think it's important to qualify this in the sense that prior to Brexit,
the UK had free access to the European Union so none of these issues ever
existed. So we had the best of both worlds then. But in the context of Brexit
having happened, Northern Ireland does have that dual market access. As I said,
we're slightly concerned it's been blunted, but in the main, yes, that point
still stands. We have the ability to trade unfettered into Great Britain and
into the European Union and no other part of the UK has that particular
opportunity. And just very briefly, this deal should go ahead, should it
whatever the DUP say? Yeah, I mean there's other reasons for doing this deal.
Obviously, the politics are important, but it works for businesses and consumers
and households, so yes, the deal should happen. Stephen Farrie, thank you so
much. Now then, there is a massive and urgent police search for a baby left
somewhere between Brighton and Newhaven. Its parents, Constance Martin and Mark
Gordon, disappeared in January, but they were found and arrested north of
Brighton. This was Detective Superintendent Lewis Bassford this morning. It is a
vast area and at the present we are looking in the local vicinity to where the
couple were arrested last night, seeking a shelter or location to where they may
have been held up and hopefully where the baby is present. Well, our
correspondent Howard Johnson joins us from Stanmere Villas area of Brighton
where the couple were arrested. And Howard, what is it? I mean the couple have
been sighted on CCTV. So what is it that we know about when the baby was last
seen with them and where they last were? Well, it's believed that the baby was
born just two days or so before they went missing on January the 5th when their
car broke down on the motorway near Bolton. And since then we've seen that
they've moved down to Essex and then they went to East London and then to
Sussex. And right now I'm standing next to an allotment where a massive
investigation is going on, a big search, people down on their hands and knees
going through bins and allotment sheds to try to find this missing baby.
Recently they've just erected some screens next to an area where the police have
set up a temporary camp and we can expect an update from the police at 2.30. But
it's a massive hunt at the moment. Dozens of police officers wandering around
this area looking for any signs. They've been speaking to residents as well,
urging them to check their back gardens. And I spoke to many residents this
morning. So there's an eerie feel in this area that they're concerned, deeply
concerned for the fate of this missing baby. Any information on the couple who
have been arrested? Well, the information that we do know is that Mark Gordon, a
48-year-old, had been deported from America because of a sex offence, a rape
committed when he was 14 years old. He served 20 years in prison for that before
he was deported to the UK. And that Constance Martin, a 48-year-old who lived a
very privileged life, had met him while she was a drama student. And that they
had then gone on a sort of a very nomadic lifestyle, moving around from place to
place. She's estranged from the family. But today Napier Martin, the father of
Constance Martin, has come forward and said that he's deeply relieved that she's
been found, but is still obviously extremely concerned about the fate of his
grandchild. Howard, Howard Johnson, thanks very much. Now when the European
Commission President Ursula von der Leyen stood alongside the man she called
Dear Rishi yesterday, she said that when the New Deal on Northern Ireland was
implemented, then work could start immediately on bringing UK scientists back
into the Horizon programme. It is the pan-European scheme that allows scientists
from different countries to work together and to bid for funding. Well, Sir Paul
Nurse is the 2001 Nobel Prize winner for Medicine or Physiology and also
Director of the Francis Crick Institute. Good afternoon, Sir Paul. Good
afternoon, good afternoon. What was your response when you heard this yesterday?
I think this is fantastic news for science. We've been on tenderhooks for many
months. There's three sort of major science groupings in the world, North
America, Asia increasingly focused on China and Europe. And we were part of that
European, let's call it a superpower for the time being, but part of that
science superpower. But we were gradually drifting away. And that arrangement
with Europe establishes all sorts of networks, collaborations and interactions
upon which science thrives. And actually the future of our country depends upon
knowledge, much of which is generated by science. So it's very, very important
to us. And the only thing standing in the way of association was the Northern
Ireland Protocol. So government policy is to associate and now they are able to
do so. And as we've just heard, the European Union wishes to see that happen
too. OK. A lot of people will struggle to understand it because you think, well,
you can have a conversation. No one's stopping you having conversations or
working together. This is what it ties scientists together with the funding. Is
that the significant bit? It's that and also the informal contacts that are
promoted. I mean, I've been a scientist for 40 years and I've watched over those
40 years collaboration networks developing throughout Europe involving the
United Kingdom. And we now have a strong presence there, except it's already
fading away because of the problems we've had in the last couple of years. And
in terms, I mean, she talked about immediately once the deal has been
implemented, which may take some time. And also there's a bit of a problem
because I think the UK gets associate status, doesn't it, before it's then fully
involved. So we're talking about it's not something that scientists are going to
think, well, great, I can pitch for that funding now. Not yet. But honestly,
it's better the halfway step than no step at all. We were in danger of floating
off, frankly, into the cold northeast Atlantic, where the only company we might
have had is Greenland. And I like Greenland, but this isn't good for our
science. What we see here are the first steps in getting back into that European
science fold. It's really, really important for the entire UK science endeavour.
OK. And in terms of, I mean, does it come down to money? Does it make a... No,
it's not just money. That's actually been a caricature. We had a very good deal
before because actually we got more money back into science than we put into the
European Union for science because we are so effective at it. With the new
status, we won't have that privilege or that advantage. So that's a
disadvantage. But this is a better situation than we were in before.
Collaboration, talking, interacting, it sounds soft. It isn't. It really, really
matters. And if you're not part of one of these groupings, you really lose out.
There were sort of plans, not least talked about by previous science ministers,
to set up alternatives on the assumption that the UK would not be allowed back
into Horizon. Do they now just fall by the wayside? Well, I think they should
fall by the wayside. The ones that have been put in place were with small
countries or countries a long way away. They were in no sense a substitute for
the connection with Europe. If, for example, however, this finally doesn't get
through, I mean, because, you know, there's negotiation required, what we should
be doing in this country is actually replicating as much as we can what is done
in Europe through the various initiatives that they have there so that when
eventually we will be able to associate, it will be easy to do that. Spending
all the money on other initiatives will make that association much more
difficult and that's much more dangerous. Sir Paul Nurse, thank you very much.
Thank you. Midnight tonight is the deadline for any drinks business in Scotland
to register with the new deposit return scheme. It's a requirement if they want
to sell in Scotland after August. One of the candidates to take over as leader
of the SNP, Kate Forbes, has warned that it could cause economic carnage. But
introducing the scheme was one of the conditions the Greens set when they agreed
to join the coalition with the SNP. We'll speak to the Greens in a moment.
First, though, Phil Sisson owns Simple Things Fermentations Brewery. He told me
why he didn't want to sign up to the scheme. I believe it's potentially very
harmful from a business. It would almost be irresponsible and reckless to sign
it, I think. Why would it be reckless? How tough is it on your business? It's
very tough. It's essentially imposing a whole different admin structure for
Scotland, where we obviously sell a lot of our products, to the rest of the
world. And we sell a fair bit of beer south of the border as well. So I would
have two separate systems that I have to run concurrently. So that would be an
enormous amount of extra work. Do you know companies that will go out of
business as a result of this? I know companies that will choose not to continue
in business because they'll look at what's required and say, this just isn't
going to work. It's already a very low margin business. We're in probably the
toughest time for brewing and hospitality that has been in living memory. And so
we're now looking at adding a whole load of extra complexity and difficulty to
that. And people will just say, you know what, there's easier ways to make a
living than this. OK. What is it going to mean for prices? Because there's
obviously a sort of 20p, as I understand it, deposit, which is what you would
get back if you returned the bottle. But what else will it do to prices? So the
quantifiable things are 2 point something p per can or 4 point something p per
bottle. People are estimating, I think, with some justification, that on top of
the 20p that you obviously will get back, there'll be anything between 10 and
20p on top of that in associated fees. So basically just drinks are going to
cost that much more. Absolutely, yeah. And presumably at a time when costs
anyway are rising and prices are going up. Indeed, yeah. Our customers are
already less well off than they've ever been, whether that be people in their
own homes who are buying things online or pubs who are finding it increasingly
difficult to remain in business. At a time like that, to be adding such a
large... And this isn't just beer, obviously. This is like a bottle of fruit
shoot or water. These same costs are being added. People are going to really
feel this one. Of course, the three SNP candidates to take over as leader of the
party have all warned about this scheme and Kate Forbes even said it would cause
economic carnage. So one does wonder, is it going to go ahead? Are you assuming
it's not going to go ahead? I am assuming it's going to get changed, but then
I've been assuming that for the last four or five years since I first heard
about this and since I first started to give my feedback along with lots of
other people like me, we've sort of pointed out very calmly and politely the
various ways in which this is a flawed scheme and we've expected it to be
amended to suit or taken that into account. But so far we haven't seen anything
that goes anywhere near far enough to allay the concerns. Phil Sissons there.
Well, Mark Ruskell is the Scottish Greens Environment Spokesperson. Good
afternoon. Good afternoon. Do you understand the concerns? I do, but I also
think there's a lot of misinformation and if we look at how deposit return
schemes have been rolled out across the world and particularly in Europe, a lot
of these fears have not come to pass. They are successful and at the end of the
day, this is about shifting the burden of cost away from consumers and onto the
big drinks producers. At the moment, we all pay in our council tax to have
plastic bottles and glass collected. It's a significant part of what we pay as
taxpayers to our councils to do this work and actually this is a way of saving
some of that money and pushing it back onto the polluting companies. Except you
heard Phil Sissons there and it's something actually that's been brought up even
by the head of Circularity Scotland, the group that's the not-for-profit that's
running this scheme, that prices, it's going to mean extra prices. Well,
consumers will have to pay a 20 pence deposit. Of course, they'll get that back
as soon as they take their bottles back to the reverse vending machines. Okay,
but David Harris, the chief executive of Circularity Scotland, said there will
be another price on top of that, which as you heard Phil Sissons puts at 10 to
20p. I don't believe with the experience of deposit return schemes around the
world that there will be an increase, an inflationary increase on top of the
deposit that people are already paying. I mean, these are well-developed
systems, they're run efficiently around the world and there's no reason why we
can't do this in the UK. So, when Kate Forbes calls it economic carnage? Well,
the economic carnage here would be if a scheme was pulled at this point because
the story that's really not being told is that drinks companies and retailers,
the major supermarkets, are investing millions and millions of pounds in
Scotland right now. They're ordering these reverse vending machines, they're
recruiting staff to run these schemes, they're training staff, they're investing
through Circularity Scotland in recycling centres, which again are employing
more people. So, you know, there's a huge investment coming here from the major
drinks manufacturers, the likes of bars who make iron brew, coke, the
supermarkets in these schemes. So, a scheme at this point would be economically
reckless. Right, and that's what you say to Phil Sissons. I mean, you heard him
there, he runs a craft, he runs a brewery business and he's just hoping it's
going to go away. Are you saying that categorically it will not? Well, there are
concessions that have been made to small independent brewers and wine importers
over several months now. There's been help with cash flow that's been brought
in, there's been a reduction in registration and handling fees for some small
shops as well. And just to be clear, the Westminster government won't intervene
because that is one of the other options? Well, we'll wait and see. I mean,
there has been a sort of veiled threat that they'll use the Internal Market Act
to intervene here. But, you know, what we need across the UK is successful
deposit return schemes running and the UK government has continually delayed a
DRS scheme for England. It's likely now that will be introduced anytime soon.
Mark Ruskell of Scottish Green. Sorry, we're out of time now, but thank you very
much. The Prime Minister has won praise from almost every quarter for his deal
on replacing the Northern Ireland Protocol. But with the Conservatives
consistently more than 20 points behind in opinion polls, he has a mountain to
climb if he's not to be kicked out of Downing Street before the end of next
year. After more than a decade in power and with half of that riven by
infighting, what is conservatism for? The big society is about a huge culture
change where people in their everyday lives, in their homes, in their
neighbourhoods, don't always turn to officials. We believe in a union not just
between the nations of the United Kingdom, but between all of our citizens,
every one of us, whoever we are and wherever we're from. That means fighting
against the burning injustice. They will have an overwhelming mandate from this
election to get Brexit done. This government will have integrity,
professionalism and accountability at every level. Those were the visions of
previous incumbents at Number 10, including, as you heard there at the end,
Rishi Sunak. Well, as we came on air today, the levelling up secretary, Michael
Gove, was giving his view at the launch of a new project, the future of
conservatism. It's chaired by Theresa May's former special advisor, columnist
Nick Timothy. When I spoke to him earlier, I asked first whether the new Windsor
Framer would put an end to conservative fighting over Brexit. This deal, I
think, really addresses all the problems we had with the protocol, all the
problems with Northern Ireland's status post-Brexit. It's a massive achievement
by the PM and I'm hoping that the unionist community in Northern Ireland feels
able to support it. Then we potentially unlock power sharing in Northern Ireland
and we can try to get back to just governing as well as we possibly can. You've
been involved in Brexit negotiations when you were working for Theresa May. Were
you surprised at the deal that was struck? Well, yes and no, I suppose. I was
surprised because I think the EU has moved a long way. I'm not surprised in the
sense that actually some of these solutions were actually always on the table.
The irony is we're now using the combination of policy and technology to remove
a real border in exactly the same way that in 2016-17 we were saying we could do
that to remove a north-south border. We've come back and forth in this argument
over several years but we've hopefully got to a sensible place now. Let's turn
to the project that you're launching today which is called The Future of
Conservatism. What is your vision of what the Conservative Party should look
like in the years ahead? I suppose what we're really trying to deliver is the
restoration of national community. It's about a politics that's based on the
pursuit of the common good. Basically we're saying we need to look at both the
economy and culture and we need to try to forge a stronger shared identity and
try to really revitalise the country in a way that would be made possible
looking at a completely different economic model. My view is that on economics,
the existing model, the model that's basically existed my whole lifetime and I'm
just about to be 43, it's basically run out of road. It's all about wafer-thin
efficiency, not solid resilience. It's about the marketisation of everything,
not things like state capacity. Most simply, we don't make or do or sell enough
of what the world needs and wants and we need to try to build an economic model
which addresses that, which rebalances the economy both geographically and
across sectors. So I'm not clear. So for example, those who support Liz Truss's
view that taxes need to be cut and would be pushing for tax cuts in the budget,
do you support them or not? I'm not here to speak ill of any fellow
Conservatives but we tried deficit-funded tax cuts in an act of radicalism last
year and it didn't work and it spooked the bond markets. And when you're a
country like ours where we have a high deficit and a high stock of debt, there's
no point complaining that the bond markets are dictating policy because we have
to respect the way the bond markets respond. Okay. So it's a move away from any
saturated economics and also a move away from social liberalism. Is that right?
Well, I think what we're saying on questions of society and culture is that
actually we need to build a more cohesive shared identity. Instead of coming
together, it feels like we're coming apart. There's less social trust, there's
problems with crime in cities, there's problems with social integration, there's
big ideological divides caused by some of these theories to do with gender
identity and critical race theory and that kind of thing. So what we're saying
is we obviously do need a clear repudiation of those kinds of militant identity
politics but actually we need a positive programme too. So we need to do much
more to encourage family formation and keep families together. We need to do
much more to try to restore and renew our institutions. We want to focus much
more on the responsibilities and not just rights of citizenship. How is that
somebody, a young person who feels more comfortable in that world of what you
call militant identity, how are they going to feel like they're sharing this
national identity that you're talking about? Well, part of our national identity
is actually the embrace of certain socially liberal positions. So we were one of
the first countries in the world to adopt equal marriage in law and I'm a very
strong supporter of that. So this isn't about a big repudiation of individual
rights or anything like that. It's a new way of looking at the way in which we
can bring people together after a period of quite serious division. And when you
look at the future of the party, can you see Boris Johnson holding any part in
it? Well, if you're asking me is Boris Johnson likely to become the leader of
the Conservative Party and Prime Minister again, I think the answer is no.
Whether Boris ever feels able to serve the party in some kind of different way
and put the party first and the country first, then that will be up to him. Nick
Timothy there. Now to what is potentially the most important item you will hear
in our programme because it answers the question of what is the key to a long,
healthy and happy life. The answer comes from the longest ever continuous
research study. Back in 1938, scientists started following two groups. The
first, very privileged Harvard undergraduates. The second, people from some of
Boston's poorest and most troubled homes. They found that in both groups, the
single most important determinant of a long, healthy and happy life was good
relationships. The man who's now Director of the Research is Professor Robert
Waldinger and he told me what it had found. One of the strongest predictors,
perhaps the strongest predictor of human thriving is having good connections
with other people. That our connections with others not only keep us happier,
but they keep us healthier. That good relationships predict staying healthy
longer and living longer as you go through your life. So what, hold on,
irrespective of job, of wealth, the deciding factor as to whether you are, would
describe yourself as happy and you are healthy is whether you have your
relationships with other people. One of the deciding factors, another big
deciding factor is taking care of your physical health. That turns out to be
hugely impactful. That wasn't the news. Many other studies have found that, but
the news was that the quality of our relationships could predict whether we're
likely to get coronary artery disease or arthritis or type 2 diabetes. That was
the shocker for us. And then many other studies began to find the same thing and
we began to have quite a bit of confidence in our findings. What do you think's
going on there? The best hypothesis is that relationships, good ones, help us
manage stress. That stress is a natural part of life. We go into fight or flight
mode. Our bodies rev up when we meet a stressor, but then we're meant to come
back to baseline. And what we've found is that social isolation, loneliness, not
having good relationships creates a kind of chronic stress situation where our
bodies never go back to equilibrium. Whereas if we have good relationships, we
have people we can turn to, talk to, get help from when we are under stress. Now
you talk about the quality of relationships. Is that also dependent on the
quantity? I guess it's quite a hard thing to judge because perhaps you use
different relationships for different things. Depending on who we are, the
number of people we need in our life varies tremendously. Shy people find being
with lots of people stressful, whereas extroverts want lots of people. They get
energy from many relationships. What we believe from our research is that
everybody needs at least one relationship that feels secure. At one point we
asked people, list all the people in your life who you could call at 3 o'clock
in the morning if you were sick or scared. And most of our participants could
list a number of people, but some people couldn't list anyone. And what our data
show is that everybody needs at least one or two people in their lives who they
feel will be there for them when the going gets tough. And the saddest people,
if you were to look at those who would describe themselves as the saddest, was
there something that marked them out? They often felt that they were no good at
making relationships. They felt they didn't belong. And that feeling of
belonging is probably central to our well-being, belonging somewhere to
somebody, to some group. So the tips that you would give to somebody if they
want to have a long, healthy and happy life is what? It would be to invest in
relationships, to really reach out and keep current with the people who you want
to stay in your life. Reach out and send a little text or an email, make plans
to have a coffee or take a walk. Any of those small actions turn out to really
make a difference in what we're calling our social fitness, seeing it as a
practice like physical fitness where you take care of your relationships
actively. And if some of your friendships have lapsed because you've been busy
doing something else, is that something that you should think, hang about, this
isn't good for my health? Yes. In fact, I personally have done that. I mean, I'm
a professor. I could work nonstop. And what I realised from my own research was
that I needed to take more care of my friendships, of my family relationships,
and I do much more of that now than I did 20 years ago. I'm having dinner
tonight with a friend. I have two walks scheduled for the weekend. I make more
conversation with people at the coffee shop. I speak with the postal worker who
delivers my mail. All of this turns out to give us little hits of wellbeing.
When you saw the results of this research, I just wonder what your thoughts were
about how significant it is, how important it should be. Well, we know that one
in three people on the planet will say that they are lonely much of the time. We
know that loneliness accounts for between a third and one half of the complaints
that people bring to their primary care doctors. So we know that these things
matter enormously, both economically and in terms of our health and wellbeing.
So in fact, the Surgeon General of the United States, Vivek Murthy, has made
emotional wellbeing the centerpiece of his platform. That's a huge shift from
taking on smoking or obesity or any of the other important health things that
people take on. There's greater recognition across the globe that loneliness is
toxic and that social connection is enormously beneficial to all of us.
Professor Robert Waldinger there, the author of The Good Life, Lessons from the
World's Longest Scientific Study of Happiness. What a brilliant bit of research
that is. That's it from us. There'll be more with Evan and PM at 5 o'clock this
afternoon as usual. I'm Sarah Montagu and that's The World at 145. Studio
direction was by Antonio Fernandez and the editor was Rebecca Keating. Ben has a
baptism of fire in theatres coming up at 2 o'clock. But now on Radio 4, we take
to the skies for the latest stage of last year's epic autumn migration. Emily
Knight presents Flight of the Ospreys. The ospreys of Britain have begun their
5,000-kilometre migration from the Scottish Highlands to their winter hunting
grounds in West Africa. Many of these magnificent birds of prey won't make it
back home to breed next summer. A team of conservationists is following them to
find out why. The Flight of the Osprey team is led by the biologist, adventurer
and United Nations ambassador for migratory species, Sacha Dench. As we head
south, we'll be going through Yorkshire and Rutland, which is another key site
for reintroduction, and then into Wales for a site there and then through Pool
Harbour, which is the most southerly breeding site, and then down into France,
Spain, Portugal, and then crossing the Strait of Gibraltar into Morocco, and
from there it's a reasonably coastal route all the way round West Africa and
into Ghana. By the 1st of August, Sacha has gathered together her team of nine
scientists, medics and media crew close to the site of Britain's longest
established osprey colony at Loch Garton in the Cairngorm Mountains. As the
first of the ospreys begin their epic migration, it's time to pack up the gear
into an ex-army ambulance and two other battered 4x4s and set off on a four-
month conservation adventure. We are finally on the road. First stop is meeting
the three juvenile birds that we're going to be following, and the fate of
juvenile birds on migration is a key part of this whole expedition. Those three
birds are Kirk, Glenn and Tweed, all young males born this year, fed by their
parents from the fish of the River Tweed, a three-hour drive south, just past
Edinburgh. They've just been fitted with satellite tags, which will allow Sacha
and the team to monitor their progress in real time and, with a bit of luck,
catch up with them in the wetlands of southern Spain or on the edge of the
Sahara Desert. As we head off on the expedition, we will keep an eye on the
tracks, you will be keeping an eye on the tracks here, you and Diane. If you
notice anything unusual, then let us know. It's every 15 minutes, I think, where
it downloads. Diane Bennett and Tony Lightley from Forestry and Land Scotland
look after the Tweed Valley ospreys. They'll all leave at different times, and
the male is usually the one that's left last to migrate. It's amazing how, from
the same nest site, they take different migration routes, whether it's down the
west coast, the east coast, straight across to Holland, round by Germany,
France, all the way down. So it's not like they're going with all our birds.
They might see birds on passage, but they just take off and that's it, they're
gone. I hope the birds make it back eventually and breed here. What do you think
the chances are? One in three. We've not been lucky so far with some of our
trapped birds. One in three would come back. It's not that we're happy with
that, but that's just nature. Just exciting to be finally on the move, to have
the team together and people working on ospreys, really excited to have a chance
to follow the journey of the ospreys. I think what I've found from previous
expeditions is it gives people a sense of, it's a bigger sense of hope, knowing
some real faces, some real people looking out for the ospreys in different parts
of their journey. So then we went across to Glaslyn in the north-west of Wales,
where we met a woman called Gail, who's been volunteering for the osprey project
there for some time. She does observations and all sorts, and I just absolutely
loved the story of her reaction to one of the birds. It had been making signs of
potentially breeding with a couple of the females in the area. It had been
around long enough that it had become a real hit with the volunteers. He was a
Scottish bird with the ring number CU2. We named him Jimmy. I saw him wheeling
around with Mrs G, a wonderful bird. The news suddenly came through that he had
been found hanging from the pylon at the end of a power line, and he'd been
electrocuted, and honestly my heart just broke. I mean, even now I could just
relive that moment. I cried for days. I just thought, this cannot happen. Our
impact on people, on wildlife, in this world, cannot happen like this. It was an
older type of power line infrastructure that meant that a bird with a fish could
potentially cross the wires, basically, and get electrocuted, and that's what
had happened to it. And I looked into this, and I found that thousands and
thousands of birds all across the world are being electrocuted every day, to the
point of putting species at risk, like vultures. And I just thought, right, I'm
doing something about this. So she went, had a look at the power lines, looked
up online everything she could about the different formations of power lines,
the structures of them, put together a dossier of everything that she could
find, and called the power company. And I managed to get straight through
somehow, just through my sheer determination, I think. Next minute I was talking
with someone who said, yes, we will meet you. And I was like, wow, this is
really happening. Within the month, the power lines there had been changed.
They'd also taken her map that she'd drawn out of all the areas that ospreys are
frequenting around the country where there might be conflict with power lines,
and are in a process now of updating all of those as well, so that this form of
electrocution can't happen again. And I just thought for me, it was such a
moving story of what can be done when someone looks at an issue and is not
completely frozen in horror or grief at it. Next on our route was Rutland Water.
However, we had a call on behalf of a landowner, the owners of the Bolton Castle
estate in Yorkshire, saying that they hadn't told anybody yet, but they actually
had, well, they thought they had the first breeding pair of ospreys in Yorkshire
in recorded history. And would we be interested in dropping by and seeing those
and revealing them for the first time? So my name is Tom Ord-Paulett. One of the
gamekeepers spotted them copulating on, I think it was the 28th of April, the
copulation, I think it was the 7th of May. The same keeper saw one of the birds
lying very low in the nest, as though it was on eggs and incubating, so we were
pretty confident by then. So no, I mean, really, really exciting. But there was
a huge scare on the day that we'd worked out as the hatch date, and the farmer
who had been checking his livestock in the area had sent this picture of the
male trailing what looked like wire or netting behind it, probably about two
metres. And flight was presumably a struggle, but also, you know, the terror
that the chicks should have hatched that day. He's responsible for going out and
fishing and provisioning the nest, so sort of panic stations again. Brian, the
river keeper with his tree climbing skills, and he'd got all his climbing kit
ready in the hope that if he did land in a tree and get stuck, Brian could have
whizzed up with some cutting gear, he had his wire cutters and pliers, and free
the male. But the saying, don't count your chicks before they're hatched,
couldn't have been or felt much truer that day. And thank God the male had freed
himself of whatever the entanglement was, so he probably landed on something and
got caught, and he sort of pulled it clear. Luckily, and you know, he's fed his
young and his wife well on the platform, and now she's off the nest, you know,
hunting as well. Before this pair, are you aware of any previous records of
ospreys breeding in Yorkshire? No, and I mean, people far more sort of
knowledgeable than me on the natural history and things, having really trawled
through the old ornithological books, and we do have quite a sort of rich
history of those in Yorkshire, and you know, it does seem that there's no,
certainly non-recorded, and not even any sort of anecdotal breeding attempts
mentioned. They're mentioned quite frequently as a passage bird, so you know,
passing through Yorkshire on migration, but you know, no, to the best of our
knowledge, no record ever of them having nested here. Ospreys travel huge
distances for migration, but they're pretty slow to settle and breed in areas
where they've been absent for centuries. That's why in several key places across
the country, reintroduction projects have been launched to give them a helping
hand. One of the longest running is at Rutland in the East Midlands, where 25
years of effort has produced 200 osprey chicks. Tim McRill works with the Roy
Dennis Wildlife Foundation at Rutland Water. It's a moral duty really. The
osprey was eradicated from England by human persecution, so we're really undoing
those past wrongs, and really what the project here has shown is that it's got
so many added benefits. It's got people interested in the nature conservation
movement. It's inspired people, and I think that is a really important element
of the story, and something that Flight of the Ospreys is also doing so well.
One of the Rutland birds has been fitted with a satellite tag, which Sasha and
her team will be following on the journey south. He's an adult known as 4K, and
in previous years he's headed for an estuary on the coast of Guinea for the
winter. It's fascinating to follow these specific named and tagged birds, but as
Tim points out, nobody should get too attached to a migrating bird. We have lost
lots of birds on migration because it is a demanding part of their life. We've
lost birds in the sea, we've lost birds in the Sahara Desert. There was one
particular case where there was an osprey that was migrating through the
northern part of the Sahara, and it spent the night on this ridge on the
northern edge of the Atlas Mountains. The satellite data showed that almost
certainly it had died, and we actually found someone who was able to go out and
track down the exact location of the bird, and found out that actually it had
been predated, so that was a natural cause of death. We don't know exactly what
predated it, but it could have been a raptor or even an eagle owl. The fact is
that migration is incredibly hazardous. There are anthropogenic threats, but
there are also natural threats, and so the flight of the Osprey Expedition is
going to be so useful, because the satellite tracking data is fantastic, but of
course what it doesn't show you is exactly what's happening on the ground. So
actually being in the places where the ospreys are migrating through will bring
it to life and help to identify some of the threats they face on the journey.
The final British leg of the flight of the Osprey Expedition takes Sasha and the
team from Rutland to the port of Poole in Dorset, and the ferry to Cherbourg.
But before they check in their vehicles, there's time to check in on one more
osprey reintroduction project, with Paul Morton from the charity Birds of Poole
Harbour. So in context of our Poole Harbour reintroduction, it's been an amazing
year. So we started our reintroduction in 2017 in an attempt to try and re-
establish the south coast breeding population, and this year, for the first time
in, what, 200 years, we've now had nesting ospreys here in the local vicinity of
the harbour, which is just incredible. The last time ospreys were recorded as
breeding in southern England was in the Somerset Levels in 1847. So it's
understandable that Paul feels like a proud grandfather when he hears the chicks
crying out for more fish. The female that we have on our nest here, CJ7, she's
not actually one of the birds we released. She's a wild bird that has been drawn
to the area. I can hear the chicks going crazy. She hasn't fed all day today.
She got drawn to the area because of the birds that we were reintroducing. I'd
say one of my favourite moments, the one that really kind of gave me chills down
my spine, was the first time CJ7 had just laid her first fertilised egg. This
was, I think it was about April 20th this year. The male came back to the nest
and he actually wanted to try and mate with CJ, and she simply just shrugged him
off, lifted up off the nest and looked down into the nest to say, Oi, look
what's down there. And when there's this magic moment that we've got on camera
on film, where they both look into the nest for the first time and they realise
everything's different and that their priorities change. Two of the females that
we released here down in Pool Harbour as part of the project, they're now
breeding up in Wales and they have chicks in the nest up there. One of the
objectives for the project was to interconnect all the populations, and we've
done that already now. So we've got a Rutland bird down here, Wales have got two
of our birds, and the Welsh population established because of the Rutland
population anyway. So now we've already got the populations interacting, the
next key thing is to get our birds here in the harbour connecting with the
European population down in northern France. And if we can get those colonies
and populations interacting and mixing, then it should be a strong way forward
for ospreys in Western Europe. It's mid-August, and the UK's ospreys from the
Highlands, the Tweed Valley, Yorkshire, Rutland, North Wales and Pool Harbour
all have to make their way across the English Channel. Sasha and the team will
be following close behind. In the next episode, we're crossing France, along the
lush Loire Valley and down the Atlantic coast, where record-breaking summer heat
adds another stress to this tough migration. We headed south through the country
which has been badly hit by wildfires, so one of our vehicles came across still
smouldering fires. They say there was a thousand firefighters from across Europe
came in to help. Flight of the Ospreys was produced by Emily Knight and Alistair
Cross, and the journey continues at the same time tomorrow. ChatGPT has been
getting rave reviews, but can it make a radio documentary? ChatGPT is the
artificial intelligence technology that seems to be everywhere. It's an
extraordinary phenomena. It's burst on the scene. I'm Laura Lewington, and I'm
going to see what ChatGPT can do. This is going to happen. We need to learn how
to use this technology effectively. Can it write good essays, suggest holidays,
or simply change our daily lives? All of the ethical questions that concern us
when we think about using AI, they're right at the centre in the use of GPT. And
can it even make a radio programme? Find out in a documentary by ChatGPT next
Monday evening at 8pm.