TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-07H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 when you can hear the red-throated dive-in. And of course you can hear all the
tweets right now on BBC Sounds. Good morning. It's six o'clock on Friday the
24th of February. This is today with Martha Carney in London and Liz Giussett in
Kiev. It's a grey, cold winter's day here, minus three degrees in this wartime
city of Czech points. Some shortages occur few from 11pm to 5am. The capital of
a country where air raid sirens are now the soundtrack of everyday life. Our
headline this morning. Ceremonies will be held across Ukraine to mark exactly
one year since the start of Russia's full-scale invasion. Ukraine's President
Zelensky has insisted this conflict will end with victory for his country. We'll
dedicate most of today's programme to marking this momentous anniversary. We'll
catch up with some of the people we featured in our reporting to hear how
they're faring a year into this war. And I've been speaking to the most senior
woman in the Ukrainian military, Lieutenant Colonel Larissa Yakubchuk. Sometimes
it's difficult for men to accept that their commander is a woman. I always say,
firstly, I'm an officer, then I'm a woman, and then I'm blonde. We'll also hear
from Ukrainian ministers, the UK's defence secretary Ben Wallace, and a
specially recorded essay by Ukraine's Booker Prize-winning author Andrei Kudkov.
It is difficult for me to remember life in pre-war Ukraine. It's not that I have
forgotten exactly. It's just that it now seems like a fairy tale, like something
I heard about as a child. And throughout the programme, we'll hear live from our
correspondents, including Orligiren, James Waterhouse, Jeremy Bowen and Steve
Rosenberg. Our other headline this morning, the government says it's considering
changing the law to ensure criminals who refuse to attend court for sentencing
are given longer prison terms. Also in the programme? It's important to make
sure that we cherish the specialisms that we have in this country. A lot of
people would be eating termites right now, rather than thinking necessarily
about aspects of lettuce and tomatoes and similar. With the rationing of fresh
produce in a number of supermarkets, should we be eating more seasonally, and?
393 miles along the permanent way from London, Edinburgh's Waverly station was
ready to receive the giant of the steam age. Despite the anxieties of some, she
wasn't going any further. It was the end of the line. To mark the centenary of
the Flying Scotsman, the poet Lauret Simon Armitage will be reading a poem
composed in its honour. And why does being part of a couple mean you live
longer, but only if you're a man? The BBC News is read by Alan Smith. People in
Ukraine are preparing to mark a year of war on the first anniversary of Russia's
full-scale invasion. Ceremonies will take place across the country, remembering
those killed or forced to flee from the conflict. And President Zelensky is due
to hold what's expected to be a defiant news conference. He's warned that evil
is still around, but insisted that the battle will end with Ukraine's victory.
Our correspondent James Waterhouse reports from Kyiv. On this morning last year,
the thuds of explosions and sight of 150,000 Russian troops crossing the border,
marked the moment that Ukraine and the world changed forever. Despite being
outnumbered against one of the biggest armies on the planet, Ukraine would win
the battle for Kyiv. It is, however, still fighting for its survival. Invading
forces occupy almost a fifth of the country and are throwing everything at
trying to take the eastern Donbass region. President Zelensky has described the
situation in the south as dangerous and the eastern front as very difficult and
painful. As the country waits for more western hardware, such as tanks, to try
and break the deadlock, it's marking this anniversary with ceremonies across
Ukraine. On February 24th, millions of us made a choice, said Mr Zelensky in his
overnight address. Not a white flag, but a blue and yellow flag. Not fleeing,
but facing. Rishi Sunak will urge allies to increase military support to Ukraine
during a meeting of G7 countries to mark today's anniversary. Mr Sunak will also
join people across the UK, observing a minute's silence, as our political
correspondent David Wallace Lockhart reports. At 11 o'clock this morning, many
people in the UK will fall silent to mark the anniversary of Russia's invasion.
The Prime Minister then hopes to use his voice to increase support for the
Ukrainian cause. At a virtual meeting of leaders from the G7 advanced economies,
Rishi Sunak will call on countries to move faster in supplying artillery, armour
and air defence systems to Ukraine. The Prime Minister will also reiterate his
offer to train fighter pilots, though there are no immediate plans for the UK to
provide aircraft. Justice Secretary Dominic Raab has said the government is
looking carefully at changing the law to ensure people convicted of serious
crimes are given longer jail terms if they refuse to appear in court for
sentencing. Mr Raab said he would not rule out using force to get some offenders
out of their cell and into the dock. Here's our Home Affairs correspondent June
Kelly. Dominic Raab's pledge to bring in tougher rules and penalties for
convicted criminals who refused to attend their sentencing came during a meeting
with the family of a murder victim Zara Alina. Misalina's killer Jordan
McSweeney, who was jailed for 38 years, chose not to be in the dock for his
sentencing. He was condemned as spineless by the judge. Zara Alina's aunt Farah
Naz described McSweeney's refusal to appear and hear the family's statements as
a slap in the face. The family of the schoolteachers Sabina Nessa, whose killer
also wouldn't come into court for sentencing, have been campaigning on the issue
as well. Police have arrested a fourth man in connection with a gun attack on an
off-duty officer in Oma. Northern Ireland's Police Federation says Detective
Chief Inspector John Caldwell suffered life-changing injuries in the shooting on
Wednesday. Officers say they're focusing their investigation on violent
dissident Republicans. Nominations for candidates to replace Nicola Sturgeon as
the leader of the SNP close at noon. The winner of the contest will be announced
at the end of March. Here's our Scotland editor James Cook. The SNP is holding a
rapid contest to elect a new leader before Easter, a pace which some activists
worry will stifle debate. The two best-known candidates are under pressure.
Humza Yousif, because his plan to fix the health service was criticised by an
official report, Kate Forbes, for saying she would have voted against gay
marriage. The third contender, Ash Regan, quit the Scottish government last year
over plans to make it easier to legally change gender. She launches her campaign
in five this morning. Research carried out for BBC News suggests the price of
pasta has nearly doubled in two years. The average cost of a 500-gram bag from
the standard range at four supermarkets is now 95 pence, compared with 50 pence
in 2021. A basket of 15 popular food items from the same supermarkets has risen
in price by more than a third over the same period. Overall inflation last month
stood at 10.1 per cent, but the prices of many food items have risen more
sharply and are still rising. The poet laureate Simon Armitage has written a new
poem to celebrate the centenary of the Flying Scotsman. The world's most famous
steam locomotive set off on its first journey 100 years ago today. The poem is
on display as part of an exhibition at the National Railway Museum in York. And
he's going to be reading it for the first time live this morning at 20 Pass
State. The time now is seven minutes past six. Let's hear about the day's
weather from Sarah Keith-Lucas. Hi Sarah. Good morning to you Martha. Well,
we've got quite a chilly start to the day across parts of southern England in
particular, with clearer skies first thing. There's a touch of frost around, but
for most of us we've got quite a lot of cloud around first thing this morning.
Cloud and outbreaks of patchy rain set to slowly shift south through the day and
then more sunshine but a cold northerly wind developing from the north. So to
put some detail on that, all of southern England, Wales, the Midlands and
eastern England will stay fairly cloudy through the day after those initial
clear skies in the far south. So a frontal system moving south, patchy outbreaks
of light rain and drizzle at times certainly won't be raining all day. Something
a little bit brighter and drier though through the second half of the afternoon
and temperatures here around eight to eleven degrees. For northern England,
Northern Ireland and southwest Scotland, that front is producing outbreaks of
rain certainly over the next few hours, but they'll tend to peter out and clear
southwards. So sunny spells developing through the middle parts of the day,
quite a cold northerly breeze, particularly close to the east coast as well.
You'll really notice it'll feel a little bit colder here. Eight to eleven for
most, but just one or two wintery showers for perhaps the Pennines for North
York Moors for instance too. Eastern and northern Scotland lastly and here,
clearer skies developing over the next hour or two. Quite a cold day with that
northerly wind. There will be a mix of sunny spells and scattered showers and
over the higher ground some of those showers a little bit wintry. Top
temperatures here six or seven degrees and things looking mostly dry but cold
through the weekend. And now for a look at this morning's papers and what's on
the main news websites. Well many are marking this first anniversary of Russia's
invasion of Ukraine. As the Times puts it, Ukraine's year of blood. The report
said Rishi Sunak will renew Britain's offer to send typhoon jets to Poland or
any other Eastern European country that will hand over their MiG-29 combat
aircraft to Kiev. The paper says the Prime Minister is expected to urge NATO to
give Ukraine a decisive advantage over Russia on the battlefield to shift the
mindset, he says, of President Putin. The Guardian focuses on the devastation in
the city of Mariupol which it calls perhaps the bloodiest and most shocking
chapter of Russia's brutal war. It tells how after crushing resistance last May
Russian forces have been erasing evidence of recent atrocities and destroying
the Ukrainian history in the city. The continued defiance of Ukraine is
highlighted by the Metro which has the headline heroes never give in. Well this
war has led to 100,000 civilian deaths according to the Independent. It
attributes that figure 10 times the official total to Ukraine's top war crimes
prosecutor. He tells the website the bodies will have to be found and identified
after the country is liberated. The Daily Telegraph's main news is an article by
the Archbishop of Canterbury. He argues that Russia must not be crushed in any
future peace deal. Justin Welby writes that Russia cannot be allowed to repeat
its aggression but must not be humiliated in the way that Germany was after the
First World War. He says Ukraine must not be pressured into an unjust peace
either. The Guardian also publishes a poll which suggests that 65% of people in
the UK believe Britain should maintain or increase its support for Ukraine. Both
the Daily Mail and the Daily Express lead with comments by the Queen Consort
urging authors to resist curbs on their freedom of expression and imagination.
The Mail describes Camilla as wading into the row about the woke re-writing of
Roland Dahl's classics. The Express quotes a source close to Camilla as saying
she was dismayed that the publisher's puffin had made hundreds of changes to the
original text of the much-loved children's books. A claim that Rishi Sunak is
softening his position towards striking NHS workers makes the eyes front page.
It reports that ministers plan to invite in three other unions unite GMB and
Unison for pay talks after making an offer to the Royal College of Nursing. The
paper suggests that the government mood music on ambulance workers and health
staff is now changing with an olive branch set to be offered next week. The Sun,
under an exclusive banner, claims that Vernon Kay will replace Ken Bruce in that
mid-morning slot on Radio 2. Ken Bruce had revealed last month that he would be
leaving the BBC. The corporation is yet to confirm who will replace him. And the
Daily Mirror and the Daily Star mock yesterday's advice from the government
minister to raise coffee on how to get round fruit and veg shortages. Let the
meat turnip since the headline in both papers. The Mirror calls her advice
bizarre. The Star describes the vegetable as a government approved tasty treat
and its front page offers a cut-out and keep turnip for every peasant. And
that's the paper review. One year on, this war still rages and Russia now
controls about a fifth of Ukraine's territory in eastern and southern parts of
this country. From the very beginning one of Moscow's most important strategic
goals has been the complete capture of eastern Ukraine, the area known as the
Donbass where its forces first moved in in 2014. At this moment the fight is
focused around Bakhmoot, an eastern city laid to waste. After months of battle
it's a place of blackened buildings and the empty streets. A target both sides
are bent on taking. Our senior international correspondent, Orla Girnan now
joins us from outside the city. And Orla, there's been reports that the fighting
by Russian forces has intensified in the run-up to this anniversary. Is that
what you've been seeing on the ground? Well that was definitely the case, Liz,
when we were inside Bakhmoot last week. We've been inside the city twice and it
is literally a situation where the shelling does not stop. We could see that
Ukrainian forces were under pressure. They told us that they were lacking in all
kinds of ammunition but particularly shells. They said they also needed
encrypted communication devices. They even need armoured vehicles to move their
troops around. Even under the intense bombardment that we could see and hear,
troops were moving on foot and they were being transported around the city in
regular civilian SUVs. Now the battle has gone on since last July. Russian has
intensified step by step. It began originally with wave after wave of fighters
from the Wagner mercenary group. But that has been supplemented in recent times
by regular Russian troops. But the state of play is that Ukraine against the
odds is still holding that city but the Russians crucially have control over the
two main roads. There is now one back route into that city and that back route
is coming under intense shelling. So the question arises, how much longer will
Ukrainian forces be able to hold on? I suspect a decision will have to be made
at some point to withdraw. Yes and as you know there have been reports from
western capitals that some are urging President Zelensky to pull back to use his
forces in other more important battles and yet we hear from Ukrainians they are
going to fight for every inch. There is pressure to pull out the troops from
back mood while there is still time. Once that last supply route is cut off it
will be too late. We know from sources inside the city that the Russians have
now advanced on two sides. They are about two kilometers away on both the left
and right hand side of that road. Now I have driven down this road on this visit
and on previous visits. It is a hairy experience all the time because it is
extremely exposed and once that is cut there can be no more resupply for the
troops inside. Now there is a school of thought particularly abroad that Ukraine
would be better served by pulling out the troops while it can, save the lives,
save the resources to fight elsewhere. When you say that to troops inside they
have a counter argument. They say look we are tying down the Russians here. We
are keeping them bogged down in this battle and we are stopping them from moving
on elsewhere. I think the indications now are that Ukraine will certainly try to
hang on for a while. Oleg Yeren thank you for your work and the work of your
team in back mood. And at 60 Minutes Past Six we continue with our coverage one
year on from Russia's invasion of Ukraine because I have businesses operating in
the country managed. Well Felicity Hanna has more. Morning Felicity. Morning
Martha. Yes, the economic impacts of the war have been felt globally, of course
nowhere more profoundly than Ukraine itself. Let's talk to Charles Hecker who is
a partner at Control Risks, an international risk consultancy. It advises more
than 70% of FTSE 100 companies and we originally spoke to him in the days
following Russia's advance into Ukraine. Charles, good morning. Good morning
Felicity. Last year you told us that your clients were very worried about their
businesses in Russia and Ukraine but understandably extremely anxious about
their staff and what might happen to them. What's the mood now? Well you're
right Felicity. I mean we are now a year into a conflict that none of the
parties to this engagement thought would last this long. And so the number one
question on the minds of the international business community is how and when
this is all going to end. And the answer to that is probably no time soon. You
know our most likely scenario for the conflict going forward is that it will
continue at its current level of intensity or perhaps even escalate for at least
the next 12 months. And so if we were to have this conversation again Felicity,
a year from now we might be talking about the same level of combat on the ground
in Ukraine. How are you supporting businesses in Ukraine? How much business is
happening in Ukraine? Well I mean Ukrainian GDP has taken a catastrophic hit as
a result of the war. But if you look across the different regions there are
still companies that are on the ground and present in Ukraine because they can
or because they have to be. We recently opened up an office in Kiev and for
international businesses that want to or have to visit their premises for
reasons of business continuity and also to understand the dynamics of the
conflict and how it's impacting their business on the ground. There is a way to
get in and out of the country and to maintain a presence there safely as long as
you're taking into very very careful consideration the dynamics of an extremely
fluid conflict. A business is telling you that they're looking to get back into
Russia. Yes, there are already questions coming from the business community
about when they can go back into Russia and a question also that comes right on
the heels of that is what kind of Russia would we be going back into? And I
think behind all of this are questions and concerns about sanctions and the
durability of the sanctions that the UK, the EU, the US and the rest of the G7
have put on Russia. And for the time being those sanctions are going to remain.
It's been relatively swift and relatively easy to impose those sanctions. That's
one of the things that surprised all of the parties to the conflict is the unity
and the unanimity of sanctions from the international community. It's extremely
difficult to reverse sanctions. It's extremely difficult to lift them. And while
the conflict rages and even if there were some pause in the hostilities, it's
highly unlikely that we're going to see any sanctions relief for a very long
time to come. And of course the sanctions weren't just in one direction. We have
Russia's retaliation in supplying energy to Europe. Do you expect more of the
same? Is that going to continue? Yeah, there was a complete rewriting
essentially. As a result of the conflict there was a complete rewriting of the
European and in fact the global energy markets. And at some point the taps to
Europe, whether it's oil or gas, are going to turn off completely from Russia.
And yeah, Russia will continue to try to reprogram its energy sector to pivot
away from what was once its biggest customer to try to develop other customers
and encourage those who are currently buying Russian energy to buy more. That's
a long play. That's a slow play. It takes an enormous amount of infrastructure
to reorient energy markets, but that's probably the direction of travel for
Russia in the near future. Now your organization Control Risks, you've opened an
office in Kiev. You're expanding within Ukraine. What's it like doing business,
developing business there? Well, for the time being we're focusing on companies
that are already in Ukraine and who have maintained their business presence.
There will come a time when Ukraine has to rebuild. And that's once hostilities
are over. The budget for rebuilding Ukraine is estimated to approach something
like a trillion dollars. And that will start with rebuilding critical national
infrastructure and then we'll move on to rebuilding other sectors of the
Ukrainian economy. A lot of that investment will come from European businesses
because they're the closest to Ukraine and there will be, including from
companies like us, on the ground support to make sure that that can be done
safely, to make sure it can be done securely. Again, with a sort of critical eye
towards potential triggers and drivers of change in the security situation on
the ground and also in the investment environment going forward. Charles Hecker,
Partner at Control Risks. Thank you very much for joining us again this morning.
First time to Jane Foley, Senior Effects Strategist at Rabobank. Jane, good
morning. Good morning. One year on then, how much have the markets recovered
from the initial shock and volatility that followed the invasion? Well, it
depends which market you're talking about. Certainly, the biggest, as you
mentioned, was oil and gas. And that, of course, has had real knock-on effects.
And European economy, to start off with, for instance, there are estimates that
the German economy could be about 2.5% or maybe even 4% lower than what it would
have been. And that is because of the impact of the higher energy prices. But
those, of course, have come right off, partly because, of course, we've seen a
warm winter in Europe. And the same can be said for some commodity prices. Weep,
for instance, is back down to the levels it was before the war. That's partly
related to the fact that the yields in Russian growing have been really quite
strong, were last year. That might change. But as we've noted before, we've seen
food price inflation remaining very high, even though commodity prices have
generally come off. And this is because of the delayed reaction through the
supply processes. Higher fertilizer prices, for instance, from last year, higher
growth prices from last year are still coming through into what we're seeing in
the supermarket prices now. So, there is still an awful lot of ramifications
hitting us all. Let's be a bit more recent. There's been some stock market
volatility. Global equities have rebounded from earlier losses on Thursday.
What's going on and what's driving it? Well, actually, February has been a poor
month for stock prices generally, a poor month for risk appetite. And that goes
against the improvement in risk appetite that we saw at the start of the year.
Now, a large part of the reason that the markets are more concerned right now is
this fear that actually interest rates in the Federal Reserve and the US and
elsewhere in the world too might have to be higher for longer. What we're seeing
is resilience in economies such as the US in particular, but also here in the UK
too, some economic data showing a bit more resilience than we had feared. And
that suggests that in order for central banks to push demand lower, to get
inflation lower, they may have to work harder and put interest rates higher than
the market was thinking. Jane Foley from Rabobank, thank you very much. Let's
stay with inflation because yesterday we brought in news that food service price
inflation had fallen from 22.9% in December to 22% in January, falling for the
first time since September 2021. Today, new research for the BBC shows the cost
of a basket of 15 popular food items has risen in price by more than a third
over two years. The retail research firm, Asosia, has been tracking the prices
of items at Asda, Tesco, Morrisons and Sainsbury's. It found, for example, the
average cost of a 500 gram bag of pasta from the standard range is now 95 pence
compared with 50 pence in 2021. James Walton is the chief economist at the
Institute of Grocery Distribution, which provides insights to the grocery
sector. James, good morning. Good morning. So, official figures suggest that
overall inflation may have peaked. This research, though, shows some food prices
are still rising sharply. Why? The previous lady actually hinted at it. And the
major reason is that the food supply chain is very, very long and very, very
complicated. So, before your food arrives on your plate, it's gone through a lot
of processes, it's gone through a lot of hands. And therefore, it takes some
time for cost increase at the top of the supply chain, maybe on the farm, to
feed through all of those contractual relationships to you at the till. With
that in mind then, when can we expect the rate of food inflation to come down?
Well, we anticipate that food price inflation is going to peak in the early part
of 2023 and will then start to slow down as the year progresses. But we do think
that food inflation will still be above zero at the end of this year. So we're
still talking about ongoing price change, but at a declining rate. And the
cumulative effect of that, of course, is extremely damaging for households
because you're looking at inflation on top of inflation. And of course, a lot of
households are very vulnerable to that. And of course, food inflation can hit
lower income households even harder. What kind of impact could the fresh food
shortages like we've seen this week have? The fresh food shortages that we are
seeing at the moment are not unprecedented. But when we see them in combination
with inflation, what they do is reduce the shoppers' ability to maneuver.
Because when shoppers see prices going up, they don't let themselves be kicked
about helplessly by that. They act. Shoppers are very dynamic. They look at
what's going on and they make choices to protect themselves. Perhaps they move
from one store to another store to get a better deal or they change the types of
products that they're buying. But of course, if a lot of those fresh foods are
temporarily unavailable, they have less space to change. What kind of impact
does this have on the grocery sector? You're advising that sector. Does it
change retail habits? Yes. Of course, retailers and suppliers both want food to
be available for shoppers. And from the start of this inflation event, what
we've seen is ranges being changed in order to change the average price point
downwards. So what you'll see is retailers, for example, taking out some of the
more expensive items, perhaps some of the premium-owned label items, and putting
more emphasis on the basics because those are the things that shoppers are going
to want as they try to manage their grocery spend. And lots of retailers really
focusing on price in their marketing at the moment. James Walton, Chief
Economist at the Institute of Grocery Distribution. Thank you very much. And
thank you, Phyllis. And we're going to be looking at food shortages ourselves at
10 to 8 and the great turnip debate. Time now, 28 minutes past 6. Gary's here
with the sport morning, Gary. Great turnip. I was worried for a moment. I did
leave a small pause. I know you did. Pause is good on radio. A great win for
Manchester United. Details on the way, but first reflections on a great day for
England in the second test against New Zealand. Gary Brooke and Joe Root are
making headlines. Rain brought an end to play with England on 315 for three. But
Brooke, 184 not out and Root, 101 not out. Let's cross to the ground in
Wellington. Good morning to our reporter, Stefan Shemilt, who can give us all
the details. Stefan. Morning, Gary. It was a stand of 294 runs between Brooke
and Joe Root. England had been 21 for three after being put into bat on a green
pit, Zach Crawley, Ollie Pope and Ben Duckett all falling cheaply. But Brooke
led a counter attack for his 406 tests. Root moved into his slipstream with his
first 100 in eight tests. 101 not out, the former captain. It was quite
disdainful at times from the Yorkshire pair. Who knows where England might have
been had the rain not arrived. We only had 65 of the scheduled 90 overs, but
power to come for England tomorrow. They could rack up a huge total. And just
put into context this Brooke innings. 184 not out. You've written lots of
interesting articles on him on the website. I mean, it was an incredible day for
him. We're running out of things to say about him. Gary's only played six test
matches, so maybe we should just let the numbers do the talking. No England
batter has got to 400s quicker than the nine innings taken by Brooke. His 107
runs rather, and counting because he's still not out, is the most by any batter
in the history of test cricket after nine innings. He's an incredible talent and
to think he only got his chance at the end of last summer when Johnny Barstow
slipped on a golf course and broke his leg. That was in September, while since
then Harry Brooker's pocketed a T20 World Cup winner's medal and now he's
tearing up the record Brooks in test cricket. Thank you, Stefan. Much more on
the cricket later in the programme and much more on the football later in the
programme where Manchester United are through to the last 16 of the Europa
League. They came from behind to beat Barcelona 2-1, Fred and Anthony scored
their goals. Andy Murray is through to the semi-final of the Qatar Open. He came
from a set down to beat the French qualifier Alexander Muller. Super League,
Hull KR made it two wins from two, defeating Salford's 24-10. Let's give you the
tips. Warwick at 2.30, number one. Henri the second, and then we're off to
Wolverhampton at 7.15, number seven, Send in the Clouds. Thanks very much, Gary.
Exclusive performances by much loved artists. Together with the BBC Concert
Orchestra. From classic tracks to brand new covers. Radio 2's piano. Watch on
iPlayer, listen on BBC Sounds. And now the time is 6.31. You're listening to
today on BBC Radio 4 with Martha Carney and Lise Doucette. And now a summary of
the news for balance Smith. CEREMONIES will take place across Ukraine today as
the country marks the first anniversary of Russia's full-scale invasion. People
will gather to remember those killed or forced to flee from the conflict.
President Zelensky will speak later in what's expected to be a defiant news
conference. Rishi Sunak will use a virtual meeting of the world's most advanced
economies, the G7, to call for an increase in military support for Ukraine. The
Prime Minister will join people across the UK, observing a minute's silence at
11 o'clock. Despite the United Nations called on Moscow to withdraw its troops
from Ukraine's territory, the motion was backed by 141 nations. 32 countries
abstained and seven, including Russia, voted against. The resolution is not
legally binding. Police have arrested a fourth man in connection with a gun
attack on an off-duty officer in Oma. Northern Ireland's Police Federation says
Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell suffered life-changing injuries in the
shooting on Wednesday. Officers say they're focusing their investigation on
dissident Republicans. The Justice Secretary Dominic Raab is considering longer
jail terms for serious criminals who refuse to appear in court for sentencing.
Mr Raab said he would not rule out using force to get some offenders out of
their cell and into the dock. His comments follow several murder cases where the
defendants refuse to go to court to be sentenced. Nominations for candidates
hoping to replace Nicola Sturgeon as leader of the SNP and Scotland's First
Minister will close at noon. Three politicians have so far announced they will
stand. The Scottish Health Secretary Humza Yousuf, the Scottish Finance
Secretary Kate Forbes and the former Minister Ash Regan. And a study of food
prices for BBC News suggests that the cost of pasta has nearly doubled in two
years. The average price of a 500-gram bag from the standard range at four
supermarkets is now £95, compared with £50 in 2021. The cost of a basket of 15
popular food items from the same shops has risen by more than a third over the
same period. Thank you, Alan Smith. February 24, 2022, is a day seared in
memory, a time steeped in history. At this time exactly one year ago, Russia's
invasion of Ukraine was only hours old, the biggest attack on a European state
since the Second World War, an assault from the east, the south and the north on
land, sea and air. In a televised address before first light, Russia's President
Vladimir Putin had declared what he called a special military operation, forced,
he said, by Ukraine's threats to Russia. Explosions and gunfire rocked this
city. We were all jolted from sleep by the sounds of war, the wail of the air
raid siren. Well, I'm joined here in our temporary studio in Kiev by James
Waterhouse. He's the BBC's Ukraine correspondent. James, you're also in Kiev on
that momentous morning. I still feel it chill thinking about it. What stays with
you? Just the speed, Lise, where the shadow of war descended on Kiev. You and I
were working the night before and Kiev was just like any other European city,
wasn't it? And we wandered around and we spoke to people. Even with Vladimir
Putin doing things like officially recognizing those separatist territories and
the rhetoric ramping up, there was a disconnect because what Ukrainians would
say is, well, who is right? Is the West right by saying it's going to happen? Or
is President Zelensky right in that we shouldn't panic and should just not plan
to rush his hands? And that morning, you know, the city changed in the click of
a finger. And I remember surfacing with you and we walked around and, you know,
there was panic and there was fear and the streets just hollowed out. There were
empty as people tried to leave in their millions or they stayed to either take
shelter or fight. And it's that morning and the speed of events which will
really stay with me. Today's another moment. What lies ahead? Well, I think
we're going to see both sides trying to seize the initiative where we are
talking in the midst of a really static period where we are seeing Russian
forces already starting their spring offensive, throwing everything at this vast
Eastern frontline to huge cost for both sides. And we have Ukraine patiently
waiting for more Western hardware to arrive, light tanks to try and unlock
things. They see it as a way to kind of concentrate on the front an area of the
frontline, push through with infantry and achieve their dream of repelling
Russia completely. But complete liberation right now feels a very, very long way
off. Yes. And to Ukraine, they're still saying this is a war we can and will win
and we'll win it this year. James Waterhouse, thank you for all of your work.
And it's a war which has meant that so many people have been forced to leave
their homes after the start of the war, almost 4 million Ukrainians crossed into
Poland, some moved on, others settled there and still more arrive every day.
Well, we can talk now to Sarah Rainsford, BBC's Eastern European correspondent
who's in Poland. Morning, Sarah. And I remember very vividly your reports a year
ago of all those people arriving in the stations in Poland. And what's the
situation now? Well, there are still people crossing the border, but far fewer
than there were a year ago, of course. I was in Eastern Ukraine at the time and
there were huge numbers of panicked people then in the days after the beginning
of this war a year ago who were flooding to train stations in terror, basically,
because they just didn't know what lay ahead. The war had started, the
explosions were going off and those chilling air raid sirens had started to
sound. And so people were flooding out in their millions. And I just remember
the goodbyes, the separations, the men staying behind and the women and the
children crushing onto trains. Now, they are still coming across and people are
still coming across for the first time into Poland. I spoke to people and I
asked them why they were coming. And a lot of people told me they were really
terrified that Vladimir Putin was going to do something even more wretched to
mark this anniversary. And they said there were lots of rumours, lots of
information even that something might happen. And people who, for example, I met
families who'd lived under occupation inside Ukraine who said they couldn't face
that happening again. So they were leaving even though these families I was
speaking to didn't know where they were going. So I think this kind of just
depressed and tired mood now, it was panic a year ago now, it's just this sense
that they don't know what the future holds still. Many people left just for a
few days. They're still here a year later. And it's hard to build a life when
you don't know what the future is. And I think that's what I'm finding reflected
in the people I'm talking to here. And huge changes too for the people of
Poland. Yeah, this is a country which has really mobilised to help Ukrainians.
It's been quite staggering. I think many Poles I've spoken to are almost
staggered themselves at how people here have been so incredibly supportive of
people in Ukraine. And the Ukrainians are very grateful for that. But it has
changed Poland. Warsaw is a city that you walk around now and you hear Russian
and Ukrainians spoken on every street. I've been staggered by how many people
here have moved to Poland. And many of them are integrating, many of them are
doing well. Polish as a language is quite close to Ukrainians. So people are
finding it relatively easy to fit in here to learn the language. I've seen lots
of children going to Polish schools and the officials that I've spoken to say
the schools are coping. They're not struggling to find places. So it's going
okay, but speak to the Ukrainians themselves and speak to the psychologists, for
example, who are working with them. And they're saying that they're trying to
tell people that it's all about living for today, that they have to focus on the
fact that they're not in basements, they're not under fire. They are safe here
and try somehow to figure out how they go forward when so many people are saying
they don't see any end to this coming soon. Sarah Rainsford, many thanks. Time
now is 20 to 7 and let's turn to politics back here. And who's going to take
over from Nicola Sturgeon as First Minister of Scotland? The candidates have to
declare by lunchtime today. Let's talk to James Cook, our Scotland editor, and
just remind us of who's standing, James. Well Martha Humsley-Yusuf, the current
Health Secretary is standing. Also Kate Forbes, she's Finance Secretary in the
Scottish Government, but she's on maternity leave. She's come back off her
maternity leave to stand. And the third candidate whose campaign will be
launched today, looking out over the 4th and 4th and 5th, is Ash Regan, the
former Community Safety Minister who resigned from the Scottish Government in
protest that plans to make it easier to legally change gender. And the first
week of the campaign has really been dominated by Ms Forbes and a row over her
beliefs. She's a member of the Presbyterian Free Church of Scotland and she has
been opposed to gay marriage, she's been socially conservative on other issues
too, but crucially she said she would have voted against gay marriage when that
bill was passed in 2014. She wasn't in Parliament at the time and that's
provoked something of a row, to put it mildly. And Ash Regan, we know that she
had quit the Scottish Government, didn't she, because she opposed its gender
reforms? Yes, that's right. She quit the Scottish Government over that issue, as
I say. And that's been another controversial issue. So it's interesting, Martha,
I mean a lot of times we're talking about economics, about public services,
about independence, but we've spent a surprising amount of time in this campaign
so far discussing the cultural issues and it's been interesting to see that
crossover. I suppose there's an interesting question about that, is does it
matter? And there's one poll out this morning, a poll of a thousand SNP
supporters. Now a couple of caveats. That's not one of the biggest polling
companies, it is a thousand people, but it was conducted online. Nonetheless,
quite an interesting result because all the coverage, I'm looking at some of the
newspapers, through the last few days have suggested that Kate Forbes' campaign
is in tatters, but it puts her in the lead. So we're still at an early stage
because the nominations haven't even closed yet. As you say, that happens at
lunchtime. Mr Youssef under some pressure himself because of a critical report
into the health service in Scotland that came out yesterday and particularly
criticising his plan to try to fix some of the problems in the health service.
And Ms Regan, well to be honest, she's much less known as a candidate so it'll
be very interesting to hear some of her views this morning. Interesting contest
ahead, James, thanks very much. British MPs worried about the supply of some
vegetables from abroad heard that the shortages could last for up to a month.
But the Environment Secretary told them the UK's food security was still
resilient. Here's our parliamentary correspondent, Susan Hume. To earlier
generations, a lettuce in February would have been a rare and wondrous thing.
Now we expect to, in fact, we're told to eat a healthy Mediterranean diet all
year round. But supermarkets are struggling to get hold of their usual supplies
of tomatoes, peppers, cucumber and lettuce. Several retailers are limiting how
much of those shoppers can buy at any one time. The Environment and Food
Secretary to raise coffee blamed unusually bad weather in southern Spain and
Morocco. But in her most calming tones, she insisted there was no need to panic
about salad. Industry has the capability, levers and expertise to respond to
disruption and where necessary my department will further support and enable
that. I wish to reiterate, UK food security does remain resilient and we
continue to expect industry to be able to mitigate supply problems through
alternative sourcing options. Labour's Shadow Minister, Jim McMahon, thought she
sounded much too calm about it. Food security is national security. This is
absolutely mission critical and frankly I found that response to be completely
detached from the reality that's been faced on the ground. He recognised there
had been external factors but he felt the government had failed to pull the
right levers to help farmers combat the various food supply crises. We've had a
billion fewer eggs like this year than before the pandemic on our shelves. We
literally had pancake day this week and you couldn't buy eggs to make your
pancakes. This is the result of indifference and divvying from government.
Therese Coffey accused him of playing politics but the salad shortage isn't over
yet. I'm led to believe by my officials after discussion with industry retailers
we anticipate the situation will last about another two to four weeks. It's
important that we try and make sure that we get alternative sourcing options.
Now Therese Coffey had said that other European countries were also affected but
the SNP's Patricia Gibson didn't believe it. The only European country with
empty supermarket shelves. The reality is that food shortages are due to law
food production which is in serious decline under this government's watch. In
addition the supermarket sector has been and I quote, Hucked horribly by Brexit
according to the Chief Executive of Sainsbury's. A Conservative Sir Desmond
Swain asked with heavy irony. If only I had been told before I voted for Brexit
that it was going to cause frosts in Morocco I could have made a different
decision couldn't I. Another Conservative, Celaine Saxby thought we might be
looking at this the wrong way. I believe the supermarkets are still importing
far too many produce for us and that actually we should be eating more
seasonally and supporting our own British farmers and if we were actually to
move to a seasonal line of eating many of these problems would be avoided and
that there are great food products available from local farmers at this time.
Therese Coffey said it was important to cherish British specialities and
considered what we could be having for dinner. A lot of people would be eating
termites right now rather than thinking necessarily about aspects of lettuce and
tomatoes and similar but I'm conscious that consumers want a year round choice
and that is what our supermarkets and food producers and growers around the
world try to satisfy. Labour's Luke Pollard accused her of being complacent.
It's 2023 and there are crops rotting in the fields because there's not enough
people to pick them. There are kids going hungry in all our communities and now
we have rationing in our supermarkets. That's not because people are stockpiling
and panic buying salad although you can't keep to add that long or the lettuce
lasts longer than the last Prime Minister. I do want the Secretary of State to
have some more grip. Therese Coffey thought it was ridiculous to complain that
there was no one out in British fields right now picking vegetables because
there wasn't much growing at this time of year. I'd love to hear about which
farms in his constituency are as short right now of people being able to pick
tomatoes or lettuces because I have to say it's probably about as rare as a...
Unfortunately the Minister was struck by a supply issue with her metaphors.
Alternative sourcing options shouted out their suggestions. She rummaged round
the mental stock room. What's the best way to go and see? Oh I came up... I had
a great one Mr Speaker. I don't know. I had gold at the end of the rainbow.
Yeah, sometimes you just have to make do with what you've got. As we're
learning, Susan Heumann you can hear more from yesterday in Parliament at half
past eight on Longwave and on Digital. Our main headline at 30 minutes to seven.
Ukraine is marking the first anniversary of Russia's full-scale invasion. In the
UK there'll be a minute silence at 11 o'clock this morning. Of all the threats
which have concentrated mines here and in capitals around the world over the
past year, the spectre of a nuclear strike has been the most alarming. This week
the UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres warned again about implicit nuclear
threats. A reference to warnings which have come more than once from Russia's
President Vladimir Putin. He's spoken of being ready to use all options to
defend Russia. And there's another worry too of a nuclear disaster, an accident
or an attack on Ukraine's nuclear power stations, including the Zapparizha power
plant, its Europe's largest and it was taken by Russian troops last March. And
nuclear watchdogs are still expressing concern. They did it this week about a
risk of a nuclear disaster, either a deliberate attack, an accident or a
shortage of power supply to this country's plants. I've been speaking to
Ukraine's Minister for Energy, Geryamangalu Schenko, and I asked him how big a
worry is it? Before this massive attacks of an energy infrastructure, I was
thinking that they won't attack directly the nuclear stations in Ukraine. But I
mean, after what they did with Zapparizha MPP when they captured these stations,
so they shallered by heavy tanks, by artillery, and that is absolutely far from
the feeling of nuclear safety. We're not talking about even some international
rules convention. Everything is destroyed. But what we should expect from
Russians, I really do not have an answer now. So I hope that they won't shell
our nuclear station. The good thing is that we in very close cooperation with
the CIA and today, yes, with Rafael Grossi and here, I can tell you that we
already provided the permanent missions of the CIA experts to all nuclear
stations of Ukraine. I hope at least it should stop them. I mean, to do some
stuff. This is not a top worry at the forefront of your mind. I hope. I mean, at
least if they have any feeling of, that's not the issue of Ukraine and Russia. I
mean, if you attack the nuclear station, that's not only the issue of two
states. That is the issue of global security. I mean, our neighboring countries.
So we understand what could be in case of a nuclear accident, what could be with
our neighbor country, with Europe, with Russia. And I hope that at least they
still have some feeling about consequences. But I cannot be 100 percent sure
about this. It's been one year since Russia invaded. We speak as the winter
temperatures are dropping. Your energy reserves are dropping too. What is the
main worry on the mind of Ukraine's energy minister? I can tell you so. I quite,
let's say, confident about the reserves. I mean, when we are talking about the
stocks of gas and the stocks of coal in Ukraine. So we feel quite safe because
it's even, I might say, that we have reserves in case it's needed. But, of
course, the most dangerous issue is the shellings, which unfortunately continue.
And that's the issue of really what would be the damage of these attacks. I
mean, I'm not expected they would stop these attacks. And of course, I can tell
you that the situation when we maintain the system for more than four months,
every day attacks, I don't want to use the word miracle. I mean, but it's not a
miracle because that's the concrete people. We also have a lot of our energy
staff who died at this war and died repairing the energy infrastructure. That is
Ukrainian people in the energy sector and as a nation, as Ukraine. As a last
question, may I just ask you? It's been one year and there is a concern that
this seems to be a war without end. What is your prediction for this year, this
new year of war? I'm not expected one year of war. So I hope and I feel that the
victory is not far. This year? Yeah. Do you really have all the weapons you
need, the advanced weapons? I'm not an expert in weapons, but what I see, I
mean, and let's say that's my feeling and expectations about this that we will
win. Not far. Thank you very much. Thank you. The time now is eight minutes to
seven. Over the past year, we've certainly seen the war fought fiercely on the
ground, but the battle for world opinion is equally contested. President
Zelensky in battle fatigues addressing parliaments around Europe and President
Putin trying to convince the Russian public and the wider world that his mission
is to defeat neo-Nazis in Ukraine. Well, we can talk now to James Rubin, former
Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs and now Special Envoy for the
U.S. State Department. Good morning. Good morning to you. And part of your role
is to lead Washington's effort to counter propaganda and disinformation that
threatens U.S. security. And we've certainly seen plenty of that, haven't we, in
the context of the Ukrainian war? Yes. From the beginning, I think there's been
an information component to this war starting when President Putin and his team
basically lied to the world about their intentions. And then the United States
did something unusual, which is to really explain how we knew and why we knew
that Russia did intend to invade. And frankly, as an American who's been on your
show for many years, I am pleased to say that that information turned out to be
correct, unlike some information in the past we used to talk about. And I think
it's done a lot to show the change in the world's attitude towards the United
States. We were able to tell the truth to the world in advance and to debunk
some of the expected lies coming from Moscow. And I think, unfortunately, some
of our allies and many people didn't really think it was going to happen, but it
did happen. And since that time, over this year, there have been continued
efforts by Russia, sometimes supported by China and others, to misinform,
disinform, manipulate international opinion. My organization is called the
Global Engagement Center that I lead. We put out a report today called
Disinformation Roulette, which lays out the things that Russia has done over the
last year to mislead and to manipulate international opinion. Go ahead. Yeah,
no, it's just interesting that you say sometimes supported by China, because
there's obviously a lot of interest in that relationship at the moment, the
suggestion that China may even be involved in arming Russia. How do you see that
relationship now? Well, that is pretty much the big question of the day. We saw
China's leading diplomat arrive in Moscow in the last few days. He met with
President Putin. And I think it's been a matter of extreme concern to the
president, to the secretary of state, that China has been so supportive of
Russia and its war, supportive diplomatically, supportive politically,
supportive economically. And particularly in the area that I work on, China has
repeated, and over and over again, Russia's lies about this war. They've
repeated Russia's lies about the biological weapons claim, which was all
nonsense. They've repeated the most important thing that somehow the United
States wanted this war, the United States pushed this war. That's their false
claim. And I think it tells us a lot about what China's real policy is, the fact
that they would be so close to Russia right now. This is a Russia that has now
alienated the world. 140 nations voted against it. And China is supporting
Russia's war diplomatically, politically. Diplomatically, but militarily as
well. Do you think there is likely to be armed support from China? I'm not going
to speculate on what will happen. I think you know that President Biden, or I
can tell you that President Biden has raised this issue with China's president
on several occasions, warning him about the consequences for our relationship,
if that were to happen. Secretary Blinken in the last several days has talked
about this, that there is evidence that they may be planning to do that. We are
trying our best to tell them the damage that that would do, not just the
relationship with the United States. Let's face it, China's leaders have been on
a charm offensive in Europe for the last several months. And the fact is they
can't do two things. They can't claim to be for peace, and yet supporting the
aggressor in this war. And finally, looking at the options for the West and
offering more help to Ukraine, what do you think about the so-called backfill
options? In other words, countries like Poland, which have former Russian
aircraft like MiG's, would give them to Ukraine, and then countries like Britain
would then backfill, as it were, supply other aircraft to Poland in its place?
Well, I don't want to predict exactly how the military assistants will get to
Ukraine. What I can tell you is that anyone who looks back in this one-year
period, I think there's almost nobody around who would have predicted the extent
to which the United States and our allies have provided so many weapons,
including systems that a year ago, tanks that people thought we would never give
them. So coalition management is about keeping the coalition together and making
it possible to give greater and greater support to Ukraine. Like to include air
power for them? Well, I don't want to predict that. I'm not the Secretary of
Defense. I don't want to be that, and that would really be in his area. James
Rubin, Special Envoy for the U.S. State Department, thank you for joining us.
And now it's time for the weather. Here's Sarah Keith-Lucas. Thank you, Louise.
Well, we've got a lot of dry weather on the cards as we see out the final few
days of February, a bit of a colder feel to the weather, certainly over the next
few days with the northerly breeze developing. Now, today is something of a
north-south split, so we'll start with a detail across all of Scotland, Northern
England and Northern Ireland. Well, we start this morning with a front sitting
across the region, so that's bringing some patchy rain to the western isles,
down towards Dunfries and Galloway, some of that patchy rain down towards
Northumberland, for instance, as well. As the cloud and rain just slowly sinks
south through the morning, we'll see a return to sunnier skies during the
afternoon. Still a few showers around, particularly for eastern Scotland, one or
two for northeast England, and they could be a little bit wintry over the higher
ground, but some sunshine too, although it'll feel quite chilly, six or seven
degrees across the northern east of Scotland, perhaps 11 degrees a little
further south. Now, for the Midlands, Wales, eastern England and southern
England today, it is going to be quite a cloudy day, chilly first thing in the
far south. Few spots of light patchy rain through the day, but a return to some
slightly brighter conditions later on this afternoon, and highs here of eight to
eleven degrees. Sarah, thank you. Radio 4's Lent talks for 2023. This reflective
moment's taking inspiration from the Lord's Prayer, with meditations on
forgiveness, fatherhood and finding heaven on earth. A collection of personal
stories, from the man who forgave his brother's killers, to the writer escaping
a war zone, to facing despair but finding hope. Sharing experiences on faith,
humanity and... We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are
distributed via third party services and platforms, and the BBC stream you are
currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an
internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the
manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to
stream on BBC Sounds. I'll be swapping tomatoes for turnips. I have to think of
some turnip recipes, won't be. If you're listening to today on...