TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-03H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 powerful countries on Earth. Listen to episode two of the invention of Russia.
This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio station. Coming up on the
newsroom from the BBC World Service, Vladimir Putin blames his enemies for the
war in Ukraine. Responsibility for fueling the Ukrainian conflict lies fully
with the West, and of course with the regime in Kiev. As President Joe Biden
rallies support for Ukrainian sovereignty. Stand with us. We will stand with
you. Let us move forward with faith and conviction, and with an abiding
commitment to be allies. I'm Peter Goffin, and at two hours, GMT will cover the
cyclone battering Madagascar, a deadly alligator attack in the US state of
Florida, and in Syria, a glimmer of hope after the earthquakes. We began to dig
through the rubble for her parents. I heard a voice. It was the baby. Also, how
international football is hurting the environment. All that coming up after this
bulletin on the BBC World Service. This is Danielle Yawoviecov with the BBC
News. Hello. Days before the anniversary of Russia's invasion of Ukraine,
President Biden has given a defiant speech painting Ukraine's struggle as a
generational conflict for freedom. Speaking in Poland, he said that Washington
and its allies would never waver in their support for Kiev. Addressing a
cheering crowd in Warsaw, Mr Biden said that, as he put it, President Putin's
lust for power and land would fail. Appetites of the autocrat cannot be
appeased. They must be opposed. Autocrats only understand one word. No, no, no.
No, you will not take my country. No, you will not take my freedom. No, you will
not take my future. Mr Biden also rejected the Russian leader's portrayal of the
war as a necessity, saying it was Mr Putin's choice. In Moscow, President Putin
painted a different picture to justify the war. I want to repeat, it were them
who are guilty, who are culpable for the war. We are using a force to stop it. A
year ago, in order to defend our historical lands, to liquidate the threat that
came from the near Nazi regime, we decided to conduct a special military
operation. And step by step we carefully, consistently, will settle the task we
are facing. The NATO chief has accused President Putin of making the world more
dangerous after he announced that Russia would suspend its participation in its
only remaining nuclear arms control agreement with Washington, the New START
Treaty. Jens Stoltenberg urged Moscow to reconsider the decision, which he said
dismantled the whole architecture of arms control. China's top diplomat Wang Yi
is in Moscow for talks with Beijing's strategic ally. He said relations between
the two countries remained, as he put it, as hard as a rock. On Tuesday, NATO
echoed US concerns that China could supply Russia with weapons in its war
against Ukraine. Here's Stephen McDonnell. China has been accusing the US of
prolonging the war. Now you've got the US saying it's China as the one that
could be making the war go longer if it starts supplying arms and ammunition for
the Russian war effort. Beijing says it's neutral, but researchers in North
America say this country is already supplying these dual-use technologies, so
equipment that could be used to fix fighter jets or jamming gear. Now later this
week, China's leader Xi Jinping will be making a speech and apparently calling
for a negotiated settlement in Ukraine. World News from the BBC A court in New
York has ruled that victims of the 9-11 attacks in 2001 by Al-Qaeda militants
were not entitled to Afghan central bank funds frozen in the US. At the time of
the attacks, the ruling Taliban allowed Al-Qaeda to operate from Afghanistan.
The judge said access to the $3.5 billion to compensate the victims would amount
to recognizing the Taliban as the legitimate Afghan government, which violates
US government policy. A New York court has found Mexico's former security chief
guilty of taking bribes in return for allowing safe passage for drugs.
Prosecutors said Hennaro Garcia Luna, once the face of Mexico's war on drugs,
was secretly receiving millions of dollars from the country's biggest crime
group, the Sinaloa Drug Cartel. Witnesses said they'd passed the money to Mr
Luna. A US prosecutor concluded the Sinaloa Cartel could not have built its
cocaine empire without Mr Luna. His lawyer, Cesar de Castro, contested the
verdict. The government had no reliable evidence to corroborate their witnesses.
Mr Garcia Luna, family and the defense team trusted in the process, trusted that
the jury would see through the government's case. We are very disappointed that
it did not. This has been an extremely difficult and long road for Mr Garcia
Luna and his fight will continue. The US authorities have ordered a train
operator to pay the entire cost of cleaning up contamination after one of its
freight trains carrying hundreds of tons of chemicals derailed in the state of
Ohio earlier this month. The head of the Environmental Protection Agency said
Norfolk Southern would bear the cost for the trauma it inflicted on the town of
East Palestine. Iran has added 36 EU and British individuals, organizations and
companies to its sanctions list, accusing them of supporting terrorism
interference. The action comes a day after the EU imposed further asset freezes
and visa bans on Tehran. BBC News. You're listening to the newsroom from the BBC
World Service with me, Peter Goffin. It's nearly one year into Vladimir Putin's
war in Ukraine and the Russian leader is in a bind. The campaign has become a
war of attrition. NATO is pouring money and weapons into the fight and Russia is
a pariah to the West. On Tuesday in his annual address to the nation, Mr Putin
blamed his enemies. Responsibility for fueling the Ukrainian conflict for its
escalation and for the growing number of victims lies fully with the West. And
of course, with the regime in Kyiv, I wish to repeat, they started the war. We
are using force to stop it. A few hours later, a rival view of the world, Joe
Biden visiting the Polish capital Warsaw laid out the responsibilities of the US
and its allies to build global peace and security, dignity and respect. And he
called on all democratic nations to join the cause. Stand with us. We will stand
with you. Let us move forward with faith and conviction and with a binding
commitment to be allies, not of darkness, but of light, not of oppression, but
of liberation, not of captivity, but yes, of freedom. Well, President Biden also
made clear that the US is invested in Ukraine for the long haul. He said that
decisions made in the next five years or so would shape the world for decades to
come. Our North America editor, Sarah Smith, traveled to Poland for the speech
and gave this assessment. Joe Biden is inordinately proud of the way in which he
was able to coordinate a united and unified Western and NATO response to
Russia's aggression. And he repeats quite frequently and did again in this
speech that Putin thought that he would find the West weak and divided and
uninterested and therefore be able to take advantage of Ukraine. And of course,
he found entirely the opposite. And that is a real point of pride for Joe Biden.
And it's something he wants to try to maintain over what he is hinting is going
to be a seriously long haul. If you talk to security officials in the US and
people in the White House, they tell you that there's a practical stalemate on
the ground at the moment. And there's no incentive for either side to enter any
kind of talks or negotiations. So there's no point in even suggesting it at the
moment. Both sides, of course, will try and launch a spring offensive. But
American intelligence doesn't seem to suggest that that is going to make any
huge or material difference. If you think about some of the bigger commitments
in weaponry that the US have made to Ukraine, the most recent one was promising
them. And one Abrams tanks, which Ukraine had been asking for for months in the
US, eventually agreed to. They're not going to arrive this year. It doesn't look
like if they're going to be there for a spring offensive, it will be a spring
offensive in twenty twenty four. And the fact that the US is procuring and
commissioning tanks to send to Ukraine on that kind of time scale tells you that
they're looking at this lasting for a considerable length of time. Let's turn
now to the African country of Madagascar, where a category five storm has made
landfall. Cyclone Freddie is one of the most powerful storms to hit the region
in years, and residents of this island and the Indian Ocean are bracing for its
full impact. We used to be afraid of wind gusts, but now it's more the rising
water that scares us. Also, our house is at the bottom of a bridge, so we're
afraid of flooding. We've inspected each of the homes to try and deal with the
danger. According to what we're hearing, it's a very powerful cyclone which has
to be taken seriously. Well, the newsrooms Nigel Adderley has been following
this story. Nigel, what's the latest from Madagascar? Well, Cyclone Freddie made
landfall on the island at around 1630 GMT on Tuesday, and the eastern coast has
taken the brunt of it so far, winds of over 200 kilometers per hour. It's been
confirmed a man has drowned in the nearby port of Manonoro, as we've heard that
people in the region are extremely worried about the potential damage this could
cause. Madagascar is, of course, one of the world's most impoverished nations,
and the UN's World Food Programme has said more than 2.3 million people could be
impacted by this. And the storm landed north of Manonjari, a town of 25,000
people, which is still devastated after Cyclone Barysarai last year, which
killed 130 people across the country. And 33 also perished last month, when the
first tropical storm of the year, Storm Cessano, caused more havoc with
extensive flooding covering an area of 90,000 people. You mentioned those other
storms. I mean, how common is this type of event in the region? More common than
they believe it should be, because the Cyclone season runs between November and
April. They average around 1.5 per year, which is the highest average in Africa.
But around six tropical storms have hit the nation within the last year. And
this was one of the worst seasons on record. The humanitarian charity Save the
Children has highlighted climate change as a reason for this, and has also
called on higher income nations to increase aid to help those unable to protect
themselves and their properties. So Cyclone Freddie has made landfall in
Madagascar. What's its trajectory? Where is it headed from here? Well, its
forecast, the Cyclone will cross the island and then head towards Mozambique and
Zimbabwe by Friday. And disaster management in those nations are already
planning to move people away from those areas, which appear to be in its path at
the moment. All right, Nigel, we'll leave it there. Nigel Adderley, thank you
very much. You're listening to the BBC World Service. It is 212 GMT. Now let's
take a look at Turkey and Syria, where rescuers are searching through the
wreckage and rubble caused by an earthquake on Monday. The region is still
grappling with the effects of the quakes that struck two weeks ago. Our
correspondent Anna Foster is at a makeshift shelter in the southern Turkish city
of Adina. As the ground started to shake once again, millions of people gathered
up everything that was precious to them and ran. Hundreds came to this sports
centre, bedding down on blankets spread across a volleyball court. For many,
like Felice, it brought back painful memories of the first quake two weeks ago.
I'm concerned for our future. I'm afraid for our children. I don't want them to
be orphans. Mentally, I'm upside down. Almost half a million people have now
left the earthquake zone in southern Turkey. There's growing pressure on
authorities to care for those who aren't able to flee. Adana's mayor, Zaydan
Karala, visited survivors here and promised to help. People filled this place up
and thousands are on the streets again. It's our job to erect them tents,
provide them blankets and food. Many of the buildings which collapsed in the
latest quake were already empty, damaged beyond repair by the first one, which
killed more than 40,000 people. Most of the new injuries were caused by panic.
Some people jumped from windows to try and get to safety. Now, in spite of all
that chaos after the earthquakes, there are still moments of hope. A baby in
Syria who was born and orphaned on the day of the first quake has now been
adopted. Thousands of people all over the world volunteered to give her a new
home, but she's gone to live with her aunt and uncle. Speaking to the BBC,
Khalil Al-Sawadi said one day he'll tell his niece how he rescued her from the
debris. We began to dig through the rubble for her parents. I knew that her
mother was about to give birth. As I was digging, I heard a voice. It was the
baby. She was screaming. I had no idea her mother had given birth, and I started
shouting, she's alive, she's alive. I pulled the baby out with my bare hands and
cut the umbilical cord. Then I took her to hospital. The doctors told me she was
OK, but I noticed she wasn't doing well. She'd spent seven hours under the
rubble by that time, so I was almost certain her parents were dead. All I wanted
was for the baby to keep the family name alive. At first, I thought the baby was
a boy, so when the doctors asked me for a name, I said, let's name him Abdullah
after his father. I then went out to continue searching through the rubble for
the parents, but I was later told the baby was a girl. I suggested naming her
Ayah after her aunt, who'd also died in the earthquake. But the nurse said I
should name her after her mother, so I've named her Afwa. Two days after Afwa
was born, my wife also gave birth to a little girl who we've named Ayah. Khalil
Al-Sawadi there talking about the miraculous rescue of his newborn orphaned
niece. Now, Honaro Garcia Luna was meant to be fighting Mexico's war on drugs,
but the former security chief now faces 10 years to life in prison after being
found guilty of taking bribes by a court in New York. Our correspondent, Neda
Tawfiq, told Andrew Peach about the background to this case. This case really
rested on the testimony of cartel members who have been convicted of their own
drug crimes. And those members gave evidence about the bribes that Garcia Luna
received, saying how it was all delivered in cash, once left in a safe house in
a false wall, one time at a car wash in Guadalajara, another time at a French
restaurant in Mexico City across from the U.S. Embassy. And they detailed just
how essential Garcia Luna's involvement was to the cartel, passing along
sensitive information about law enforcement investigations. At one point, one
cartel member detailed how they were given federal police force escorts as
bodyguards and police uniforms and badges to be able to load shipments of
cocaine. And prosecutors really say that the Sinaloa cartel became this global
cocaine empire and the biggest crime group in Mexico, specifically because of
Garcia Luna's help. How was he caught? Well, he was living in the United States.
And in fact, there had been rumors about his complicity with the cartels.
Prosecutors in the United States, I should say, initially decided not to go
after him, thinking they didn't have enough evidence. But after the El Chapo
trial in New York, he is the former kingpin of the Sinaloa cartel. After one of
the witnesses, Jesus Zambada said that he had given millions in cash bribes to
Mr. Garcia Luna, well, then he was arrested in 2019 in Texas. And are there more
officials like Hanaro Garcia Luna who may come to court yet? Well, look, I think
if you speak to many people in Mexico, you know, as I have in preparation for
this trial, you know, many will say that there is always, you know, this fear
that the Sinaloa cartel and cartels like them can't operate without corrupt
officials helping them. I will say that the United States, while they thought
this might be the start of not just going after cartel members, but also corrupt
politicians, well, Salvatore San Fuegos, he was the former Mexican defense
secretary who faced very similar charges to this in late 2020. Well, after they
arrested him, Mexico got very upset about that. They didn't take too kindly to
an official, another official being arrested in the United States. And
ultimately, the United States did drop that case. But I think this also does
send a signal to other officials that if they want to step foot in the United
States and work with the United States, there is a bit of caution that needs to
be taken. Neda Tofik in New York. Now, our newsreader Danielle has some other
stories we're following this hour. The number of people killed in landslides
which hit coastal towns in Brazil's São Paulo state over the weekend has risen
to 44. More than 40 others are still missing. Locals have joined forces with
rescue workers to search the mud for survivors. More than 750 people lost their
homes as torrents of earth and rock came loose from hillsides after a record
amount of rain fell in the coastal area east of São Paulo. The daughter of the
murdered American civil rights activist Malcolm X says she's suing the New York
Police Department, the FBI and the CIA over his death. Ilyas Shabazz accuses the
agencies of allegedly concealing their role in her father's assassination in
1965. She announced the planned legal action at the site where Malcolm X was
fatally shot exactly 58 years ago. Nigeria's first lady Aisha Buhari says she
ordered fake news posts that appeared on her social media accounts to be
deleted. On Tuesday, the Central Bank of Nigeria issued a warning about a fake
press release that was shared by her accounts with incorrect information about
the phasing out of old Naira notes. Mrs Buhari said in an Instagram post that
this was not the first time her accounts have been tampered with. Concerns have
also been raised about the spread of disinformation ahead of Saturday's
presidential election. And the filmmaker Steven Spielberg has been honored with
a Lifetime Achievement Award at the Berlin Film Festival. The director of iconic
productions such as Jaws and E.T. was also in the German capital for the
screening of his new film The Fablemans, a drama inspired by his childhood and
teen years. The 76-year-old had this advice for those hoping to emulate him. I
have a lot of kids coming to my office and I meet a lot of young filmmakers,
especially at film schools, and I tell them all study, study movies, study old
movies, study contemporary movies, but also write. It's very, very important
that directors can also write or at least associate themselves with writers
because it's all about the story. How you communicate the story, everybody has a
different style and you have to also hone your style. But to figure out what you
want to say, that's the most important thing. You have something to say that
people through film, who will listen? Steven Spielberg there with some tips for
aspiring filmmakers. A retirement community in the U.S. state of Florida is
reeling after an 85-year-old woman was killed by an alligator while walking her
dog by a local canal. Florida is home to more than a million alligators, but
attacks like this are extremely rare. Stephanie Prentice reports. It was a scene
that a witness at the Spanish Lakes Fairways retirement community described as
horrifying. An 85-year-old woman was walking her dog on the edge of a lake in
Fort Pierce when a three-meter alligator sprung out of the water, lunging at her
pet. When she tried to save the dog, the reptile grabbed her, dragging her into
the water. The neighbor told a local news station that her friend, who hasn't
been identified yet, was able to come up for air to shout for help before being
pulled back into the water. The dog survived the attack. Alligator sightings are
common in many parts of Florida, even on highways and in car parks. These people
say they're vigilant. Where there's water, there's gators. So you don't walk
close to them or if you do, you stay aware of them. I had a dog. The dog never
went in the water or near the water because they're attracted to that. Expert
trappers arrived on scene and dragged the alligator from the bottom of the lake.
It will now be relocated or euthanized. Despite people and alligators living
side by side in all 67 counties of Florida State, the Fish and Wildlife
Conservation Commission said they seldom bite people and attacks, especially
those which end with someone dying, are rare. The newsroom's Stephanie Prentiss.
Now let's check in on the latest sport news with Richard Newman. Thank you. The
Liverpool manager Jochen Klopp says he's not feeling optimistic. His side can
turn around their Champions League last 16 tie with Real Madrid after losing
5-2, having led the first leg 2-0 at Anfield. It's the first time the club have
conceded five goals at home in the competition. Klopp's side head to the
Burnabough in three weeks time. I think Carlo thinks the tie is over. And I
think it as well in the moment, but in three weeks. So it is in these moments,
the closer you get to the game, the bigger our chances have become and the
lesser likely it is that the tie is over. But tonight with a 5-2 and you see the
game, it's like they are pretty good in counter-attacking. We have to score
their three goals, so take some risk. That could be a bit tricky. Napoli have
control of their tie after winning 2-0 at 10-man Eintracht Frankfurt. Former
Watford manager Javi Gracias, the new man in charge of Leeds, but it's not clear
if he'll remain in charge beyond the end of this season. He's been appointed on
what the Premier League strugglers have described as a flexible contract. In
Rugby Union, Wales players have set a deadline of today to resolve a contract
dispute with the Welsh Rugby Union. All the threat of strike action ahead of
Saturday's Six Nations match with England could become real. The head coach,
Warren Gatlin, delayed naming his team on Tuesday, while negotiations continued.
Cricket Women's T20 World Cup, the host on Africa, set up a semi-final with
England by beating Bangladesh. England, who were already through, produced
record innings for the tournament of 213 for 5 in their victory over Pakistan.
And the World Anti-Dopey Agency's appealed to the Court of Arbitration for Sport
over what it's described as the wrong judgement of Russia to clear the teenage
figure skater, Kamila Valieva, of intentionally taking a banned substance.
Details of a failed test emerged after she'd already won team gold at the
Beijing Winter Olympics last year. Richard Newman. Now, football is already the
most popular sport on Earth. About 1.5 billion people watched the most recent
Men's World Cup final. But the game's global governing body, FIFA, plans to
expand its reach even further by including more teams in international
tournaments. That may be good news for football, but critics say it's bad for
the environment, and it clashes with FIFA's commitment to reducing its carbon
footprint. Our sport news correspondent, Alks Kapstick, reports. Fans from
Argentina are celebrating their team's spectacular World Cup triumph in Qatar.
The tournament was watched by a global audience of billions, making it by far
the most popular single sports event on the planet, with profits to match. The
financial statements are looking extremely, extremely good. So this shows how
strong FIFA is today. And the FIFA president, Gianni Infantino, wants to build
on that success. It means international football is said to become even bigger,
but not necessarily better. Is it ignorance, or is it just that they don't care?
David Wheeler plays for Wicom Wanderers in the third tier of English football.
He also has the title of Sustainability Champion at the Players' Union, and he's
aghast at FIFA's expansion plans. Like the next men's World Cup, which has been
bumped up to 48 teams, with matches spread across the USA, Canada and Mexico.
They tried to claim carbon neutrality for the Qatar World Cup, which was
probably one of the most carbon intensive events after the two World Wars.
They're now having a World Cup over a continent, which is insane. It seems like
it's a money making exercise at the expense of all else. FIFA is also upgrading
the men's club World Cup. Real Madrid won the latest competition held recently
in Morocco, a relatively low profile event contested by just seven teams. But
the revamp, scheduled for 2025, will involve 32 clubs. FIFA's hunger for more
has also extended to the women's game. A record 32 nations will compete at this
year's World Cup, with a brand new event added to the list. This was the
traditional welcome for the 10 teams who've been competing in New Zealand over
the past week, for the final three World Cup qualifying slots, a tournament
which raises more questions over FIFA's commitment to lower its carbon
emissions. My name is Diane Caldwell and I represent the Irish National Team,
Republic of Ireland. Diane is also part of a group of international players
called We Play Green, who speak out on environmental issues. I'm sure FIFA will
say they've done it to help the women's game grow there. Of course, we all want
the women's game to grow, but it can still be done in a sustainable way and not
by flying 10 teams from different continents to New Zealand to compete in 13
extra games. In response, FIFA issued a statement saying the new playoff
tournament was a collective decision by leaders of all the international
confederations. It also insists substantial efforts have been made to tackle the
environmental impact when increasing the number of fixtures. The global game is
already big business, but do big profits have to come at a big cost to the
planet? Or can football find a new tactic to tackle climate change? Alex Kapsdik
on the environmental impact of international football. And that's all for this
edition of the newsroom on the BBC World Service with me, Peter Goffin, a
reminder of the main news. President Joe Biden, in a speech in Poland, said
democracies were stronger and autocracies weaker one year on from Russia's
invasion of Poland. Goodbye. This is the BBC World Service with the story behind
Louis Armstrong's concerts in the former German Democratic Republic. In post-war
communist East Germany, loving jazz was dangerous. If you wanted jazz, you know
you have to speak with a special person. You were willing to take that risk?
Yes. So how did the famous American musician come to play a series of concerts
behind the Iron Curtain in 1965? I know we're going to have a nice stay here
because I have a lot of friends right here. Armstrong always told stories of
performing in West Berlin and people would come from East Berlin, they would
come from Russia. And that always impressed him that these people would kind of
put their lives on the line just to go see him. I'm Kevin Lejeant. I'll find out
who pulled the strings to make these legendary concerts happen. Cold War in full
swing. Today at 10 GMT. I'm Misha Glenny, a former BBC correspondent, and I want
to tell you about 1709 when Peter the Great's Army defeats the marauding Swedish
forces at Poltava. From then on, Russia had become a major European state. To
find out how Peter transformed Russia into one of the most powerful countries on
Earth, listen to episode two of The Invention of Russia with me, Misha Glenny,
on the BBC World Service. BBC News with Danielle Liao-Viecke. Days before the
anniversary of Russia's invasion of Ukraine, President Biden has given a defiant
speech painting Ukraine's struggle as a generational conflict for freedom.
Addressing a cheering crowd in Warsaw, Mr Biden said President Putin's lust for
power and land would fail. China's top diplomat Wang Yi is in Moscow for talks.
Mr Wang told the Russian Security Council secretary Nikolai Patrashev that
relations between the two countries remained as hard as a rock. He said the two
sides discussed their willingness to oppose all forms of bullying. A judge in
New York says victims of the 9-11 attacks in 2001 by Al-Qaeda militants are not
entitled to Afghan central bank funds frozen in the United States. The judge
said it would mean recognising the Taliban government as legitimate. Mexico's
former security chief, Henaro Garcia Luna, has been found guilty of taking
bribes to allow safe passage for drugs by a US court. Mr Luna took millions of
dollars from the Sinaloa drug cartel, Mexico's biggest crime group. The attorney
general in Peru says the US State Department has agreed to extradite the former
Peruvian president Alejandro Toledo on corruption charges. Prosecutors say he
used the bank accounts of accomplices in the US to receive millions of dollars
in bribes from the Brazilian construction giant Oderbrecht. The US authorities
have ordered a train operator to clean up contamination after a train carrying
hundreds of tons of chemicals derailed in the state of Ohio earlier this month.
Iran has imposed sanctions on 36 EU and British individuals and organisations.
The EU imposed similar measures on Tehran a day earlier. The European Food and
Safety Agency has recommended that laying hens and broiler chickens are no
longer kept in cages. And that's the latest BBC World News. Around 600 years
ago, a largely wooden fortified settlement began a mission to gather in the
Russian lands. First it conquered its neighbours, places like Novgorod in the
north, along with Rostov and Tuvaire. Soon it began expanding beyond the
original lands of the Rus, using rivers like the Volga that stretched south and
east, towards Kazan and Astrakhan on the landlocked Caspian Sea. Crazy Cossacks
set out for Siberia. Peter the Great took on the Swedes and Catherine the Great
challenged the Turks before slicing and dicing Poland in one of the more cynical
acts ever seen. Imperial overstretch? Moscow was building the greatest
contiguous landmass the world has ever seen. I remember when I was a small child
you sometimes see these programs on Newsmelt or something and you'd have a map
of Europe and you'd see the Soviet Union and how many planes and tanks they had
in the Warsaw Pact. And you thought, God, they're going to be tutting back by
Thursday. The Invention of Russia, presented by Misha Glenny. This is a
remarkable success story, but it also looks extremely aggressive, a sort of
rolling military machine. Episode 2. The Empire Strikes Back I don't think it
was different. I think the Soviet Union was the manifestation of the Russian
Empire. There was an illusion of something different, a facade. And it's a
facade that I think to this day Putin manages to keep up. So my name is James
Hill and I have spent much of the last 30 years living in Russia, working in
Russia. In 1991, the very end of the Soviet Union, I arrived in Ukraine. And in
1995, when I joined the New York Times and Contract, I moved to Moscow. What's
the country like? How would you describe it if you were talking to somebody
who'd just arrived from Mars? Well, I remember the very first time I took a
flight from Moscow to Vladivostok. And first of all, if you fly for, I guess it
must be about eight hours, you land in the same country. And then I was in a
place which fires up the imagination. And so when I went there and I saw the
Pacific Ocean, I thought, wow. And then of course I walked into the restaurant
of the hotel that I was staying in. And this was in, I think, 1994. And the menu
was exactly the same as every other hotel I've been in, in the former Soviet
Union. So the Sulyanka borscht for soup and it was beef stroganoff. And I was
shocked that, because you traveled all this way and you found something that was
exactly the same. As in a place which was thousands of miles to the west and in
a completely different time zone. Russia, the Russian Empire, the Soviet Union,
whatever name you give it, we're talking about roughly one sixth of the world's
landmass. You just can't escape the size and the huge number of peoples it's
embraced. And when it comes to how it expanded, only one country really comes
close, the United States, the French, the British, Portugal, Spain, all their
empires were overseas. The Dutch had to sail halfway around the world to reach
their empire. But here the colonists, as in the US, just kept pushing out across
the land. At the end of the 16th century, a small group of Cossacks went on a
business venture into Siberia. The business venture was that's where the furs
came from, that's how you got rich. And they didn't stop until they got to the
Pacific. Project Braithwaite, author of Russia, Myths and Realities. What they
were doing was of course what the trappers were doing in North America at the
time. They were moving in, catching the animals, fighting the locals, and then
being backed up by, in North America, the British Army, and later the American
Army, and in Siberia by the Russian Army. The methods they used, which of course
were brutal in the extreme, they massacred the natives and they were supported
by troops sent by the Tsar from Moscow. And that was the way people did things
in those days. We look back on it now with some dismay, but that's what
happened. Do the Russians look back on the way they conquered Siberia in terms
of the effective extermination of many of the indigenous peoples? Do they have
the same crisis of conscience that some Americans have had about the way they
conquered the West? I haven't myself detected much in the way of Russian guilt
complexes on this subject of the kind that we feel now. Professor Janet Hartley,
author of books on the Volga and Siberia. I think when I wrote about Siberia, I
did like to try to challenge some of the stereotypes, and one of them was that
Siberia is just a land of ice, desolate. But in fact, the southern part of
Siberia is really quite productive, and once a railway was built, it was very
advantageous to the Russian Empire to export grain. We imported butter from
Siberia in the early 20th century. I think that would surprise people that they
don't think of Siberia as a great exporter of foodstuffs. And then, of course,
it has the resources iron, copper, and then later on oil, gas. But the issue
there, of course, is that they are in remote parts even of Siberia, then they're
not in the southern part. James Hill claims to have visited pretty much all of
it. As a journalist or as a photographer, what often interests you the most are
the places where you're on the edge of something, and Russia is this wonderful
word, kray, nakray. I spent a lot of time, for instance, in the Russian Arctic.
I went up to Norilsk, where they have the famous nickel mines. And for instance,
I went up into Chukotka, which is the area opposite Alaska. And so you flew nine
hours to Anadyr, and then I spent three days in a tracked vehicle driving to
this fishing village on the Sea of Ochotsk. So how do they run a country like
Russia if it's so big and if it takes you nine hours and three days in a vehicle
to get to a fishing village? With great difficulty. And of course, the other
thing they do is great harshness. I was once in Kamchatka, and I had a five hour
drive, and I was chatting with my taxi driver on his hand between his index
finger and his thumb. He had a tulip tattooed. And so I asked him what the tulip
was for. And he said, oh, I meant I sat my full sentence. Because I asked him,
well, you know, perhaps nervously, what are we in for? And he said, for nothing.
And in fact, what he'd been inside for was for having this is in literature
under his bed. And he'd been given 10 years in prison for having this is in
literature. Of course, the scale of that punishment made me understand that the
principal way in which they controlled that enormous space was through fear.
What they do think is that they were bringing enlightenment to the natives. They
believe that they were extremely tolerant of native differences. They didn't
force them to become Christians. They recognize their religions and their ways.
That's what Russians tell themselves. And you'll find Putin telling himself the
same that we were bearers of civilization. It's, of course, a myth. It's a kind
of myth that imperialists tell themselves. But by very early on, by 1630 or
thereabouts, the Cossacks had got to the Pacific. I mean, they covered the
territory with tremendous speed. I think we should pause, Misha, and explain the
Cossacks. They were pioneer frontiersmen spread across the steppes, protecting
borders, grabbing lands. They're sort of like guns for hire. Some even lived and
worked inside the old Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, one of the really big
powers of the day. They just don't fit neatly on a map. So for Ukrainians, I
suppose they could be perceived as cowboys. They are frontier men who fight off
the raids coming from the Ottoman Empire to the steppe, to the wild steppe of
Ukraine. There are so many stereotypes. But the ultimate plan is to assimilate
them. That was the Ukrainian historian, Olesia Krumjacuk. And this is Anna Reed,
author of a brilliant book called Borderland. The Cossacks inhabited those great
plains that we're seeing on the television now, those great prairie lands along
the north shore of the Black Sea. This was all a sort of empty no-man's land,
which the Cossacks, who originally were sort of runaway serfs, poor laborers,
landless peasants settled. Ukraine, all of central Ukraine and western Ukraine,
is Polish ruled at this stage. It's part of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth.
So some have taken Polish stipends and allowed the Polish crown. Others are
still sort of autonomous down in the Zaporodian Sitch, which is a stockaded
fortress on an island on the Dnieper. You'll notice we've moved south and west.
And the reason these Cossacks matter is their support for a man who leads them
against the Poles, Bochdan Kmelnitsky. Kmelnitsky is a massive figure in Russian
and Ukrainian and Polish history. He was born around the start of the 17th
century to a land-owning Ukrainian family. He was taught by the Jesuits,
although he was Orthodox, and served in the Polish army against the Ottomans.
And then he goes back to the family estate in central Ukraine and for 25 years
lives there quite peaceably, avoiding the various Cossack rebellions against
Poland. So why does he end up leading the rebellion? It seems to be down to a
personal grievance. While he was away, a neighbor raided his house, killed his
son, and kidnapped the young woman who he was planning to marry. His first wife
had died, and he went to the local courts for justice, didn't get it, went to
Warsaw for justice, didn't get it. And then in frustration went to the free
Cossacks, and he inspires the Cossacks there to rebel again against Poland. The
war that followed was horrendous. They killed Polish landowners. They killed
Jews. And when it went wrong, Kmelnitsky and the Cossacks called in the Russians
to help. Kmelnitsky says, we will give you an oath of loyalty in exchange for
guarantees for our rights, and that we, the Ukrainian nobility, can hang on to
our land, that it won't be handed over to Russians. The Zars representative says
no. Zars, we make no promises to our subjects. Our subjects make promises to us.
Kmelnitsky walks out, a few hours later walks back in again, and he ends up
signing a one-sided oath of allegiance to the Czar. He is such a complex figure
because he, of course, is perceived in Jewish mythology as an instigator of
pogroms, of massive anti-Jewish violence. But for Ukrainians, he's both
perceived as a hero, as a rebel who managed to rise up against Polish landlords.
But it's a complicated figure because of Periyaslav Triti, the treaty that he
established with Moscow Pizar. The Russians interpret it as the Ukrainians
coming home to join the Russians, their brothers, become the little Russians in
official language. The Ukrainians see it as something intended to be just sort
of one move in the long balancing act that Ukrainians always had to do between
rival powers to try and retain a bit of autonomy, playing off these more
powerful neighbors. But what you're saying is that in Russian schools, for
example, this will be taught as proof positive that Eastern and Southern Ukraine
is part of Russia, whereas in Ukrainian schools, Kmelnitsky will be taught as
the U.A. figure in Ukrainian modern national consciousness. I mean, the
Russians, of course, yes, they see him as leading the Ukrainians out of Polish
bondage into sort of reunion in this great sort of Slav brotherhood. There's a
statue of him outside St. Sophia Cathedral in central Kiev. It's in the middle
of a roundabout and is put up, I think, by Nicholas II. And it's Melnitsky on a
rearing charger and he's pointing his sword northeast towards Moscow. He's
leading his people towards Moscow. And it's always been a bit of a controversial
statue for Ukrainians, but he's still there, though now, of course, ironically,
he's all covered up with sandbags against Russian missiles. Professor Janet
Hartley. Might also be worth mentioning that we think of Russia as a great land
empire, which, of course, it was. But until the middle later of the 19th
century, it did have possessions overseas in North America, both in California
and in Alaska. I didn't know about Northern California. I knew about Alaska.
Port Ross, north of San Francisco, it was a trading post to get some sea otters
and they sold it off to a Swiss adventurer in 1841. Just before we get back to
the 17th century, Alaska, I've always wanted to know, was there ever a
possibility that Russia might have maintained their sovereignty over Alaska
rather than sell it to the United States? Because that would have changed
geopolitics in an extraordinary way. Well, it would, and so would Russian
California if they'd not sold it before the gold rush. But really, in practical
terms, it was just too difficult to supply. It's a nice idea, but it's not
really practical. This is the old Russian anthem, the imperial anthem, God Save
the Tsar. Written in 1833 by when Russia had moved into Crimea, further into
Ukraine and taken a chunk of Poland to boot, Finland became part of the empire
in 1809 and the Tsar marched into Paris towards the end of the Napoleonic Wars.
Many of these changes were set in motion a century earlier by Peter the Great
and he did it by obliterating some old friends of these programs, the Swedes. My
name is Ulf Sander and I'm professor of history at Lund University. Sweden at
that time has this power position, a great power position because it's an empire
and most Swedes tend to forget that we used to have a Baltic Sea empire. The
Russians, the Muscovites, dates back to Muscovy, had always seen the Baltic as a
legitimate objective for their foreign policy. They needed to have a foothold on
the sea to break out of their landlocked status. And the Swedes, who had
performed quite remarkably during the 30 years war under their king Gustavus
Adolphus, were pouring into Eastern Europe and under Charles XII, Charles XII
was a remarkable soldier. I mean, he couldn't pass a town without laying
successful siege to it. Well, he's a warrior king and he becomes king at the
very young stage, goes away from Stockholm, our capital, at also a very early
age and never comes back because he's on different battlefields in Denmark,
Germany, Poland and Russia. Russia was a main enemy. So we have to wage a war
against Russia. The Great Northern War, as it's called, ran for 21 years. As
well as the Swedes and Russians, it sucked in the Danes, the Poles, the
Prussians, even the British for a while. But the key moment came in 1709 when
the Swedish warrior king Charles XII led his troops too far into a trap. So they
are marching through this Russian winter and it's cold and it's terrible and the
soldiers are dying like fleas. And in the end they are ending up in what is
today's Ukraine at Poltava. And they are just waiting for the Russians to have
this fight. And in the end the Russians do come and they are much more. And if
anyone tries to invade Russia, well, they are not going to succeed. Ah, the
Russian winter. When you have archaeological investigations nowadays, you can
see that many of the Swedes actually have wounds on their backs. So they were
trying to get away, but few of them did. Charles XII made a huge strategic error
and that was to believe that he could beat Peter the Great, whose military
abilities he rather despised. And so he invaded Poland, he went on into Ukraine
and Peter cut off his supply lines behind him. So he was stranded in Ukraine.
His army was totally destroyed with nowhere to go. And that was in 1709, key
date in Russian history, which again all Russians remember. And indeed in
European history. From then on, you couldn't manage European politics anymore
without taking Russia into account. It was able to dispose of Poland at the end
of that century. Then it went on to defeat Napoleon and so on. I mean Russia had
become a European superpower. And Peter, then Catherine, Alexander I, Russia
continued to expand. We hope to visit all these characters in the next episode.
But first miles we have to travel south, 2000 kilometres south, to a part of the
old empire where the food was more interesting and the winters less harsh.
Georgia. Like all good Russians, we've decided to go and eat some Georgian food
and of course taste some Georgian wine. I have a fine Georgian red here, so
gomazhos, which means cheers in Georgia. Here's my salad, which is very good
news. My lens has just fallen out. I've ordered a haji puri. Now I haven't had a
haji puri since I was in Georgia 30 years or so ago. And when I went to Georgia,
I of course visited the town of Gori, which is the birthplace of Stalin. Still a
lot of nostalgia for Stalin amongst some people in Georgia. And I picked up a
rare memento, a bottle of Stalin vodka. How would you define the Russian
relationship with Georgia? Complex. I think it's a lot more confused than we
realise or admit it. My name is Natalia Antilava. I'm a journalist. I'm from
Georgia, country, not the state. So Natalia, your name seems Russian to me. I am
very Georgian. So the ending of the surname, it would sound Russian if it was
ever or over, but Ava is a Western Georgian name. My mother is a Russian
speaker, so I spoke a lot of Russian at home. But the history, yeah, there was a
lot of confusion about how to teach history. It's a country which always had a
very strong identity. Georgians are not Slavs driven by dreams of freedom and
independence from multiple conquerors that were always on the doorstep. So I
think the biggest education for me wasn't necessarily in school, but was what
was happening just 50 metres down the road from my school, where the Soviets
brought in the tanks, killing 30 people. I saw all of that history in the
making, and my sense of history was definitely shaved by this completely massive
change. When you suddenly wake up in a different country and when you see people
fighting for ideals and willing to die for them. Let's go back, way back now,
Natalia. Tell me, when did Russia first claim Georgia as part of the Russian
Empire? 1783, when a very historical treaty was signed that gave part of Georgia
the Russian protection from other foreign forces. And that is really the big
beginning of Georgia's quite tormented relationship with Russia. One of the
reasons we spoke to Natalia was because she had written about how the empire
operated in subtly different ways from that of the French or the British. Their
empires emphasised difference, while Moscow insisted on sameness. There is a
Ukrainian philosopher Volodymyr Vyarmolenko who has this concept of, you know,
if the West ran its colonies by telling those they colonised, you can never be
like us because you're different from us. The Russians would tell their
colonies, you have to be the same as us. Hence Stalin, a Georgian, could become
leader of the USSR. But sameness, Russification, was frequently violent,
dissidents locked up, killed in terrifying numbers if you didn't tow the line.
So was the USSR a continuation of the old Tsarist empire but under a new name?
Definitely when I was in school, it wasn't taught as Soviet occupation, but
that's what it actually was. And those who did manage to survive then perished
during Stalin's purges. Of course, there's one huge irony which we can't escape,
and that is that Stalin, the great leader of the Soviet Union, was Georgian.
Does Georgia feel as though it has played a part in that Russian imperialism
through that single man? It depends who you ask. But I think Joseph Stalin
continues to have a completely outsized influence on the country. On Russia as
well, monuments to Stalin growing up in Russia, and we've seen how successfully
Russia used the fact that he was Georgian as a soft power tool in Georgia. Kind
of that cultivating pride in Stalin, a local boy who made it big, is very much
part of Russian propaganda toolkit in the way that Russia manages to create and
maintain alliances in a country that is mostly hostile towards Moscow. Georgia
has fought two wars with Moscow since 1991. That's why many of them feel acutely
involved in what's happening now in Ukraine. Some Chechens may feel the same, I
don't know, shared anger that Moscow now refuses to accept the empire or the
Soviet Union has come to an end. But has it? I think when you look at the
continuation of the Soviet Union that we see today in Putin's Russia, I think
there were a lot of people who were not ethnically Russian who willingly took
part in it and bought into how strong that idea is and how all of Putin's
narratives relate back to the Soviet days, the Second World War, even the Stalin
era. I see it as an extension of Russia. It's actually fascinating listening to
you, Natalia, because I can see you sort of process the whole thing almost as
you're discussing it, because it is a kind of a tricky question. And, you know,
I remember in the Soviet Union when Georgia was the playground of the Soviet
Union being more entertaining and less miserable than Russians. And that's why
Russians like to go to Georgia so much, is because they could sing, dance and
drink. That's why they like to come here to this day. And I think that is
actually part of that Russian colonialism, because often the country is
basically perceived as a restaurant. It's a place with good food and where
everyone is kind of ready to serve. It's like, why do you need this democracy,
elections? You make good food, you make good music, be that. And that's not that
different from any other form, I think, of colonialism. Many in the West never
really regarded Russia as a colonial entity. Basically, Russia was Russia. It's
taken the Russo-Ukrainian War for people to realize both here and in Russia
itself that we are now facing the slow, bloody and painful demise of
colonialism. Many of our assumptions, and maybe their assumptions too, need now
to be reinvented. This is the BBC World Service exploring the seriously fun work
of the Flying Seagull Project. My name is Captain Bash. Ash has been on a
mission to bring fun and frivolity to children around the world. Children in
refugee camps, in orphanages and care homes. We are making changes to the way
BBC live streams are distributed via third-party services and platforms, and the
BBC stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you
are using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds. February 1999, his death sparked three days
of rioting. Stay with us. iClick is next.