TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-10H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 But that's it from us, our editors Tom Smith, our Jack Evans, the studio
director was Antonio Fernandez. From all of us, have a good weekend. BBC News at
nine o'clock. Expectations are growing that a deal between the UK and the EU on
post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland could soon be reached.
Talks are intensifying with the Downing Street source describing negotiations as
positive but an announcement on changes to the Northern Ireland protocol has
been delayed repeatedly. Our political editor Chris Mason has been following
developments. My understanding this morning is yes, it is all but there. The
discussion now is about its unveiling and its presentation. The King was due to
meet Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission today.
Various sources saying that that was cancelled for operational reasons, not
political ones. But the planned visit is significant because it strongly
suggests that the unveiling of a deal was going to happen on the same trip. A
fifth man has been arrested in connection with the shooting of an off-duty
police officer in Oma. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell is critically ill
after the attack at a sports centre on Wednesday. Investigators say they're
treating it as a terrorist incident and their main line of inquiry is focusing
on the dissident group, the new IRA. Almost a million households which don't pay
an energy company directly for their gas and electricity can now start applying
for government help with their winter bills. They include people in England,
Scotland and Wales who live in mobile homes, care homes and properties off the
mains grid. Health officials in the UK have begun drawing up plans to deal with
the possible bird flu pandemic. An 11-year-old girl has died in Cambodia after
contracting the H5N1 strain of the disease. The UK Health Security Agency says
that high levels of transmission in wild birds present are a constant threat but
there's no evidence the virus is getting better at infecting humans. Hundreds of
artefacts recovered from a 17th century shipwreck are going on display in
Norwich. The Gloucester ran aground off the coast of Norfolk in 1682 among the
objects brought to the surface were the ship's bell, spectacles and a silk
petticoat. BBC News This is BBC Radio 4. Good morning. In a moment, the best-
selling author Jojo Moyes will be talking about the inspiration for her new book
and will hear how music and performing can help deal with trauma. That's coming
up on Saturday Live with Nicky Bady and Richard Coles. And while we're talking
of national treasures... This year as part of Red Nose Day, you could win an
iconic BBC treasure. How about Pat Butch's earrings from EastEnders? Heavier
than you might think? Maybe a House of Games winner's suitcase? Or Craig Revel
Horwood's 10 score paddle from Strictly? Not that he uses it much. These are
just some of the BBC items that could be yours as part of Red Nose Day. Hey, not
the microphone! To enter, find out more or donate to Comic Relief, go to
bbc.co.uk forward slash rednoseday. We'll find the terms and conditions and
privacy notice. You must be 18 or over to enter. The giveaway closes at 11.59pm
on Saturday 18th of March 2023. Good luck. Now, do peas belong in fish pie?
We'll join Jay Raynor, who's in Grimsby, to find out, in the kitchen cabinet at
10.30pm. But first, it's time for Saturday Live with Nicky Bady and the Reverend
Richard Coles. Very good morning and welcome to Saturday Live, where we meet the
novelist Jojo Moyes, who's sold more than 50 million books and can't resist a
portrait of an unsentimental woman. We're also joined by the former comedian,
now playwright Henry Naylor, to recall his time in Afghanistan and what that
does to someone trying to make people laugh. Also with us is Aaron Horn,
musician, DJ, record industry guy, Grammy nominated for this track, talking
about music's capacity not only to delight, but heal. And the writer Ava Glass
joins us, who used to be an official working in counter-terrorism, before she
turned fact to fiction. All these, plus inheritance tracks from the theoretical
physicist and former runaway, Carlo Revelli. What a tune, Aaron. This is what
you were Grammy nominated for, wasn't it? Yeah, it got me a Grammy nomination
this year and last year, which was great, yeah. Both years? Two years, how does
that work? I'm not sure, I was just happy to see it pop up again. It's so good,
they gave you a prize twice, I wonder if you're a prize twice. Just kept going,
the gift that keeps giving. That is the voice of Aaron Horn. And also in the
studio with us, Jojo Moyes, Henry Naylor, Ava Glass. And what we would like from
you this morning, are the stories behind the things that you own and love that
everybody else dislikes or hates. So Jojo, do you want to start us off? I think
Richard alluded to... Yeah, well, during lockdown, I developed an auction habit,
an online auction habit. There's a website that covers pretty much every tiny
sale room across the country. And I found myself buying portraits under the
umbrella title, women who've had enough of your... something or other. Basically
just women who've had enough and they were basically just... We don't need
slippers and pipe, do we? No, they're women who just look thoroughly
disappointed or disapproving. And nobody wants these portraits because nobody
wants a disapproving woman looking at them. So you can get these beautiful
portraits for a song. And I've got about eight now from different time periods
and countries. And the sort of sad unloved ones I give a beautiful frame to. And
I'm going to create a gallery going up my stairs. Oh, wow. I've just moved
house. So they're all coming with me. Do you have a favorite? I do. I have one
kind of existentially fed up looking old woman who... Yeah, I gave her a very
fancy frame. She cost about Â£100. And I think the postage for the painting cost
more than she did. And she just... they make me laugh every time I see them.
They just... they just amuse me. Henry, what about you? I tell you, if you want
portraits of women looking disappointed, I should give you photos of all my old
girlfriends. Yeah, well, I've got a lite which I brought from Ground Zero. And
it is the most disgusting thing. I bought it sort of like literally a year after
9-11. And it is a picture of the twin towers on the front of it. And it has the
plane going into the building pictured on it. And when you turn the lighter on,
the plane flies into the building. Oh, good grief. And it says on the lighter,
never forget. And I couldn't believe you could buy this at Ground Zero. I
can't... I've... Why did you buy it? Well... Because it was so disgusting. But
you think that must have been an algorithm, surely. I think there's nobody with
any judgment or humanity would have thought, I know, let's do it as a lighter. I
can't understand that decision process. I can't understand. And that's part of
the reason why I also bought it, because it is probably going to be one of the
most defining events of this century. And I kind of thought it's just a little
piece of history in a very obscene way. Yeah, very dark. Eva, can you cheer us
up a bit, please? Do you have anything? I have for years, for reasons I don't
understand, collected antique books with very ornate spines and incredibly
boring names. So, like, I have these amazing gilt-edged leather-bound, the
history of the mosquito. Oh. Or I have The Moths of Britain, volumes one and
two. Absolutely stunning. And Biscuit Tins from 1865 to 1939, when apparently
Biscuit Tins stopped, I don't know. Very specific timeframe. Exactly. But also,
I mean, those sound lovely. Do other people just not like them? No, I suppose
not. I think the titles are so unimaginative and the books are so thick. They're
always really solid. You wouldn't think there could be that many moths in
Britain. Aaron, what about you? Yeah, I've got synthesizers coming out of the
loft. I can't go into a secondhand shop or pass by a sort of rusty old dusty.
Strange looking instrument without squirreling it away in the attic or... That's
the thing. Have you been to the musical instrument museum in Belgium, in
Brussels? No. Oh my gosh. I went in there and then there, in a glass case, as if
it were a Christophore forte piano, was the Synclavia on which I made records in
the 1980s. Now, a museum piece. Oh, wow. In the course of 40 years, it's gone
from being literally cutting-edge technology to an item in a museum. That's tech
for you, though, isn't it? That's how it goes, yeah. I just have to keep my dog
away from them. My dog likes to sort of chew the edges of all these instruments.
You don't want dog-initiated fraying off the goggles. Well, if you've got a
story about the thing that you own and love but nobody else likes, let us know.
You can email saturdaylive at bbc.co.uk. Also, if you'd like to tell us your
story on air, put your telephone number into the body of the email. If you're
texting, the digits are 84844 and texts will be charged at your standard
message, right? Richard's cheering me on for doing the T's and C's here. And if
you're tweeting, use the hashtag, BBCSaturdayLive. I'm not considered a safe
pair of hands when it comes to T's and C's wisely. I can't read this stuff
anyway. We've been talking about portraits of women unsentimentally looking out
at a world which has perhaps disappointed them. And I want to tell Jojo Moyes
about Van Eyck's wonderful 15th-century portrait of his wife, Margaretha, that
hangs in the Groningen Museum at Bruges. She looks out at the painting at her
husband, we presume, with an expression of, well, I'd describe it as expert
resignation, which I think might delight you. I'm going to send you it down the
phone. I would love to see that. I think you've taken on a place in your
personal gallery of paintings of women who, in your words, have had enough of
your......challenging behaviour. Yes. Jojo, in her 50s after a challenging few
years, has rebooted, moved from country to town and now has a new title to her
50 million-plus-selling back catalogue, Someone Else's Shoes, a novel inspired
by an everyday kind of gym mishap, but also a very famous 80s film. But the gym
mishap's an interesting one, as it is so much a thing of our time that you pick
up the wrong bag. Yeah. I mean, the book is basically about two middle-aged
women on a crisis day in both their lives who accidentally swapped gym bags and
the impact it has on them of literally having to walk in someone else's shoes
from that point. And yeah, I was inspired by... Well, a couple of films. I have
described this film as like trading places for menopausal women. But it was
actually... Because we all want to do that, right? Yeah, of course. Who doesn't
want to be a menopausal woman? Why am I showing it? Seizing it. Owning it. But
it was also one of my favourite films, is Desperately Seeking Susan. Tell me
about that. Oh, because it's just... It's the most stylish and it really holds
up as well. I watch it every few years. And some films from the 80s, you just
literally want to curl up and dye it the soundtrack alone. But it's just... It's
magnificent. And it's just about two people who accidentally swap lives over the
ownership of a jacket and a pair of earrings. And I just found, as you say, I'd
had a tough few years. I wanted to write something lighter. I wanted to write a
caper. And I don't feel like women of my age get to be much. In fictional
narratives, except for kind of really annoying parents or, you know, cheated on
spouses or whatever. So it was just a story about... Or staring and painting
women. Staring, yes. Staring disapprovingly and disappointingly out at life. No,
these are women who actually do something. And it's about friendship as well.
Well, I mean, so much I'm packing there, but I want to start with this idea
of... And it's a fantasy, I think. This idea that we can just change ourselves.
You can have this kind of arbitrary, haphazard moment of someone else's shoes
metaphor is one, of course, reality. Or someone else's jacket. All of a sudden
you can dress as something different. And there's this whole life that you're
not living that maybe you could live. I don't think it is a fantasy. I don't
know. The older I get, the more I just think there's possibility in everything.
You know, I thought my life was set on a certain course and then a number of
things happened and I've gone off in a whole new direction. And it's, you know,
yes, it's challenging, but it also brings with it a lot of joy because suddenly
you're open to possibilities that you may not have had before. And if that's
down to wearing a different pair of shoes or a different jacket, then maybe
that's the thing. What was the door that opened for you that made the life
you're living now possible? Ooh, gosh. What was the door? I mean, I think I'd
been banging on it for years. I wrote three books that weren't published and
then another eight books that weren't best sellers. I think it was, I'm going to
pay tribute to my editor, Louise Moore, who took me on when I was selling
nothing, could see something to do with me that she felt she could package me
and kind of rework it. And my first book for her was Me Before You. And she did
tell me afterwards that she thought it would be the first step on a kind of
resurrecting my career. And then it went on to sell 14 million copies. So kind
of... She was a person. Yeah, for me, it wasn't a door. Is that the one that was
made into the film with Amelia Clarke? Yeah. That's so sweet. And then you have
that thing that writers of fiction will dream about, which is of turning up on a
set, and then there are your characters running around holding cappuccino with a
chair with their name written on the back. That's extraordinary. I mean, I
literally remember walking onto the set the first day and you're ferried from
one car park to another, and then you walk out and suddenly there's food trucks
everywhere and wardrobes and heated things and there's rain machines. And then
in the middle of all this chaos with a million extras, my own character is
walking towards me dressed in a suit and looking like the man who had only
previously existed in my head. What do you mean he was walking? He was a
quadriplegic, wasn't he? No, we were filming early scenes before he has his
accident. Ah, no spoilers. Yeah. But no, lovely Sam Clefflin was walking in his
business suit in his prior life in the film. What went right with Book Nine that
hadn't gone right perhaps was one through eight. Oh, my God, I've asked myself
that so many times. I think, honestly, I think it was the introduction of
humour. I think that was a huge thing. None of my books had really contained
much humour before that point. And the reason I did it with that book was it was
such a tough subject, the subject of assisted suicide, that I felt like I had to
balance it with kind of quite British sense of unsentimental humour. But also, I
think it was, you know, so much of it is down to luck. It's down to timing. It's
down to, you know, things being in the news that somehow tap into the zeitgeist.
It's down to packaging. Luckily for me, the stars aligned and it became a word
of mouth book. I don't think anything of... I don't think those alignments pay
out unless somehow the author has found his or her voice, actually. There's
some... all of a sudden an authority about it or a sort of strength about it
that perhaps wasn't there before. I think you're right. And I think it was
because this was the book, as my dad sweetly put it, that's probably going to
kill my career. And so I wrote with absolutely nothing to lose. You know, I'd
been offered one sixth of my previous advance. I knew I was on... You know, the
clock was ticking as to whether I could carry on writing. So I just wrote the
book that was in my head with no reference to what I thought anybody would think
of it. And even though the subject matter was mad and nobody really wanted it at
that point, and it paid off and it's taught me now that I only ever write the
thing that's lodged in my head. I don't anticipate what markets want. I don't
think about what readers want. I can only write the thing that is important to
me. Did you have that thing of seeing for the first time somebody out in the
wild reading your book? It took me 13 years. It took me 13 years ever. I'm
always being sent pictures by people or text messages from friends saying, I'm
on holiday and three people are reading your book by the pool. I never saw them.
And then I sat in my dentist in Stanstedt about two years ago and I turned to my
right and she was reading Still Me, the book before last. And I looked at her
and I said, that's my book. And she went, no, it's not mine. And I said, no, no,
I wrote it. And she looked at me very nervously. And I said, no, please look on
the back cover. You're literally the first person I've ever seen reading one of
my books. And then she opened the back flap and saw my picture and then decided
I wasn't a random kind of strange. But can I just say, is your author photograph
of a woman who's not taking any more? No, I'm way too smiley. I think I need to
look more disappointed in life really, but I'm not really disappointed. So it's
hard. Ava Glass, fellow bestselling author. Have you had that moment of seeing
somebody read your book and approaching them? No, I'm in those 13 year stage. So
people send me pictures of, here's a lady on the bus reading your book. And I'm
like, I go on buses. I never see this. So not yet. I'm sure that's how you know
you have it. I remember when Bridget Jones' diary came out. I remember getting a
train from Waterloo South, one commuter train in the evening, and every single
woman under 40 was reading Bridget Jones' diary. And he realised that all of a
sudden someone's kind of hit that thing that everyone's... Your own life is kind
of particularly interesting lately. You've gone through quite a change. You've
been through... You would think that a successful author living in a big house
in the country, well, that's great. End of striving, but that's not the case.
No, no. Well, yeah. In 2019, I got pretty burnt out. I'd been basically running
two jobs at once, one in book, one in film in LA and travelling a lot. And it
kind of caught up with me. And at the same time, my mum was dying of blood
cancer and my marriage was breaking down. So 2020, instead of being a gap year
of rest and relaxation and going to see my friends and travelling for pleasure,
we just had a pandemic instead. So, yeah, it's been a kind of period of
rebuilding, I guess. And part of that rebuilding was realising that with my kids
grown and, you know, my life being different, what I wanted was connection. And
so I've moved back to London, or I'm in the process of moving back to London, if
I can ever sell my house. And it has been transformative because I realised at
this age what matters to me is being able to meet my best friend, to go on a dog
walk three times a week, or to get a coffee from the local bagel shop and things
that I haven't done for 22 years now feel hugely exciting. Whenever I'm in
London now, I just don't understand the pastries in any way. Yes, but it's fun
investigating. Right? But it's very interesting because I must have perhaps
looked to others that you had kind of achieved this realisation of your dreams
and it was all lovely and then just sort of coast along. But actually, life
makes its demands in all sorts of unexpected ways. Were you blindsided by this
feeling that actually this is not what I want? No, I think it was a creeping
thing. And also, I'm not one of these people who put stuff out on social media
saying, you know, I'm so sad or whatever. So I only put on a kind of happy face
and I was very private about my family life and what was going on. And so it's
really... Yeah, I started to wonder who that was serving this year. So I've
tried to be open about my own mental health struggles. You know, I spent two
years on antidepressants and in therapy and it was the best thing I ever did for
myself. A huge investment. And, yeah, just life doesn't always go the way you
want. And it's painful and, you know, you get afraid at the edges. It's also
good, isn't it? It's great. We are often the worst authors of our sense of our
own good fortune, aren't we? It's narrow and an unimaginative landscape that we
create. Sometimes we need to be shocked out of that and discover the world is
bigger and weirder than we thought. And to take pleasure in the really small
things. You know, I love my dogs, I love my friends, I love going to try a new
pastry for the road. And I really... That's the thing that's important to me
now, it's just connection, small pleasures. And I think we've all kind of
learned over the last few years not to take any of that for granted. One thing
you have shared with the world is dogs. Because, I mean, for you, an abandoned
dog in a Balkan war zone is catnip, really. That's making so many measures in.
But tell us about your... Because you adopted a Bosnian dog and it wasn't the
easiest adoption. No, well, this was 2020, which was my kind of Anissa Ribelis.
And I saw a picture of a dog in Bosnia who had been in a pound for six years.
And nobody wanted her because she's too big and too old. And I thought, OK...
Basically the size of a Shetland pony. Well, no, that was the previous one. Oh,
sorry, my dog's being stopped, forgive me. But Sisa was also big. And I thought,
OK, I can make one good thing happen this year, even if everything else is
falling apart. And so I paid for her and actually a van load of other dogs to
come over. Well, they had homes, I hasten to add. I didn't just pay for a van
and a dog. The charity is a tiny charity. Run free, my darling. Yes, go, go.
It's a tiny charity called Saving Suffering Strays. And they home dogs over here
through Just For Dogs in Derbyshire. And I hasten to add that, yes, I have had
English rescue dogs too. OK, yeah, yeah. And all the rest of it. You're a good
person. You always get criticism for doing it abroad. But anyway, she'd been in
a pound for six years. She came over on the first day she arrived. She managed
to escape and run away for 10 days. And I had to employ a pet detective. You
want to know about who do you call? Well, pet detectives are us, I'm telling
you. No, but my publishers had just published a book by a man called Colin
Butcher, who is a pet detective. And I spoke to him on the phone and he
basically I can tell you now what happens to dogs when they escape and they
don't run in a straight line. What happens? What happens? They triangulate
around an area. They feel safe. Well, all dogs that run away. I couldn't say all
dogs are in a way. This is kind of broad, poor strokes here. Yeah, broad, poor
strokes. And the best thing you can do is not chase them, especially if they're
nervous dogs, not try and pursue them. But you lay food. And I was laying
sardine oil up and down my drive. I was just doing barbecues in local fields. I
bought night cameras. The local farmers let me put night cameras up so we could
try and track her. And after 10 days, having borrowed a huge humane trap, I
managed to get her back. And now she will never know the lengths you went to.
No, but three and a half years on, she's now my shadow. If I'm upstairs, she's
upstairs. If I'm downstairs, you know, she she gives back more than she's, you
know, more than I give her. She's been a profoundly wonderful addition to my
life. Now you're flying a bit more solo than you were before with an enormous
Bosnian dog. Do you do that thing that I do sometimes? I realize I relate to the
world more through my dogs than I do through other people now. And I interpret
the world in accordance with their interpretation of the world. Yes, I'm a great
well, she is my spirit animal. She's basically an incredibly wary, slightly fed
up, middle aged female dog. And there's a theme here. I judge people based on
how she judges them. So and you can literally see her giving people side eye and
going, yeah, no, thanks. It's not going to happen. And but if she trusts
someone, then, yeah, well, I think romance in your golden ears should definitely
be triaged by dogs because they're reliable in that kind of thing. No, don't
think what is it we love about dogs? Lots of things about dogs, but one of them
is the steadiness, I think, and their delight in seeing you and that very firm
and breakable bond. Oh, my God. The best moment of my day is coming down in the
morning. And if I mean, she does sleep at the foot of my bed, but still somehow
manages to be downstairs. And I have these two dogs and it's like being welcomed
by two seals, these kind of wiggling kind of things, thrusting themselves under
your armpits and just wanting love. It's yeah, especially if you've just done
three teenagers. It's like somebody has to be pleased to see you. You mentioned
your father a minute ago. You grew up in a in what the Daily Mail would call an
artistic household. Yeah, except they probably wouldn't say it in a positive
way. Yeah, it was a creative household. Yeah, both my parents were artists. But
not only not only artists, but also people who worked at the business end of
that spectrum as well as the creative end of that. Yeah, my father ran a company
called MoMart, which he built from being a tiny van moving paintings kind of
secretly so that people didn't know the value of the paintings inside because it
was a scruffy old van to having this gigantic fleet of lorries. And he stored
items like he still poor McCartney's Sergeant Pepper outfit and, you know, just
amazing pieces of art. And he ended up kind of hanging the government art
collection and storing their things as well. And yeah, so I even though it was a
business sense, I kind of grew up wandering around those warehouses being
surrounded by extraordinary works of art. But it also makes you realize that
this notion of art as being a sort of refined and ivory tower sort of enterprise
is all very well. But actually it has to have an existence in the world. And you
need to be pragmatic about that. And did that change the way you did what you
do? Oh, that's interesting. I suppose it kind of makes it accessible. It doesn't
feel like something rarefied, but I didn't have any writers in my family. So for
me, that was never it didn't feel like a career option. It was only after 10
years in journalism that I felt I might have a voice. But what my both my
parents gave me was a kind of formidable work ethic. They were both absolute
grafted. So, you know, they were out doing it from seven o'clock in the morning
till whatever o'clock at night. And I think I inherited that possibly too much.
Oh, are you still a grafted yourself? Do you have a very disciplined way of
doing what you do? I have taken steps to make sure I never work as hard as I did
again. Well, I was going to ask you about that because it is the easiest thing
in the world for driven people to work to the point beyond which it's actually
does you good, I think. And I wondered if there's that when we call it burnout,
don't we? But yeah, it affects all things, it affects your relationships, it
affects your relationships for the rest of the world. Yeah, definitely. I mean,
my friends told me afterwards, I looked like a rabbit in headlights for about
five years. You know, it's that thing when you get an email and you actually
jump, you know, it's not a positive feeling. It's always what does somebody want
now? And and I think if you're involved in the creative industries, it's really
easy to burn out because you feel so grateful to do what you're doing and to get
the opportunities that you've got, that it's very hard to see it as burnout. And
also after eight years of rejection, when all of a sudden you get acceptance,
you kind of hang on to it rather desperately, don't you? Yeah, and I remember
saying to myself, if I get this wrong, it's not going to be because I didn't
work hard enough. That was my kind of mantra. And now I deliberately don't work
hard enough. Do you like not working hard enough? I, yeah, it's still not my
default. Like I have to fight the impulse to be filling time, but I have built
things into my day like an hour and a half dog walk every day, whereas I
wouldn't have allowed myself that before. And I have lunches with people and I
go out in the evening and I go to the cinema and things like that, which I just
didn't allow myself for so long. Sometimes people think that catastrophe of an
obscure but urgent kind will attend them if they don't do everything they're
meant to do. But have you managed to wean yourself off that catastrophic outcome
scenario? Uh, yeah, I don't know. You'd have to ask my therapist. No, I'm not
really a catastrophist thinker as far as my career goes. I think, you know, I've
been lucky enough to exceed my own best dreams for that. It's yeah, it's just an
impulse to be productive all the time, which I'm sure somebody who studied late
stage capitalism would have huge things to say about where that came from. But I
am that person who needs to feel productive. And I don't think I think you have
to check yourself with that. Excellent. Well, we're glad you didn't check
yourself to the point of not writing. Someone else's shoes, which is out now.
Jojo Moyes is with us till the end of the programme. Do please get in touch with
your questions and comments. If you've got anything to say about late monopoly
capitalism, particularly keen to hear from you. Heavy first thing in the
morning. No, no, no, it's radio full. I love it. Saturday Live at BBC.co.uk. You
can text on 84844 and you can tweet using the hashtag BBC Saturday Live. And if
you're using scissors, ask a grown up to help. To the part of the show now that
we hand over to you so that you can say thank you to someone who once did you a
good deed which you couldn't or didn't thank them for at the time. And today's
comes from Maya Piris. The person I'd like to thank is the man who back in 1981
saved my bacon. My first big solo drive was from Streatham up to Rhetford in
Knotts. I got all the way to King's Cross and I was looking for the sign saying
the A1 and the North, which was really small in those days. Of course, a shop
passed it. And instead of just doing a U-turn somewhere, I kept driving. I'd got
into a traffic queue, barely moving, but I just went ever so elegantly into the
bumper of the car in front and felt such an idiot. I'd pulled over into the
garage, my stomach churning, when suddenly I heard a gentle knock on my window
and could see somebody outside, a man wearing a sort of truby hat. And he asked
me, was there anything he could do because he could see I was in a state? I said
I'd pranked the car, I was lost. I didn't know how to find my way to the A1. He
was clearly looking very concerned and said, if I followed him to his office,
he'd sort me out. I did follow him. He seemed such a nice man, I trusted him. We
parked our cars and he took me into the canteen and drew me several maps over
several pieces of paper from the car park to the A1. I was very nervous getting
back in the car, but I set off very calmly. He stood there waving at me and I
got myself onto the A1. And after that, it was easy peasy. My biggest regret is
that I never thanked him. I didn't think at the time to take his name. I just
sort of drove off trying to focus on what I had to do next. But I had never
forgotten him and his warmth. He was just the nicest person one could ever hope
to meet. I want to say I've got no time for nothing, yeah. I'm all back home.
This week's thank you from Maya Piras. And if you would like to thank someone,
it's never too late. Just email us, saturdayliveatbbc.co.uk. And if you
recognise yourself as the person being thanked, we'd love to hear from you too.
So you are listening to Radio 4, well done. Saturday Live with the Reverend
Richard Coles and Nicky Badion with us in the studio, author Jojo Moyes, who has
taken decisions by asking what would Madonna do, haven't you? I love this. I
have because I think, you know, you're either somebody who internalises
everything and worries about what people think of you. And I think when I was
younger, I used to think, who's the one person who doesn't actually seem to care
what anybody thinks and suits herself? And so that was something I asked myself
periodically. Well, what would Madonna do? Well, I still would. She's a
trailblazer. Grammy nominated musician, double Grammy nominated musician I need
to add now. For the same track. Yes. And Gongbath healing advocate, Aaron Horn,
the playwright and performer, Henry Naylor, and author, Ava Glass, who's
previously worked in counter-terrorism. Now, what we've been asking you for this
morning is about a story about the thing that you own and love that nobody else
likes. Let's go on the phone to speak to the Reverend John Bramble. Good
morning, John. Good morning. What's yours? It's a bookage. Oh? It was, I'd seen
it in a furniture shop just before my birthday and asked my parents to buy it
for my 18th birthday. And they hadn't seen it. And when they got his, when I got
his home, they pulled faces. And basically that was over 50 years ago now. And
I've still got the bookcase and it's gone with us on every move. It's been to
California and back. And every time we move, my wife says, shall we get rid of
it? In the name of the name of the name of the king of it. So it's nothing
special as a bookcase? No, no, it's not very aesthetically pleasing when you
look at it. I think it's just that it was that moment of coming to adulthood. It
was the first thing I chose when I was nearly an adult. And so that bookcase is
going to go with you for as long as you're going to go? It is, yeah. Very good.
Thank you very much for your call, John, and enjoy that bookcase. Jean Davis has
been in touch to say, I have a toy dolly of a leprechaun. I inherited him from
my dad. He sits on the bookshelf. Nobody likes him but me. He has a sack of gold
in his lap. And when I look at him, I think, he's been to the end of the
rainbow. And Alison Reed says, at a salvage fair in Cheshire about two years
ago, I was on the lookout to buy an old wooden ironing board and an old test
tube rack complete with glass tubes. I spotted an ironing board I loved and
quickly made the purchase. I now use it as extension to my drawing table to work
on whilst writing. It works a treat and it's beautiful, but my partner Steve
isn't so keen. About six months later, I was able to buy the test tube rack.
Unfortunately, he didn't like that either. Oh, dear, can I just say, Rebecca
from Somerset says, I have a collection of plastic John Wayne models from all
his films, each one of housed in a Perspex dome. I treasure them but hide them
because I'm actually an antiques dealer in 18th and 19th century British
furniture and they're a bit frowned upon. I love that. Well, we're here until
10.30. So if you have any comments or stories about the thing that you love that
everybody else dislikes, do get in touch. Saturday Live at bbc.co.uk. Henry
Naylor is an award-winning playwright. He rose to fame, though, in the world of
comedy satire, writing for Spitting Image and Elast Smith and Jones. He was also
one half of the comedy duo Naylor and Parsons with Andrew Parsons and Dee
Parsons. His latest work, Afghanistan is Not Funny, looks back over more than 20
years to recount the eventful research expedition he took to Kabul in 2002 with
his friend, the photographer Sam Maynard, after the Taliban were ousted. But
what took you to Afghanistan, Henry? Oh, well, at the time, Nicky, I was writing
for Parsons and Naylor. We had this show on radio too. Is it Parsons and Naylor
or Naylor and Parsons? You'll be furious about that. No, I put you first, you
see. I know, I think you're absolutely right. The world put it the other way
round. But, yeah, we were writing jokes for that. And we had a series which was
going out at exactly the same time as the war in Afghanistan. And the only thing
in the news was the war. And we had to write topical jokes about the war. And so
we just watched the news 24-7, just trying to find any little comedic angles.
And I was watching this one report, and there's a BBC reporter called William
Reeve, who was stuck in a basement in Kabul right at the end of the war. And he
said, I don't know if you can hear, but there's a lot of bombs going off
outside. They seem to be coming closer and closer, and that one was really loud.
I don't know if you heard that one. That was right outside. And then the next
thing, live on air, he was blown off his chair and the studio wall collapsed.
And the cameraman ran in front of the lens and shouted something which I can't
say on Radio 4 at 9 o'clock in the morning. And I nearly fell off my own chair
because the cameraman was my old flatmate. And I thought, what's he doing out
there? And then after the war, I phoned him up and I said, look, I've been
trying to write jokes about the war. And there seems to be sort of a discrepancy
between what you guys are putting out on air and what you're actually seeing on
the ground. And I sort of said, I want to write a play about this. And he
said... So was that the first play that you wrote? Yeah, it was, yeah. It was
called Finding Bin Laden. I wrote it in the Edinburgh Fringe. And he said, look,
you know, he said, I said, you know, I've started writing this play. Can you
check the facts? And he said, he said, look, I'm a BBC man. I can't endorse a
fiction. But he said, if you want to come out here, I'll introduce you to the
BBC Fixers. And so I went with my friend Sam Maynard and we had a week out there
and it was the most absurd week. We got abducted by the Taliban at one point. We
got... Sorry, sorry, back up, back up. Sorry about the mujahideen. I was sort
of... Well, can you tell us about the mujahideen? Yeah, well, we were trying to
find this place called the Tank Graveyard, where over 500 tanks were just
abandoned in the middle of the desert. And we were told it was an amazing place
to get pictures. And what I was trying to do for the play was to get photos from
the war zone and instead of a set, blow the pictures up the sides of the stage
and get our actors acting in front of it. And so we wanted to find the Tank
Graveyard for this one scene. And our fixer drove us out of town and there was a
single tank on top of a hilltop. And he said, this is it. And we're going, no,
this isn't it. There's meant to be 500 of these tanks. And he's going, no, this
is it. And my mate and I were just... Sam was like saying, look, I spoke to him
this morning. The reason why he's been funny about this is he's never been more
than 20 miles out of Kabul. And he'd lived there his entire life. And it was
just so dangerous. And so we went to look at this tank and we were stood on the
mountain top. And suddenly these two soldiers were walking up the hill towards
us and pointing at the AK-47s at us. And we were going... They were sort of
standing in between us and the car. And so I tried to bribe them with some
Marlborough cigarettes and they weren't going. And I said to my fixer, what do
these guys want? And they said, oh, they want us to go with them. And so... And
they kidnapped. And they took us down to this... this sort of concrete sort of
building in the middle of the valley. And then 14 more Mujahideen soldiers came
in and they surrounded us and they all had AK-47s. And this warlord came in and
sat in front of us. And he's the most frightening man I've ever seen. He had
this scar down his face and down his neck. And he had this sort of fierce gaze,
which would punch your concrete. And he sort of just sat in front of us. And he
said, what are you doing here? And I said, we're searching a play for the
Edinburgh Fringe. No, we shouldn't laugh. Henry, I need you to tell me how you
felt in that moment. I honestly thought we were going to get killed. Right.
Right. And then he said, and what is your play about? And I said, well, it's
about the day that John Simpson said he liberated Kabul. And he said, John
Simpson. I know John Simpson. And I went, what? He said, yes, I stood at the
right hand side of John Simpson the day we liberated Kabul. And then he just
turned to his men and he just sort of like said, you just wave them outside. And
he took us out into the backyard and there were seven tanks. And he started
driving these tanks all around us. And he said, so you want to write about the
liberation of Kabul. This is what it looked like. Oh, my goodness. And he
recreated it with his own tank. Yeah. And then the absurd thing was after that,
Sam, not photographer, mate, friend, you know, we literally thought we were
going to be killed. He started pointing to the mujadeen on the tanks and he
started directing them. So please tell me that the photos, a stunning black and
white photos that accompany the play, were not part of a set up that they were
randomly taken. They were randomly taken. But he was pointing to the guys at the
tank and he said, come on, you're liberating Kabul. You know, look more excited,
punch the air and sort of like he's got all these mujadeen jumping up and down
on the tanks and punching the air and stuff. Did you have a moment then of
being, and I don't don't want this to sound awful, but being the Brit abroad who
suddenly realises I am out of my depth and then feeling like you have a lot of
responsibility. Do you know, Nicky, that's exactly right. I mean, sort of like,
because I think part of the thing about being a satirical comedy writer, you're
very snary about the news. You're very snary about what politicians are doing.
You're always poking fun at them. And then, but you move on to the next story
and the next story and you have a go at another celebrity or another MP. And
what you never really think about is the implications of a news story and
actually being in the middle of a news story when I was writing sort of
satirical stuff. And, you know, because we went to a refugee camp and actually,
you know, seeing people who were living through extreme poverty and these are
the people who were kind of left behind. So like the entire press pack moves on,
you know, satirical writers move on. And there's real people still there having
to struggle with the real issues. And that's part of the reason why I stopped
doing comedy and moved into playwriting. That was your pivotal moment.
Absolutely, because I kind of thought there are bigger issues than we're dealing
with, then just like saying the government's rubbish. You know, and tell us
about is his name Humayan, your fixer? Humayan, yeah. Tell us about him. He was
a wonderful guy. He was very, very patient. But we had this extraordinary moment
when he... We tried to get... I wanted to go to some of the bases and speak to
some of the American troops and sort of like get the Western perspective on what
they were doing. And Humayan drove us into the centre of Kabul because we were
told that the only way we're going to get accreditation was outside was at the
American Embassy. And so what he rather naively did was he poured up outside the
embassy, turned off the engine for us to go inside. And then the next thing that
happened was I could see at the end of the street this enormous soldier running
towards us going, move your car, move your car, move your car. I mean, just move
the car. And he just kind of stopped the car. And then I looked above my head
and there's a machine gun turret and the machine gun, it was pointing the gun
directly at us. I'm like, move the car, Humayan. And then he finally started the
engine and we drove off. And I said, Humayan, why were you parking outside the
American Embassy? I said, I said, they would have thought we were suicide
bombers. And he said, you put your English. Why would they do that? I said, they
don't know we're English in the car. And then and then I said, Humayan, how much
experience of fixing do you actually have? And he said, he said, none at all.
This is the first time I have done it. And I said, I mean, you can't do it. And
I said, well, he said, Mr. Henry, he sort of said, if you if you want to get a
fixer with more experience, you need to bring a budget. Frankly, a front plate,
the Edinburgh Fringe cannot compete with CNN. I want him as my fixer. Great. But
wasn't he a surgeon? He was. He was a surgeon. And that was and that was that
was really embarrassing, actually, because, you know, I asked him this and. And
he said he was fixing for for Westerners because he supplemented his income
because he's only been paid 20 dollars a month. How do you feel now that you are
not just a playwright, but an award winning playwright? Do you think that that
moment was meant to happen in your life, that you move from comedy to depicting
things through theater? Well, it's interesting here in what Jojo talking about,
finding your voice and stuff like that. And I think sort of I think when I was a
stand out, I was OK. I was never I was never particularly good at it. But
there's something about there's something about that incident really made me
connect with myself and really made me feel like I personally had something to
say because otherwise, you know, otherwise it's just a middle class. Well, I
still am a middle class white bloke from Bandsley. And but that that actually
gave me sort of a kind of purpose and a kind of passion to my writing. So, yeah,
it definitely transformed me. And tell us what's happened to whom I am. Well, it
was I tried to get in touch with him when the Taliban got to go into power and I
sent him an email when they got back in and in the 20 years in between when we
worked with him, he became a he worked for the for the UN and he worked in
women's rights. And so he so he had a target on his head. And so I sent him an
email saying, look, is there anything we can do? And he said, no, there's
nothing you can do. I'm on the run. And his wife had been a lawyer and sort of,
you know, she was being forced to wear the burka and sort of like like hand in
the cover and stuff. But I kept in touch with him and he got out in the middle
of the Edinburgh fringe, you know, when I was doing the show, you know, and it
was the Germans got him out. But the German government and the Canadian
government seem to do most of the people out there and getting him out. I think
our government was actually a pretty shameful with the amount of people that
helped to get out. It sounded like, you know, we just didn't do enough, really.
One aesthetic final question for you. What do you think it is about black and
white photographs that just make more impact? I think they do. Do you agree?
Because you've used Sam Maynard's black and white photographs. Yeah, I think
there's something that gives them a sort of like an authority in this kind of
way, doesn't there? What do you think it is? Well, I think it's because when we
look at history in history books, it's always in black and white. Interesting.
And I think sort of, so if you see a photo now in black and white, you're saying
it's a historical moment. Interesting. Henry Naylor, thank you so much. Henry's
Afghanistan is Not Funny is on at the Arcola Theatre in London until the 11th of
March. I was once in a very difficult, sticky situation in a country far away
with a fixer who was supposed to oblige me. We were standing overlooking this
scene of carnage and he turned to me and said, may I ask you something? And I
suggested, he said, how do you account for the essential pessimism in the novels
of Thomas Hardy? Does everybody know what a fixer is? I know we use it in media,
but it's a local person on the ground who has the ability to ease your
situations, deal with bureaucracy, get you permissions and essentially be a very
sensible guide. Would that be a good description? Yeah. Good. I think we need
one for real life. Oh, yes. I would employ a fixer for my life. Can you be my
fixer? I don't know if that would be any good. Yeah, he would. Well, you could
have Aaron Horn, perhaps. He is a multi-talented person dripping with Grammy.
I've only got to look at a Grammy and jump to the woods. He also has the most
magnificent jeans. The son of twin titans of popular music, Trevor Horn and Jill
Sinclair. His career in music looked preordained. Things never are, but you know
what I mean. He was in Sam and the Wamp and was involved with Psalm Studios, the
hit factory revived by his parents. Events, however, had taken an unexpected and
extremely difficult turn when he was involved in an accident which caused his
mother, Jill, injuries from which she never recovered. This was when he was in
his 20s and music and performance continue to play their part in his journey
through the landscape of loss. It's very interesting reading your story, Aaron,
because you would just assume if your father is Trevor Horn, then he would place
into your infant hands a mini-moog or something so you could get going. But he
wasn't really keen, was he? Well, no, I managed to sort of... The first time I
got in the studio, I got my hands on the mini-moog and the acai drum machines
when everyone was out and I sort of reprogrammed days of work within a few
minutes. And then that was it. I was not allowed in the studio anymore. The
flashing buttons on the machines that little me wanted to touch. No. So I was
excommunicated from the studio for a long time. And it was a place that I was...
I'd get in trouble. So I got a bit scared of it initially. Scared and also just
a bit fascinated. Yeah, no, I think my collection of drum machines now somehow
relates to that taking away of drum machines in my early years. But did you also
see in your... I mean, great fanon and mara of your fathers. And I think, you
know, like most people who are really, really good at what he does, he's a sort
of bit of a tyrant to... Tyrant's the wrong word, but he is someone who is very
much in control, right? Yeah, definitely. You have to have high standards to
make pop records because they're this sort of magnificent moment that you create
where everything is unrealistically perfect and in time and preconceived. And,
you know, a sort of 12-year-old kid trying to hit a drum kit like I was just
isn't going to make it into that. So there was definitely that tension. Quality
control also, he was very consistent about that. You might think if you're the
father of a son, you might go, your drumming is lovely, darling. But you didn't
really get that, did you? He was quite clear. And I remember playing him a song
that I had written once, and it was pretty obvious from him that he wasn't going
to give me... He wasn't going to soften his view. No, no, I think it must be
tough because loads of people always want to play in their songs. You'd see it
and people, oh, should I play this demo? I've got to see his face drop a bit.
And you'd be like, oh, how's this one going to be? And half the time they're
really bad. You know, it's tough work because you do have to have that high
standard and definitely my formative music wasn't up to that level, you know?
But how did you find your way round to the father who wouldn't let you into his
studio and who was giving you this sometimes very... almost not brutally, but
kind of very frank and unsparing advice? Well, I got... I won an art scholarship
at my secondary school and they gave me a cheque for 400 quid and it was a
travelling art scholarship. And so I said, oh, do I have to show you my receipts
to go to Italy and look at paintings of women who are, you know, destroyed? And
they said, no, no. So I went and bought a pair of turntables and got into DJing
and my dad wasn't so sure about DJs or, you know, that was learning instrument,
learning instrument. So I got into it through that. I got a set of turntables
and fell in love with scratching and cutting and making mix tapes. And then I
started to be interested in drum machines and I understood that these massive
desks in the studio I wasn't allowed near were just sort of versions of DJ
mixes, but with, you know, 148 channels rather than two. That's the thing. It's
melted. You look at them and you think, my God, it's Cape Canaveral. But I just
what it really is, it's just lots of the same thing. Yeah, it's like the
Starship Enterprise. Then you realise it's really sort of six buttons in a line.
Yeah, but if you spend your Ribena into a 48 track SSL desk because your father
was no doubt concerned you would do, that's a big deal. Yeah, that was something
that I definitely picked up and I have a massive phobia of drinks around
equipment. It's one of those things where you're like, Oh, let's put it no
doubt. We've been talking about people finding their voices, Henry and Jojo, and
I'm sure it's true for Ava too. How about you? How have you found the voice,
your unique voice? Wow, I guess we're still finding our voice, right? That's
part of the journey alive probably. But I think, yeah, going through the
industry and you want to have success. You want to have the book that connects.
You want to have that song that you walk into a room and someone else is playing
or it's on the radio. And I think having that experience in my 20s was part of
it. You sort of hear the music that you've made out there and see people
reacting to it and having a great time to it. And that helps you, you know, that
helps you sort of maybe think the stuff you're doing isn't completely terrible.
Can I ask what your dad thinks of your stuff now? Yeah, it's interesting.
There's, you know, I play him stuff and sometimes he likes it. And we've worked
together on projects and he sort of thinks I do beats. He'll be like, Oh, you
got any beats to play me? And I'm like, yeah, yeah, I got a few new things. And
he's into some of it. Some of the more sort of extreme, extreme stuff. He's
probably more classical. And I'll use some really heavy synthesizers or sounds
sometimes. And he's into that. Has he availed of your gong baths and sound
baths, sort of vibrational music? He's interested and but he hasn't come yet. So
I do hope if he's listening, he does. He does come to one. But I think he likes
to be playing. He'd probably want to be up there with a bass being, why is that
C sharp earth gong hitting? To be fair, it probably worked. Finding your voice
is also about minding your own experience and owning your own experience. You
had this incredibly traumatic experience when you were in your early 20s. Yeah.
The accident which caused your mother injuries, Jill, who was a wonderful
person. Yeah. From which he didn't recover and eventually died of something else
later. Yeah. How did that begin to affect the way you worked? Yeah, so being
involved, I mean, lots of people out there will be involved in traumatic
experiences in their life. You know, the longer you live and the more you do,
the more likely you are to be involved in something traumatic. And I think when
you're young, you don't expect it. But as you get older and it's natural to lose
parents and, you know, life happens. And people have to have to learn how to
live with that, how to move on from it. I think for me, I suffered some symptoms
of PTSD, so intrusive thoughts, rumination, self-blame. And yeah, it is very
challenging. And I did really find that music was something that helped. I went
from sort of spending a bit of my day making music to most of my day because it
was a way to escape those thoughts, to change where my brain was actually
working. And does it also provide you a means of kind of both accessing and
expressing things that might have been too difficult to say or speak or conceive
in that sort of way, that music somehow has a kind of openness that other forms
might not have? Yeah, I think the ability to communicate emotion in music is
almost unrivalled. You know, you can listen to sort of 10 seconds of a song and
you can immediately be completely overwhelmed and within an emotional state,
which is, you know, which can happen, I think, with comedy and film and books as
well. But music really gets me that way. And I definitely found that manner of
expression and being able to channel some of the more challenging feelings
through music. Gong baths. For those who've not had one. Gong baths, sound
meditation, sound healings, it depends what you want to call it. I've spent a
very mystical moment when I was on the island of Lombok in Indonesia, as you do,
with someone sort of tinkling at a gamelan around me. And I'd never come across
a gamelan in the wild. For those who don't know, a gamelan is a sort of
orchestra of tuned bells that's played according to an incredibly complex system
that we don't really understand. Bali is where you find your gamelan, Indonesia.
And just realizing that there was something about the resonance of these gongs
and these bells that got into me in a way that nothing else had. And I was
absolutely transported by that. Yeah, I mean, gamelan is an amazing, amazing
traditional instrument and they have they have really insanely complex time
signatures. They'll do pieces that have multiple time signatures. And the tuning
of them is sometimes, you know, is an in classical 440 tuning. So there are
multiple aspects that work when you experience these more traditional,
traditional sounds. And one of the main things is that if you if you listen, if
you listen to any sound that you find relaxing or meditative for six to eight to
12 minutes, your brain will will drop into a deeper, more relaxed pan. When you
in Hindu scriptures, we think of Aum as the first sound of the universe, the
primordial sound. And that is only vibration, isn't it? Yes, Aum is
traditionally tuned to C sharp. So people around around the world who would have
that sound and use it was in a similar tuning, which is the tune of the planet
itself. So is that what a gong barter? So that my main gong is tuned to the
planet Earth. So I'm working with that frequency and that's that's in C sharp.
And yeah, that, you know, there are lots of different aspects that can be
working on the body, on the physiology. And you have this sort of massive
harmonic sound, which is potentially making its way into your body and helping
with the release. Can I just gong bath rookie here? What does that mean? Because
sorry, the first image I had was of sitting in a bath while someone banged a
gong, which is clearly not the point. I think that would be fabulous as well.
But how I mean, do you sit? Yeah, the idea is that you're bathed in the sound
and the vibration of the gong. So it's like a lot of the ones that I've done are
in a sort of traditional yoga studio kind of sense. So people will come in,
we'll do a few minutes of breathing and a few alms to activate the throat and
the vagus nerve and then get everyone to lie down. And it's sort of 45 minutes
to an hour of different sounds. And the sounds change and the sounds have that
non musical element, because when you hear music or sounds that your brain can
follow, it can activate that sort of squirrel mind. So you're anticipating the
lyric or the beat. And when you listen to these long form drone sounds, it just
helps drop the squirrel mind because the squirrel mind can't latch onto it. It
doesn't know when the next bit's coming. I can see Simon Cowell's face already
pulling, turning his mouth down. But you had mentioned the body. You're also
training part-time as an osteopath. Yes. That's part of that, right? Well, I was
really interested in the science behind it. And obviously these new emerging
worlds of wellness, it's important to back them up with science. And so
osteopathy is this amazing form of medicine, which brings together traditional
practice. Andrew Taylor still who invented it. We are making changes to the way
BBC live streams are distributed via third party services and platforms. And the
BBC stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you
are using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds. To Henry Naylor, to Aaron Horn and to Eva
Glassmoor from her later inherited tracks also from the physicist and excitingly
run.