TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-04-00H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Directed by Nadia Molinari. This is BBC Radio 4. BBC News at 11 o'clock. Two of
the biggest unions representing ambulance workers in England and Wales have
called off strikes planned for Monday and Wednesday. Unison and the GMB
suspended the walkouts after ministers said there was money available for
potential pay rises. But Onik Hassab, the national lead officer for the Unite
union, told the World Tonight that his members would still go ahead with their
strike on Monday. There are heavy preconditions. They include not just that we
suspend the strike action, but also that we agree to discuss productivity and
efficiency. And that's not what this dispute is about. A teaching union has
called off planned strike action after receiving a new pay offer from the
Scottish government. The Educational Institute of Scotland will now hold a
ballot on the deal and is urging its members to accept it. Boris Johnson says
he's confident he'll be cleared by MPs investigating whether he misled
Parliament about lockdown parties in Downing Street. In an interim report, the
Privileges Committee said it had found four occasions when the former Prime
Minister may have misled the House. The operator of a ferry that caught fire
while sailing from Dover to Calais says all of the passengers and crew are safe
and unharmed. Irish Ferries says staff extinguished a small blaze in the
vessel's engine room. The ship is expected to be towed by a tug to Calais in the
coming hours. The White House has revealed that President Biden had a cancerous
skin lesion removed from his chest last month. His doctors say that he's well
and that no further treatment is needed. And Royal Mail is set to put the price
of a first-class stamp up to more than a pound for the first time. There'll be a
15 pence rise to Â£1.10 from 3rd April. The company says the rise is needed to
ensure that the service remains sustainable. Football, in the Championship, Hull
City beat West Bromwich Albion 2-0. BBC News. BBC Sounds. Seven years ago, I was
filming East London Mosque when the story broke. The three schoolgirls from the
area had gone missing. They were heading to Syria to join the Islamic State
group. Breaking news this morning, three British schoolgirls are reportedly
missing. Shamima Begum was the only one of the girls to emerge from the ashes of
the so-called Caliphate. I've retraced her steps from the UK through Turkey and
into Syria to find people who knew her and to investigate the truth of her
story. What do you think people think of you? As a danger, as a risk, as a
potential risk. From BBC Radio 4, the Shamima Begum story, Series 2 of I'm Not a
Monster. Listen on BBC Sounds. Well now, with insights from across the United
States, it's time for AmeriCast, presented by Sarah Smith and Justin Webb. It's
Justin in AmeriCast's worldwide headquarters in London, England. Hello, it's
Sarah, the BBC's North America editor. I'm right in the heart of American
politics in Washington, DC. And it's Anthony, BBC North America correspondent,
also here in Washington, DC. And it's not Mariana, the BBC's disinformation
correspondent, misinformation, because although she's been in the studio, guys,
she has flitted in, but she's just won an award and I think she's going to win
plenty more this year. And she is very, very busy. She's working on that Elon
Musk documentary. We've actually mentioned that she's been doing it before and
she went out to San Francisco, didn't she? Anyway, that is going to be on
panorama on BBC television soon. But more importantly, she'll be talking about
it to us. We are bringing you a retro edition of AmeriCast today. Yeah, let's
step into the AmeriCast time machine, which I have here in the studio, and go
back to a very eventful year. Breaking news tonight, America locked down. Three
of the country's biggest states order residents to stay home. This is just a way
they're trying to steal the election, and everybody knows it. The software
itself was created with so many variables and so many back doors that can be
hooked up to the internet or a thumb drive stuck in it or whatever. But one of
its most characteristic features is its ability to flip votes. We've won with
the most votes ever cast from presidential ticket in the history of the nation.
74 million. We're going to be looking back at issues that were dominating the
agenda in 2020 and they've come back to haunt us yet again. Yeah, we're going to
start with Covid. It's three years ago this week that the US reported its first
death from the virus. The total since then rising to well over 1.1 million. And
pretty much since the start of the outbreak, there have been questions about
exactly how it began. Did it go from animals to humans in a so-called wet market
in Wuhan? Did it leak from a lab, a Chinese government lab also located in that
same city? No one is entirely sure, but this week we got more information from
not one, but two US agencies that gave their best assessment that this was a lab
leak. Yeah, on Sunday it emerged the Department of Energy updated a report on
the origins of Covid saying in their view it was likely to be a lab leak, though
they then muddied the waters a bit because they then said they reached that
conclusion with low confidence. Low confidence doesn't sound terribly
reassuring, but what happened then was in an interview with Fox News, the boss
of the FBI said pretty much the same thing. The FBI has agents, professionals,
analysts, virologists, microbiologists, etc., who focus specifically on the
dangers of biological threats, which include things like novel viruses like
Covid, and the concerns that in the wrong hands some bad guys, a hostile nation
state, a terrorist, a criminal, the threats that those could pose. So here
you're talking about a potential leak from a Chinese government-controlled lab
that killed millions of Americans, and that's precisely what that capability was
designed for. That was Christopher Wray, who's the director of the FBI. It's
worth remembering he was appointed by Donald Trump, and as he says, the FBI's
had this view for some time, so why are we talking about it all now? The timing
is really interesting. And of course the debate has been fierce over the years.
There have always been people who've wanted it to be looked into, to put it
mildly, chief among them I suppose President Trump, always open to the idea of a
lab leak, again to put that mildly. Here he is in 2021. There's a lot of
theories, but yeah, we have people looking at it very, very strongly. Scientific
people, intelligence people, and others. China might even tell us. China may
tell us. And what gives you a high degree of confidence that this originated
from the Wuhan Institute of Virology? I can't tell you that. I'm not allowed to
tell you that. I'm not allowed to tell you that. Many though in the scientific
community, and a lot of people in political communities as well, thought all of
this was complete rubbish. They rejected totally the lab leak hypothesis. And
here's a crucial thing. They called it a conspiracy. Here is Anthony Fauci,
formerly of course America's top medical adviser, speaking to the BBC in October
last year. Although we all, myself included, still keep an open mind, it looks
like the likelihood and the evidence that is accumulating that this is a natural
occurrence far, far outweighs any evidence, if any, and there may be no evidence
at all except conjecture, that this is a lab leak. Okay, let's talk about the
very latest developments with Stephen Morrison. He's the presenter of the
podcast Coronavirus Crisis Update, and he's also the director of the Centre for
Strategic and International Studies Global Health Policy Centre. Hello, Stephen.
Pleasure to be with you. Now, you know better than most, this debate about where
Covid came from has been going on for years. These latest developments, what
we've heard from the Department of Energy, also from the FBI this week, does
this change our understanding significantly? Not really. Just to give a bit of
background, right, President Biden comes into office and in May of 2021 orders a
90-day review by the intelligence community of what do we know about the
origins. And that 90-day report gets concluded. There's eight intelligence
agencies that were involved in that, and it's inconclusive. So they do an update
just now, which is smart, and we can talk about why they would want to do an
update right now. But they do this update and they ask the Department of Energy
to turn on its special capabilities and make some judgment, and they come in and
say, low confidence, they believe it was lab leak. So what does that mean? It
means that you still don't have a consensus within the US government on this. So
I don't think it changes things that much, really. And you raised the point
yourself, which is absolutely fascinating. Why come out with this update now?
Tensions between the US and China are very, very high. We had the story,
obviously, of the Chinese surveillance balloon that was floating across the
United States before it was shot down, and currently we've got the US giving
warnings that they're worried that China might be about to give lethal
assistance to Russia in the war in Ukraine. These are very serious times. Why
now would the Department of Energy and the FBI choose to bring up again the
issue of whether or not COVID came from a Chinese lab leak, especially when they
don't have high confidence about what they're saying? You've pointed towards the
geopolitical dimension, and I think that should be the lead element here.
Relationship between the United States and China is at its lowest point ever.
The other thing I'd say is what's happening in Congress. We now have the
Republicans in control of the House of Representatives. We have the Select
Committee on the Coronavirus Pandemic, and it will be having its first major
hearing March 8th next week. So getting out ahead of that with this major news,
important in shaping that debate. And we have this very bipartisan and very
powerful new Select Committee on China that had a major hearing yesterday that
was quite dramatic. Most of the discussion was on other dimensions of the
U.S.-China relationship, but this issue is in the mix. You talked about the lack
of consensus in the government. Is there any more consensus within the
scientific community on where this came from? The scientific community has not
been a fixed community in terms of its opinions. There's been an evolution of
thinking, and some of the evolution has been shaped by political considerations.
For instance, early in 2020 during the outbreak when President Trump was issuing
really unhinged remarks about China and the virus and the like, there was an
initial reaction which was to say, no, no, no, no, this is not a lab leak.
There's a form of racism and erroneous attack upon the Chinese at this moment in
time. And they were leaning in the direction of the zoonotic spillover thesis.
But then many of the scientists who had that initial reaction reconsidered, and
there's been a very intense scientific debate that's unfolded through the
journals. And it's very thoughtful. I believe that they are stymied in reaching
conclusions by the same factors that stymie the intelligence community, which is
lack of access to evidence. And as the time goes on, availability of evidence
deteriorates, and it becomes more and more likely that we'll never get to the
bottom of this particular matter. Can I raise this with you, Stephen? There was
a letter, it was back in February 2020, in the British Medical Journal, The
Lancet, from a number of scientists condemning, and I quote, rumours and
misinformation about the virus's origin. We stand together to strongly condemn
conspiracy theories suggesting that Covid-19 does not have a natural origin.
Given what we know and don't know now, do we know why scientists were so keen at
that stage on both sides of the Atlantic to kind of shut this whole idea down? I
would say in a pandemic that starts under massive uncertainty and fear, where
you don't even know what you're dealing with in this period, and it's one in
which there was an immediate leap towards intense politicisation coming from
Trump. There was a fear that that impulse was going to dominate. And I think the
prevailing opinion within the scientific community at that time was that the
likelihood is overwhelming that this is a animal to human transmission. Now,
three years later, we have the benefit of hindsight where we can say, well, you
know, we have had great difficulty identifying what the animal chain of
transmission is. And so I think over time, scientists came around to acknowledge
that it was perfectly valid and legitimate to consider a lab leak thesis. And so
commerheads prevailed over time. That's such an interesting answer, Steve, and
I'm sure in so many respects, people will hear that and say, yeah, that probably
is the answer. The problem, I guess, is that those who are, and we've talked
about the politicisation of all of this, but those who are prone to conspiracy
theories, and let's face it, there are some completely mad conspiracy theories
around about everything, including scientific matters. They've now got a kind of
thing, haven't they, that they can batter the heads of the scientists with and
say, look, you once said this was a conspiracy. Now it's not. And so our mad
conspiracy theory that actually is a conspiracy theory might also be true. In
other words, that that letter in The Lancet and other similar ones, there was
one in Science, wasn't there, the journal. They have done quite a lot of kind of
comms damage to science, haven't they? I don't know about that. I mean, my fear
in terms of damage to science is that as if this becomes politicised in a
certain way, China affiliated scientists are going to be punished and singled
out. And we have to have open scientific collaborations that involve China. If
we're concerned about pandemic threats and global health security and
preparedness and response, we have to have scientific partnerships and
collaborations. The National Institute of Health, our NIH, has, I don't know,
300 active research partnerships funded within China. What happens if those
disappear? We're at a real risk here as this Cold War bifurcation begins to
harden up with Taiwan, with Ukraine, with the decoupling of our economies and
technological barriers being erected. And we've got this wormhole around the
Covid origin that nobody can figure out how to get out of it. You could see the
severe deterioration of scientific collaborations. Stephen Morrison, the
presenter of Coronavirus Update podcast and also the director of the Centre for
Strategic and International Studies Global Health Policy Centre. Thank you.
You're most welcome. Justin, Anthony, that was really interesting, I think,
because not just of going through the scientific evidence or lack of, but the
way in which he described how this entire debate is shaped by politics. And I
think you can see that playing out in Washington at the moment where you've got
politicians, maybe Democrats or Republicans, but those who want to be more
hawkish on America's foreign policy towards China, more likely to promote the
lab leak theory. And those who are worried about being too confrontational with
China, more likely to think that it was naturally occurring in animals, the
coronavirus. So the emerging Cold War between China and America, the coronavirus
debate seems to be really caught in the middle of that. Yeah, I agree to all of
that. And this amazing, I mean, I thought it was really clear. I don't think
I've ever heard anyone being quite so clear about this kind of explanation about
why it was that the scientific community was so keen to shut down all of this
early doors because of that kind of closeness to China. And it was perfectly
open, wasn't it, about the need for science. And you must feel this if you're
working in a lab and you need funding and all the rest of it, the need for
science to carry on that connection to China and the reason why perhaps that led
to this knee jerk thing right at the beginning where they were so keen to
suppress stuff. Now, onto another ghost from 2020, those false allegations of
election fraud, what's known here as the big lie. After it became clear that Joe
Biden had won the election in November, many Republicans followed Donald Trump
and refused to accept that result. And those unproven claims of fraud weren't
confined to the fringes of public opinion. They were echoed by some of the hosts
at Fox News, the conservative cable network. We can and must eliminate any
chance of fraud or abuse or corruption or questioning of integrity and
competence. There's good reason here not to have confidence or not to believe
this is fair. We will pursue all legal avenues where there are irregularities,
anomalies, illegalities and corruption. This is a nation of fools. This thing
should be shut down right now. And people understand that this will not be
tolerated by the American people. That was Sean Hannity, Jeanine Pirro and Lou
Dobbs, all presenters on the Fox network. And they're in the headlines now
because Fox News is being sued by a company called Dominion Voting Services.
Now, they run electronic voting machines in some states and they're accusing Fox
News of defamation. And in the last few weeks, we've been able to see some of
the documents that form part of that case. First, it was some texts between the
presenters, the anchors, as they call them in America, which suggests that they
may have repeated the allegations of election fraud on air, even though, and
this is the crucial point, they thought privately that the allegations were
wrong and unfounded. And then this week, something of a bombshell, the
deposition that was given by the media mogul, the Fox News boss, Rupert Murdoch,
was released. And that one is particularly interesting because it suggests that
he and some other executives at Fox News knew that some anchors were endorsing
the idea that the election had been stolen, but did nothing about it. Eric
Wemple is the media critic at the Washington Post. His focus is on the cable
news industry, which is exactly where we need to focus today. Eric, hello.
Hello. I'm going to spend a life immersed in cable news TV. I wouldn't wish that
on my worst enemy. It's awful. So much of it is, isn't it? But tell us
particularly about Fox News, about its persona, I suppose, but also potentially
about its strengths, its historical strengths. OK, so Fox News was founded in
1996 by Rupert Murdoch and Roger Ailes. Rupert Murdoch is the legendary
Australian-born media mogul with properties all around the globe, very much a
conservative, politically right sort of figure. All his news organizations have
pursued a conservative sort of ideology in their editorial pages or, in the case
of his TV properties, in their broadcasts. So it has been a longstanding force
in American politics and in American media. It has led the cable news ratings
since 2002. So it has more than two decades of dominance. That makes it a very
profitable entity. It regularly breaks in more than a billion in profits per
year, a billion dollars. It's a huge, huge organization. OK, so it's all going
swimmingly. And then comes the election, what Trump said about that election,
what they said about the election and the Dominion lawsuit. So tell us about the
lawsuit and tell us why it's blown up actually this week. Donald Trump, of
course, even before the election, had been talking about the possibility that it
would be rigged and so on and so forth, preparing for a loss. After the
election, he goes into overdrive and people in his sphere are starting to push
this stolen election claim. This narrative manages to scoop up a couple of sort
of ancillary storylines, which are that these voting technology companies,
Dominion and Smartmatic, which had varying levels of involvement in the 2020
election, were instrumental in flipping votes from Donald Trump to Joe Biden. It
wasn't true. So they ultimately sued Fox News for defamation. And where we are
now, and this is just with the Dominion suit, Dominion and Fox News are at the
summary judgment phase of their litigation, which means essentially that they've
done all the discovery. They've pounded each other for emails, texts, messages
on both sides. And they're asking, both asking the court to rule in their favor
before a jury trial. And the jury trial is scheduled to start on April 17th.
Now, this is the BBC, Eric, so we need to be fair to Fox. What are they saying?
What kind of defense have they mounted? What, if anything, are they saying on
air or off air? I mean, basically what they say is, and this is what I think is
the most legitimate part of their defense, is that Dominion really wasn't
damaged too much by these falsehoods. Dominion is a small company. You know,
it's about $80 million valuation, they say. And that the idea that damages could
possibly toll what they put in their initial complaint, which is $1.6 billion,
couldn't possibly be the case. The other big argument is that this material,
this content was newsworthy. The people in the president's orbit were making
these claims that there was a stolen election. They were talking about Dominion
and Smartmatic. And it's the job of a news organization to air them. And of
course the ultimate boss is Rupert Murdoch, and we've learnt more now, haven't
we, as well, this week, about his role in being aware of these things and what
he thought of them. Is that right? That is correct. They've disclosed snippets
of his deposition in the case. And Murdoch is, you know, he's 91, 92 now, but
Murdoch has always been a meddler. You know, Murdoch has always been in the
journalism. He's always been, like with his newspapers, he's always been
carefully involved. He's obviously involved in a pretty extensive way at Fox
News, noting how the audience is moving. I mean, this is stuff he loves. Eric,
it's Sarah here. Let's carry on talking about Rupert Murdoch a little bit,
because in his deposition, he did say when he was asked what should happen to
people who allowed lies about the election to be aired on Fox, that they should
be reprimanded or maybe got rid of. So it doesn't sound as though he's accepting
responsibility himself, but he may be lining up somebody else to take the blame
and possibly get fired. I mean, I think that there could be personnel actions
that proceed here, but make no mistake about it. This is not because these
people in any way countermanded their bosses. No, they were doing what they
understood to be their jobs, which is to keep the audience. This is fascinating,
Eric, because we're getting absolutely to the heart of what Fox were doing. And
of course, we know some of that from the messages that we've seen going between
the anchors and the testimony from Rupert Murdoch. This wasn't necessarily an
ideological thing that they were doing. It wasn't, as you say, because they
believed the election was stolen, nor was it necessarily because they wanted to
get Trump back into the presidency. They were worried about viewers. They were
worried about money. They were even worried about share prices, one of the
anchors said in a text message. That's why they were promoting this. That is 100
percent true. Look, when your only asset is ratings and you see those slip away,
it's time to panic. I don't remember many sort of blips like this in their
history where they've had a moment where it really looked like it could be
slipping away. And once it slips away, they have nothing left to show for
themselves, because in the cable news industry, score is not kept by scoops.
They can only say, look at how many millions of viewers tuned in to Tucker
Carlson. We know obviously that the 2020 election wasn't stolen and therefore
anybody on Fox News who was saying it was wasn't telling the truth. But that's
not enough for a defamation case in America. The standard is not just that they
were putting out information that was wrong, but that they knew it was wrong.
From what we've learned of these messages going around between executives and
anchors within the network, do you think they've reached the standard? I know
you're not a lawyer, but does it look to you as though they've reached the
standard to win a defamation case? Because that's not easy in the States. It's
incredibly difficult. The 1964 case that established this basic media protection
was called New York Times versus Sullivan. It basically required a plaintiff in
a case like this to prove that the offending media outlet made their statement
with knowledge of its falsity or with reckless disregard of its truth or
falsity. And the idea here is all about the high level of protection for media
coverage, because we want to make sure that politicians, businesses, anybody
that has power, we don't want to be pulling our punches. That's what the whole
doctrine is geared toward, a robust discussion of the powerful. And so that's
why Dominion has such a hard legal bar to clear. Let's talk about Donald Trump,
because his relationship with Fox News over the years, I guess you could call it
complicated, right? He sparred with them early on in his presidential run in
2015 and 2016. But Fox News seemed to be fully in his camp and trying to support
his presidency for four years. Where is this relationship now that Donald Trump
is out of office and contemplating or actually launched another bid in 2024? I
mean, you can see some of the drift on Fox News away from Trump. Fox News seems
to be embracing Ron DeSantis, the Florida governor, a little bit. There are
reports, and I believe there's some information in the filing that, you know,
they didn't want to deal with Donald Trump on January 6th because they felt he
was too toxic or whatever. But, you know, some of the Murdoch papers, including
the New York Post and The Wall Street Journal, have editorialized really
strongly against Trump in the past couple of years. And a lot of commentators
have used that as a signal that Murdoch properties are genuinely sort of trying
to get away from Trump. But it is a difficult thing for Fox News because they
have to be prepared. Again, all they care about is their audience. They have to
be prepared for the possibility that Trump is the nominee. What do they do then?
Eric Wemple of The Washington Post, I have to say, I think that's the most
fascinating discussion of Fox News that I've ever heard. So we're all really
grateful to you. Thank you. Thanks for asking me to come on. I really enjoyed
it. And just to add to what Eric was saying about Fox News's position first,
because it is important to hear what they say. Number one, they deny defamation.
They say that the hosts' words were taken out of context. All those words, those
things that we've been hearing about weren't in proper context. They also say
that Dominion's view of defamation, and this goes to something that Eric was
talking about, would prevent journalists from basic reporting and their efforts
to publicly smear Fox, as they put it, for covering and commenting on
allegations by a sitting president of the United States, should be recognized
for what it is, a blatant violation of the First Amendment. So that's what
they're saying about all of that. And also it is worth saying that in his
deposition, among the various bits and pieces from Rupert Murdoch's deposition,
he says at one stage, some of our commentators were endorsing it, in other
words, the lie about the election, and he says, I would have liked us to be
stronger in denouncing it in hindsight. Where does it leave Fox News? I do think
it's an interesting point, isn't it, that in order in American law to make a
case stick, it is going to have to be a pretty watertight case, number one, but
it's also going to have to be a case that meets the standards that Eric was
talking about, the idea of actual malice, that legal term. And there are quite a
few people, aren't there, guys, who just don't feel, even after all the things
we've heard this week, that this necessarily is going to make the grade. The
general view from commentators who know far more about the American legal system
than I do, seem to think that, yeah, it's very unlikely, it's such a high
standard to meet, but of course it's been very embarrassing for Fox, even if
they don't end up having to pay out this $1.6 billion. I think that oftentimes
in suits like this, it's the discovery that kills you, because it gives an
inside view in the workings of a company like Fox, or like we saw last year when
Sarah Palin sued the New York Times. She lost that case, but we got a lot of
kind of juicy inside information about how the New York Times editorial room
works and the kind of pressures and the kind of sloppiness, honestly, that went
on in the New York Times that led up to an opinion editorial that was blaming
Sarah Palin for that shooting in Arizona. So I think it will be interesting to
see, as Eric mentioned, what direction this goes now, what direction Fox News
goes now, because we know that there are very serious economic business concerns
about how they cover Donald Trump and his Republican race, and if they go too
far in being anti-Trump, there are people in Trump's base who will abandon Fox
News, and they make up a big chunk of their viewership. So stay tuned, I guess.
Thanks for getting in touch with questions, with comments as well. Keep emailing
americast at bbc.co.uk. Questions and comments, please. You can also send us a
message or a voice note via WhatsApp to 033-0123-9480. We love hearing from you,
and we read everything you send. And next week, as we said, Mariana will be here
to tell us all about her investigation into what's been happening at Twitter. So
if you've got any questions about Elon Musk or what's going on in the
Twittersphere, that's the time to send them in. See you all later. Goodbye,
everyone. Goodbye. Now to Westminster, where backbench MPs have had the chance
to bring in new laws, today in Parliament. Order! Order. Good evening, this is
Mark Darcy at Westminster, where an MP apologises for breaching bullying and
harassment guidelines. I know I let a huge number of people down, and I'm sorry
to everyone who saw Drink get the better of me. I am resolute that it will never
happen again. Also on the programme, a former waiter shares his journey to the
House of Lords. If it weren't for tips, I probably wouldn't be standing here
today. And the late Betty Boothroyd's advice on what a woman needs to do to
control the House of Commons. You're a woman, your voice is higher, you mustn't
sound like a fishwife. That was her first and last piece of advice. But first, a
parliamentary watchdog has recommended that the MP, Neil Coyle, should be
suspended from the Commons for five sitting days. The independent expert panel
ruled that he'd broken Parliament's bullying and harassment policy by drunkenly
abusing another MP's assistant and for using abusive language with racial
overtones towards a parliamentary journalist. Neil Coyle lost the Labour whip
following the incident and now sits as an independent. Soon after the report was
published, Mr Coyle made a personal statement in the Commons. I want to say how
sorry I am for the upset and offence my behaviour caused last year. I wish to
specifically apologise to the two complainants who were subject to my drunk and
offensive behaviour and attitude. I cannot apologise enough for the harm and
upset caused and am ashamed of my conduct, frankly. It should not have happened.
No-one should leave any MP's company so shocked or appalled at their
inappropriate behaviour or failure to meet the standards rightly expected of
this office. He also apologised to his constituents in Bermondsey and Old
Southwark and said this week marked a year since he'd stopped drinking. A new
law to stop domestic abusers using child maintenance payments to track down or
control ex-partners has been approved by MPs. The Child Support Collection
Domestic Abuse Bill would allow the Child Maintenance Service to collect money
if the case involved abuse and one parent requested it. The bill was proposed by
the Conservative Sally-Anne Hart who said it would provide an important new
protection for victims, overwhelmingly women. Helping to make them as safe as
possible using the Child Maintenance Service. These proposals give victims of
domestic abuse choice another avenue to aid their escape and removal from an
abusive partner or environment whilst ensuring more protection than previously
to victims. The Liberal Democrat Wendy Chamberlain said all MPs dealt with abuse
cases and the payments could be weaponised for years. I have a constituent who,
her children are grown up but as a result of the coercive control of domestic
abuse she still has money outstanding and her ex-partner still utilises it.
Sally-Anne Hart ended by thanking the many women who contacted her about her
bill. Describing the horrors and the coercive and controlling behaviour that
many of their former partners have shown towards them over the years and they
wanted to pour out what had happened to them and I very much hope and I'm
confident that this bill will prevent many, many more women and many more
children from going through the trauma of coercive financial abuse in the coming
years. Another Conservative, Jonathan Gullis, spoke of his experiences as a
teacher dealing with safeguarding issues. It's absolutely disgusting for
children to be used as a weapon, as a tool to coercively control women, totally
unfairly, totally unnecessary and those people who do that not only should have
to pay their fair share but we use the legislation we've passed in this House to
throw the rule book at them and hopefully, where necessary, put them in jail.
And his colleague, Lea Nietzsche, said she had recently come across a new form
of domestic abuse. I've had constituents coming to me where their partners have
got applications on the phone to actually control the heating in the house and
that they've found that partners are actually unbeknown to them are switching
off the central heating. For Labour, Vicky Foxcroft backed the bill, but she
wanted assurances that the requirement to produce evidence of domestic abuse
wouldn't be too stringent. It is vital for ministers to get this evidence
requirement right as the effectiveness of the bill hinges on it. The
Safeguarding Minister, Mims Davis, agreed. We aim to produce robust evidence
requirements which are fully sensitive to the needs of domestic abuse survivors
where all relevant data and insight has been thoroughly considered. And moments
later, the bill was given final approval by MPs and sent off to the House of
Lords. Now, this week, Parliament's been mourning the loss of one of its greats,
Betty Boothroyd, the first and so far only woman Speaker of the Commons, who's
died aged 93. She served in the Chair of the Commons for eight years after an
election presided over by the then Father of the House, Sir Edward Heath. The
main question is that Miss Betty Boothroyd do take the chair of this House as
Speaker. As many as are of that opinion, say aye. Aye. Those of the contrary
opinion, say no. The ayes have it. The ayes have it. In many ways, she was a
surprise choice, defeating a former Cabinet minister. As a former Commons clerk,
Paul Evans recalls... She was, in a sense, an insurgent candidate. She came from
the Labour benches. She had not been through the strict establishment route that
normally led to the Speakership. And she got a chair on the basis of
conservative, what you might call rebel votes, a rebellion against the Whip's
preferred candidate, Peter Brooke. So she was a different kind of Speaker, right
from the start in some ways. And how did that manifest itself? What did she do
differently? She was less beholden to the Government and more inclined to ensure
that it respected the House and didn't get too much of the airtime and was
treated even-handedly, more even-handedly, with the Opposition. A point echoed
by the current Deputy Speaker, Dame Eleanor Lange, who was a very junior
Opposition Whip at the end of Betty Boothroyd's Speakership. When Betty became
Speaker, there was a considerable female presence in the political world, with
Margaret Thatcher and others, of course. But the House of Commons itself was
still massively male-dominated and there was a very male atmosphere. As a woman,
you felt out of place. Having Betty in the Chair as Madam Speaker changed the
atmosphere. Back then it was all too easy for the old men to dominate because
there were so many of them. But Betty actively encouraged our participation. Her
deputies found her a congenial boss with an uncanny ability to predict trouble
ahead in a day's debates. Sir Alan, now Lord Hazelhurst, was her senior deputy
for much of her term. We would settle down round a table, a card table if you
like. She would then tend to kick off her heels and light a cigarette and then
we would really be let in on all the things that she is concerned about at that
time and what we should be looking out for in the course of our spell in the
Chair. She could give graphic accounts then to her three deputies when we were
discussing a certain situation. She might say, well, if so and so, you have
trouble there this is how you might tackle it, you know. So we were well briefed
by her. This was as close as I'd ever been to really understanding what was
going on day by day in the House of Commons. She also had more general advice to
offer. Natasha Engle was a Deputy Speaker under John Bercow. When I first became
Deputy Speaker, she called me over on the day that I was elected, she called me
over to the House of Lords and basically told me how it was going to be in the
Chair. She said, if you're going to help me, I shouldn't be expected to be
helped. If I put my name forward to be Deputy Speaker, then I should expect
everything that was coming my way. And the thing that she said to me was, you're
a woman, your voice is higher, you mustn't sound like a fishwife. That was her
first and last piece of advice, was that that is what people are expecting. So
keep your voice low and keep it quiet, but really sort of assert your voice. But
it will get rough and you must go with the rough. And it's not about you, that
was the thing, was that it was not about me in the Chair, it wasn't about her in
the Chair, that when somebody stands up to speak, they don't care who's in the
Chair, they don't notice who's in the Chair. They want to make sure that they
get the space to speak, that is what they're there for, but that who's in the
Chair doesn't matter, it's not about you, it's about them. And that was the
really, really important thing. And it wasn't about whether you're a man or a
woman or anything else, it was that you were there to facilitate the debate and
to keep the debate flowing. The Commons in Betty Boothroyd's day was a more
raucous and crowded chamber, and she expected MPs to fight their own corner. The
whole thing about making sure that the chamber was calmer and that there was
silence when people spoke, I mean that just didn't happen under Betty Boothroyd.
That famous clip with Simon Hughes, the spit it out, I mean there was no
sympathy for poor Simon Hughes, it was sort of waiting for silence. I mean he
really could have waited forever for that silence to come. So I think it was a
very, very robust place under Betty Boothroyd. That incident involving the then
Lib Dem MP Simon Hughes was seen as classic Betty. He was struggling to be heard
at a pre-election Prime Minister's Question Time and fatally he paused hoping
the House would quieten down. Madam Speaker was not impressed. Order, order,
this is so time consuming, come on, Mr Hughes, spit it out, come on. Thirty
years on, Simon Hughes still winces. I should have just put my head down and
kept going, even if I sort of couldn't hear anything and whatever the noise was.
But I halted and I made the mistake of stopping, which gave her a chance to come
back for a second time. Project your voice, Mr Hughes, in a good Betty Boothroyd
fashion. I mean she was right and it was taking too long and I accept that. I
was being egged on by Paddy Ashdown not to give in and not let the so-and-so get
you down. And in the end I can't even remember the answer and I think probably
nobody else remembers the answer from the Prime Minister. Everybody remembers
the Speaker. The current Deputy Speaker Dame Eleanor Lange contrasts Betty
Boothroyd's style of reprimand with that of later Speakers. There have been
times after Betty left the Chair and before Lindsay became Speaker when fear of
the then Speaker cast a grey shadow over the House of Commons. That's quite a
contrast to Betty who brought joy and happiness to the House of Commons. Former
Clerk Paul Evans summed up her style. She had that kind of commanding presence
and everybody... They didn't live in fear of her, exactly, but I think there was
this icy reaction to a thwarting of her will which was very effective in making
sure people jumped to when she was. Paul Evans. You're listening to Today in
Parliament with me, Mark Darcy. Now, the Child Support Bill wasn't the only
legislation to clear the Commons. MPs also approved plans to stop rogue
landlords exploiting people who need help to live independently. A Conservative,
Bob Blackman, introduced a bill to regulate what's known as exempt
accommodation. That's shared housing for people who need help and support. He
said some tenants had been abused and manipulated into what he called damaging
practices. Whether that be prostitution, substance abuse, discouragement for
work, I could go on. People are exploited in an unacceptable way. The main
reason people are referred to supported housing is to receive the constructive
support they need to transition back to normality, yet far too often they're
going backwards as a consequence of this damaging malpractice. This is an issue
that is popping up in more and more constituencies all over England,
highlighting the need for prompt regulation. Labour's shadow housing minister,
Matthew Pennycook, wanted to see further changes to the law, but he welcomed the
bill. It's not a panacea, but it will undoubtedly help put rogue exempt
accommodation operators out of business and better enable local authorities to
drive up supported housing standards in their areas. In doing so, as the
honourable gentleman said, it will improve the lives of some of the most
vulnerable people in our society and bring relief to communities struggling to
cope with the impact of concentrated numbers of badly run exempt accommodation
properties. We recognise that today is a significant, important step forward,
and we're very pleased to give this bill our support. The housing minister,
Felicity Buchan, proposed a number of changes, including an amendment to make it
harder for rogue landlords to advertise poor quality exempt accommodation on
Gumtree and other websites. She promised government support for the bill, and
she said she was determined to end what she called an abuse of the housing
system. In parts of the country, there has been a growth in accommodation with
little or even no support being provided, but where landlords are charging
extortionate levels of rent paid for through housing benefit, that is an abuse
of the system, and it puts people who should be receiving support at risk. The
bill was given a third reading without a vote and now goes to the House of
Lords. Amongst the other measures MPs discussed was a plan to end the practice
of releasing prisoners in England and Wales on a Friday. The proposals put
forward by Conservative Simon Fell are designed to help cut re-offending. Mr
Fell said people released from prison on Fridays faced a race against the clock
to get help from support services before they closed for the weekend. Failure to
access vital support can increase an offender's likelihood of re-offending. We
know that the re-offending rate for adults released on a Friday is higher than
for any other day of the week, and that those without stable accommodation on
release are almost 50% more likely to re-offend. Mr Deputy Speaker, by removing
those barriers that a Friday release can bring, we can ensure that prison
leavers have a better chance to access the support they need to reintegrate into
the community so that victims and the public are protected. Again, the bill was
given an unopposed third reading and now goes to the House of Lords. Now, it's
been announced that the Commons Ethics Watchdog, the Committee on Privileges,
will take evidence from former Prime Minister Boris Johnson later this month on
whether he misled MPs over the lockdown-busting parties at Downing Street, and
the committee's published a dossier of the evidence it's compiled. At the end of
the main Commons business, the Conservative Leonici, who had been Boris
Johnson's parliamentary aide when he was Prime Minister, complained about what
she said was a serious constitutional issue to the Deputy Speaker. She said MPs
expected impartiality from senior civil servants, but Labour were appointing Sue
Gray, the second permanent secretary at the Cabinet Office, as Sir Keir
Starmer's Chief of Staff, and she had been the senior official who'd led the
investigation into Partygate. The same second permanent secretary who carried
out an investigation to alleged gatherings on government premises during the
Covid restrictions on behalf of the then Prime Minister. It's been given
widespread concerns as to how this appointment by the Member for Holborn and St
Pancras will interact with the current work of the Committee of Privileges,
which I understand is proposing to rely on the evidence of the Sue Gray report
as its essential basis. A spokesperson for the Privileges Committee has said
that their report is not based on the Sue Gray report. The UK is committed to
decarbonise its economy and eliminate net emissions of greenhouse gases by 2050
to help control global warming. In Parliament, the progress or lack of it
towards those goals is monitored by the MPs who sit on the Environmental Audit
Committee, which can range across all the work of government. The committee is
celebrating the 25th anniversary of its creation, during which time it's gone
from being a bit of a backwater to exercising an increasingly crucial scrutiny
role on issues of rising public concern. So how much clout does it carry? I
gather together three of its members, the Chair, the Conservative ex-minister
Philip Dunne, Labour's Clive Lewis and the Green Party MP Caroline Lucas, a
veteran who's served on the committee since 2010. So how much good did she think
it had done? I think it's done a huge amount of good. Obviously sometimes it can
be quite difficult to identify a particular recommendation that was made by the
committee and a particular decision by government. But I think what we can do is
shine a spotlight on issues that otherwise simply haven't been on the agenda. So
I would point to our fast fashion report, for example, which really did put the
pressure on fashion houses. They had to account for the fact that they weren't
treating their workers very well or indeed the environment. And change has
happened as a result of that. We can make a big difference. Sometimes it's
behind the scenes. Sometimes it hits the headlines. But that ability to be able
to hold businesses and ministers to account, to hold their feet to the fire, is
what I think Parliament does best. Clive Lewis, the same question to you really.
What would you reckon to be the moments of effective pressure that the
committees exerted? Well I'm a relative newbie, but already I've seen on a
number of issues, for example, the government giving new licences for drilling
oil. We were able to hold government to account. We were able to ask some real
questions. As we move into a period of ecological and climate crisis, our role
is going to become increasingly important. This has moved so far up the
political agenda in the eight years that I've been here in Parliament, from one
that was barely talked about, perhaps apart from Caroline and a handful of
others, to one now that is never out of the news, out of the political agenda.
Philip Dunne, you've been on both sides of the divide here. You've been a health
minister, you've been a defence minister, and now you're chairing the
Environmental Audit Committee. So when a report from that committee landed on
your ministerial desk in the past, how much clout did it carry? I think we have
a forcing function in making cross-government responses to environmental issues,
which makes some departments that think they don't have a responsibility
recognise that they do. We range right across the whole breadth of government,
because it's quite rare that there is an individual minister responsible for the
specific thing that we're looking at. Sometimes you actually see that play out
in real time, when you've got ministers in front of you from different
departments, and they're both trying to disown responsibility for something, and
I think that really does hammer it home and gets people to go back and do their
homework. I actually think the select committees are one of the few ways that
politicians, members of Parliament, can actually genuinely hold the government
to account. Because if you think about Parliament, we're whipped, we're told
what we have to do, but under the select committee system, we listen to experts.
It's like a citizens' jury of MPs. We listen to experts, we listen to those
people who know what's going on, we're able to question them in detail and
depth, and then use that information that we've gleaned and turn that onto the
government to question their policies and their priorities. And that's, I think,
almost unique in Parliament. And I think it's something where if you want to
enhance our democracy in the future, if you want to be able to tackle the highly
complex kind of situation that the climate crisis is going to need in terms of
policy responses, then this is a fantastic way for democracies to be able to
hold government to account. And frankly, the executive have run away with a
great deal of power over the last 20 or 30 years. Philip Dunne, your committee
has any number of inquiries going on at the moment. I suppose the really big one
is on the transition to net zero. Is that going to be pretty much the
centrepiece, the flagship of your work from now on? Well, scrutinising the path
to net zero Britain, I think, is a key function for this committee to take us
right up to the 2050 moment and beyond. But we've also, in the last couple of
years, been focused on nature. And we think the government is now catching up
with the committee, if you like, in putting that much higher up the agenda. So
we've seen the interim targets of water quality, soil quality, air quality.
They've never done that before. And that was one of the recommendations that we
made, to see interim targets in order to get to the position for 2050 and to
restore nature to the condition we've inherited. Caroline Lucas, you were
nodding vigorously through some of that. Do you get the feeling that as the
first and still only Green MP, you've gone from being a kind of niche prophet of
a particular issue to someone who has quite unexpectedly found themselves in the
political mainstream? They're all catching up with me now. Yeah, it's great. I
was going to say two things, really. One was that I do think that work that we
did on nature, and in particular on things like the so-called Das Gupta report,
which was looking at how we value nature, not just economically but more
broadly, when it comes to some of the biodiversity work, I think we were
instrumental in making sure the government changed its targets. So it was about
not just halting biodiversity loss, but halting and reversing it. One of the
themes of the committee at the moment is just the rising potency of the
environment as a political issue. It's not just about the issue of sewage
discharges into rivers. But this is still a committee with a party majority on
it in a culture where whipping and the influence of the parties is very strong.
So, Philip Dunne, can you imagine your committee being prepared to vote through
a report that really upbraided a government of which you're a supporter, saying
that you're failing on this environmental issue and disastrous consequences will
follow? Well, we do it all the time, Mark. You must read more of our report. We
don't shy away from criticising the government. It's not just necessarily the
government. It was our committee that uncovered through the fast fashion report
that Caroline mentioned, modern slavery alive and kicking, I regret to say, on
the streets of certain towns in Britain. When we came out of the EU, we had to
put in place the biggest piece of environmental legislation as a nation that
we'd had for 40 years. And that coincided with the report that we were doing
into water quality. So there are elements of that bill, in particular relating
to water quality and what we do about sewage discharges, which were a direct
lift from some of our recommendations. I'd also point you to the report that
we've done looking at the government's failures on home insulation. I don't
think anybody could, with a straight face, say that the Green Homes Grant was a
success or the Green Deal was a success. And our committee, time and again, has
been in the forefront of saying that this simply isn't good enough. And I've
been very pleased to see how willing the committee is to say it as it sees it.
Yeah, I think it's a slightly simplistic way of looking at Parliament, that you
won't be prepared to criticise your own front bench. I think there are lots of
parliamentarians, MPs, on both Labour and the Conservative Party, who will be
happy to challenge their own party, because we also want to make sure that the
climate works right. We want to make sure that the country's operating right,
the government being held to account. And I kind of feel that whilst you might
soft-pedal slightly sometimes on your own government, you want to get it right,
because I'm sure this will come back to bite you on the bottom if you don't get
it right. And I think the other thing to add is that our reports have to be a
consensus. As a committee, we're a broad church. Caroline represents one end of
the spectrum, if I can suggest, and we've got other members of the committee who
are at the other end. No names, no pact. We seek to get unanimity in our report
writing, and that means that everybody recognises that they're most unlikely to
get an extreme position through. And we've only had one example of a minority
report in the 25 years that the committee's been running. Philip Dunne, Caroline
Lucas and Clive Lewis. Peers have backed a move to ensure employers pass on tips
and service charges to workers, but some wondered if the culture of tipping
waiting staff in restaurants was now outdated. David Cornock reports. Members of
the House of Lords owe their place there to many things, including birth,
patronage and the Church of England. Labour's Lord Mitchell had another reason.
If it weren't for tips, I probably wouldn't be standing here today. His
appreciation of tipping dated back to his time working in a restaurant in New
York in the 1960s while studying for his MBA. My basic pay was 99 cents per
hour, minimum wage, plus tips. Being English at the time of the Beatles, I
achieved some degree of notoriety, and I was good at hustling for tips. I would
earn about $60 per evening. An effort that impressed the business minister, Lord
Johnson, up to a point. It sounds like you were earning more there in the
Justice than you might be paid to attend this House today. So I have to question
your business acumen. Lord Johnson said the government would back a change in
the law that would require employers to pass on tips, service charges and
gratuities given to their staff. It would apply not only to restaurants, but
also to taxi companies and hairdressers, even Casino Croupier. If employers
failed to share tips fairly, they could be taken to an employment tribunal. The
bill sponsored by the Conservative, Lord Robertson. When customers pay service
charges, they, we, expect them to go to work in full, and they jolly well
should. Ensuring that tips are passed on to workers in full with no deductions
by employers could actually make a very real difference to workers' incomes.
Another Conservative, Lady Berridge, said tips often went to those on the lowest
wages, as she knew from experience. Back in the day, it was so encouraging on a
long shift in the local gastropub to open the drawer and see a number of paper
notes along with the coins in the tips bowl. It really was an incentive for the
rest of the ship and an extra bonus when you're saving for university. But the
crossbench or independent peer, Lady Deitch, thought employers shouldn't rely on
tips to set fair and competitive levels of pay. Will this legislation only serve
to cement out-of-date pay practices that will serve to inhibit the hospitality
industry's recruitment efforts? She summed up her reservations. It is backward-
looking rather than forward, and many of us would wish that there could be some
end or curtailment to the system of tips. For Labour, Lady Chapman said the bill
didn't deal with everything, but it was a step in the right direction. Happily,
when the government does something sensible, we should acknowledge that. I think
maybe balloons at carnival or lighting some candles or something might also be
appropriate. The Minister, Lord Johnson, said the bill would make a difference
to millions of people. Among them, many of the lowest paid across a wide variety
of sectors, and give them an avenue to seek remedies. Consumers will rest
assured that the tips they leave are going, as intended, to reward the good
service and hard work of staff, rather than lining the pockets of bosses. The
bill, which has already cleared the Commons, now goes for more detailed
scrutiny, but is on course to become law. And that report from David Cornock
brings us to our closing headline from Westminster. The MP Neil Coyle apologised
unreservedly for his behaviour after a parliamentary watchdog recommended that
he should be suspended for the Commons for five sitting days, following two
drunken incidents in a parliamentary bar. Mr Coyle, who lost the Labour whip
following the complaints about his behaviour, told the Commons he was ashamed of
his conduct. I'm Mark Darsey, the studio manager was Richard Townsend and the
editor Sean Curran. And that was Today in Parliament.