TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-04-22H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This Monday evening at 8 o'clock on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at 9
o'clock. Ukrainian soldiers are fortifying their positions in the eastern city
of Bakhmut, as Russian forces reportedly continue to advance. British military
intelligence says Kiev's troops have been bringing in elite units. The city's
mayor says the remaining 4,000 civilians are living in shelters, without access
to gas, electricity or water. Prince Harry has said he always felt slightly
different to the rest of his royal family and that his mum felt the same. He
made the comments this evening during an interview with the author Gabor Mate.
He also opened up about his memoir, Spare, saying that it had helped him to come
to terms with the difficult periods of his life. I felt incredibly free. I felt
a huge weight off my shoulders. But I also, you know, the system of which I was,
you know, I guess to some extent still am part of, doesn't encourage the free
living. It's emerged that a sonic boom heard across large parts of the East
Midlands earlier was caused by RAF Typhoon jets scrambling to escort a plane.
The Ministry of Defence says they were authorised to fly at supersonic speed and
that a contact was lost with a civilian aircraft. After more than a decade of
talks, members of the United Nations are inching towards a deal to protect the
world's oceans. The High Seas Treaty aims to safeguard marine life in 30% of
areas that don't belong to any country. The Glasgow-based bakery Morton's Rolls
is understood to have ceased trading. Its 250 staff have been laid off with
immediate effect. BBC News. Now on Radio 4, we continue our detective series
Stone starring Hugo Speer, created by Danny Brocklehurst and written by Vivian
Harvey. Following Sarah Martindale's shocking confession to murder, DCI Stone
and team are close to discovering the truth. But as the net closes in on the
main suspects, Stone's personal and professional life collide. How did it go
with Alice? I spent the night trying to locate her. Finally found her at a party
at a friend's house in Disbury. I may have overreacted. Oh? Yeah, I made a bit
of a scene. Went into the house and removed her. She was mortified. Went
berserk. Sarah Martindale was found disorientated just over an hour and a half
ago by a motorist travelling on a road through the Benwyn Forest in North Wales.
How is she now? She has bruising to her thorax, consistent with attempted
strangulation as well as blunt force trauma to the head. Do you recognise this
man? I don't. Take a closer look. I'm afraid I don't recognise him. I think you
do recognise him. This person here looks like the same person as this one here,
walking into Delamere Services with you yesterday. And that is Neil Fitzhugh,
isn't it, Sarah? Who did it, Sarah? Who killed him? Right, Detective Constable,
unplug the DLR. Who was it, Sarah? DC Shaw, unplug the DLR now! It was me. I
killed him. I killed Simon Beverall. Interview reconvening with Sarah Martindale
on Thursday 18th January 2013 at 9.42am. Present are DS Kelly and solicitor
Marcus Allison. The confession is inadmissible. Interview was suspended. My
client will not be commenting further. I will. Ms Martindale, you're not in a
fit state... Says who? I do not advise you in these circumstances... I don't
need an advisor. I'll sign it. A confession or whatever. I want to sign it. Ms
Martindale, I will not allow you to continue... Piss off! Go on! I told Jackie I
don't want a lawyer out. I refuse legal counsel. You heard the lady. Excuse me.
Excused. Right. Take your time, Sarah. Talk me through it. How did you kill
Simon Beverall? I started the fire. You started the fire? Yeah. How? I could
smell the sick from Devon's room. Sick and skunk. Thought he must have whited
again. I went to deal with it. There was this guy in there, crashed out in Dev's
bed. But it wasn't Dev. He was properly out for the count. So I just... I
started cleaning up. Go on. I was having a ciggy while I cleaned. You can't
smoke when Jackie's about. She thinks I've given up. I had the window open. Then
she calls me, saying she's minutes away. I panicked. Knocked the floor cleaner
over. I thought, I'll mop it up later. I'll put my ciggy out and... I went back
to the reception. And then? I smelled smoke. I went to check it out. Next thing
I knew, the place was up in flames. It wasn't floor cleaner. It was white
spirit. It's the meds. They mess with my head. Please don't make me take them.
No one will make you take anything. OK? Is there anything else you'd like to
tell us? No. OK. Your story sounds feasible. Only one slight problem. Rather a
key inconsistency. Simon Peverell was killed by a blow to the head. What? Simon
was killed by a blow to the head. Did you strike him? Or did someone else?
Sarah? We suspect Simon may have been wrongly imprisoned. But he may not be
guilty of killing a young man called Cody Stafford 20 years ago. And whoever
killed Simon knew that and could well be Cody Stafford's killer too. Sarah?
Sarah? Who struck Simon? I'm ordering you to stop. I have a request granted for
a full mental health assessment. From whom? Detective Chief Superintendent
McCaffrey. How long do you think that's going to take? God knows. Our comrades
in Wales have been in touch. Still no trace of Neil Fitzhugh. Brilliant. Mike!
What are you doing here? Self-rehabilitation. Back on the horse and all that.
You should be at home. That's what I said. It's not a welcome back. We missed
you. It's just not the same without you, Mike. Are you not in pain? A bit achy.
But I've got these bad boys to keep me right. Dihydrocodine. I hope you didn't
drive here. My mum drove me. Aw. You need a hand with your coat, mate? No. Thank
you, Kerit. Ow! Are you sure you want to be here? What am I going to do? Stay at
home and watch doctors? You could binge watch Narcos. Be grateful we don't
police Bogota. That's better. Don't be giving it the kid gloves. It doesn't suit
any of you. Shall we sign your cast? Yeah, chuck us a pinky. Oi, what are you
doing? Hey, give us a go. You can't leave it like that. You can draw over it.
Change it to a rocket, maybe. Ribs! They've done a right number on you, haven't
they? Let's not dwell on it, eh? Don't worry, I'm late. Not missed anything,
have I? Nope. Whoa. Can I sign your cast? No, you cannot. Come on. Put the pen
away from the pen. Right, everyone. Focus, please. Sarah Martindale has
confessed to the murder of Simon Peverell. You what? Story didn't quite add up.
We think she's covering... For Jackie. It's the kind of blind devotion she
inspires in her followers. Or St Jackie's messed with her head, convinced her
she did it. Or Neil Fitzhugh threatened her into confessing. We know there's a
connection between Neil Fitzhugh, Cody Stafford and Phil Dixon. Here they are
together in this photograph, 1998. Cody Stafford's sister, Mel, is convinced
that Simon did not kill her brother. And it's looking increasingly likely that
she's right. And we got it wrong. That an innocent man, Simon Peverell, was
wrongly imprisoned for Cody Stafford's murder. Looks like Cody's real killer is
trying to keep everyone silent. Our prime suspect is Neil Fitzhugh. We need to
find him. ASAP. Tanner, go see Mrs Fitzhugh again. And get a warrant to see his
computer equipment. Boss. Kerry, Daz, try and get more on Neil Fitzhugh's
background, recent activities. Sir. Sue, let me know as soon as Sarah
Martindale's mental health assessment's complete. Will do. Tanner, walk with me.
I admire what you're doing, Mike. Getting stuck back in. But if you do need to
stop, take some time out. No one will think any less of you. I will, boss. Okay.
Once this case is done, I'm gonna go and see me dad. I don't know if he's gonna
help or make it worse. But I owe him an apology. I think we all owe our parents
countless apologies. And them us, too. Go see Christine Fitzhugh. Get Raz to
drive you. What are you gonna do? Never mind. Sorry, we don't open till 11. I'm
DCI Stone. I'm here to see Phil Dixon. Great. Hold on, I'll try your office. Mr
Dixon, there's a... Sorry, what's your C&E once again, sir? Where's the office?
Upstairs on the left, just past the private door. Thank you. You curse, deep
shit, Dixie. What are you chatting about, Chief? Mike, Tanner. I know you're
responsible, and I'm a bloody proof it. Responsible for what? I'm watching you.
Oh, yeah? Yeah, a lot of people are, mate. It's what happens when folk are
envious of what you've got. Envious, right. How do I touch you, mate? I heard
about it, though. Yeah, shame that. Man just trying to do his job. But he
shouldn't have walked that way, should he? What way? Being a few folk getting
done over down there or later. I blame the spice hedge myself. Back in the day,
you knew where you were with drugs, eh? I made CCTV from the club. No problem.
Just had a new system fitted, haven't we? Proper high end. I'll have my people
contact your people. And make sure you don't go anywhere. My people may wish to
speak to you about the murder of Simon Peverell. This is John Stone. Leave a
message, I'll call you back. This is your reminder call. Pick us up from Mums
230. Set an alarm. Write it on your hand. Etch it on your brain. Do not be late.
OK? Thanks, John. I'll see you then. Alice? I've got the milk and I've picked up
some cheeky pan au chocolat from the deli. You want a cuppa? Alice? You up? Oh,
for God's sake. Come on, you lazy lump. It's nearly 11! Alice? Alice? Alice!
Mum, what are you doing? Oh, thank God. You bloody terrified me. What are you
doing? What are you doing? What's this? An empty bottle of vodka. Why is it
empty? Cos I drank it. Oh, yeah? Where did you get it from? Offy. What, just
like that? Yeah. You're 13! You gave me wine when I was eight. Just a taste. We
were in France. Which Offy? I'm going to report them. Mum, you are so
embarrassing. Oh, yeah, and having a 13-year-old daughter who necks a bottle of
vodka isn't. No, no, it's bloody tragic. I didn't drink it all myself. Maya had
some. What, Maya? Of the all-night party? Yeah. The party no-one else got
dragged out by their overreacting, super-embarrassing parents. Can you go away
now, please? What is wrong with you? Why are you so angry all the time? I'm a
teenager. Look, is there something going on? Is there something you're not
telling me? Go away. Look, Alice, love, you can talk to me. I promise I won't
judge you or I won't... Go away! Look, please! No! Get out! OK, you can talk
about this with your counsellor. I'm not going to a counsellor. Yes, you are.
Now get up! Up! Evie, it's Dad. I'm on my way to the velodrome. Don't you worry,
I'm going to be there for you. INCOMING CALL JACKIE STANTON I've got to go. I
love you, Evie Bear. I'll see you soon. Jackie, what do you want? Neil, where
are you? Driving. I'd like to see you. Really? Yeah, of course. Digsy going to
be there? Digsy? You two have been getting cosy. Sorry, I don't follow. You told
him to find me, didn't you? What are you talking about? He was trying to make me
jump. What? You put him up to it, didn't you? Me? Are you serious, Neil? I'm
calling you because I want to help you. Always helping people, aren't you,
Jackie? Get out of it, though. You're like feeling needed. Does that give you
power? Neil, don't attack me, please. I'm not the bad guy. When I heard you were
in trouble, I felt sick. I couldn't sleep. Because you scared the truth well
out. Because I want to protect you. Because the young girl who loved you still
holds a place for you. Because I can actually help. Go on, then. How are you
going to help me? We can deal with this. You can trust me. I've got a plan. We
take some time out. What, go on the run? Firstly, we lay low for a while. We're
the innocents in all of this, never forget that. We did all of this to protect
her. I can help you, but you have to trust me. Do you still trust me? Do I have
any choice? I need to see you. Me too. Pull over. I want you to memorise an
address, OK? Meet me there in an hour. Yeah. Yeah. But there's something I've
got to do first. Alice. Oh, Alice. Let me in, love. Go away. It's my fault,
isn't it? I thought I was doing the right thing, moving us away, Brian. Fresh
start. I got it pretty wrong, didn't I? Mum. Don't, it's not you. No? No. It's
Cornwall and Brian. And that shitty school. I want to move back up here. Oh,
Alice, it's not that simple. It is that simple. It is. What about work? Oh, you
and Dad, bloody work. What's wrong with you? What about me? What about your
child? Alice, that cost me 200 quid. Leave it. You're lucky it's not cracked.
Who sent this? Leave it. Who? Who sent it? Alice? I don't know. Alice? You can't
tell. It's anonymous. Oh, is it now? Mum, just leave it. Is this on Instagram?
No, Backchat. Backchat? What's Backchat? An app. What else are they saying? I'll
bloody kill them. They think they can say this about you. They can say whatever
they want. And they do. Every day. They're jealous, love. They're not. They are.
Mum, they're not. Look at me. I'm nothing. Who'd be jealous of me? I'm pathetic,
disgusting. No, no, no, don't talk like that. You're everything, Alice. You
shine. You mean my oily skin and spots? You are beautiful. And more importantly,
you're kind, smart, quick, funny, cheeky, and brilliantly infuriating. I know
where I get that from. Yeah, and you've got his eyes.