TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-10H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 I'm Macadam and Tom Fielden, studio director, Shona O'Donoghue, from Nick and
from me. Good morning. BBC News at nine o'clock. An organisation which protects
the rights of asylum seekers has said legislation being introduced by the
government today to try to stop people crossing the channel in small boats
appears to be unlawful. The measures would place a duty on ministers to remove
anyone who enters the UK by an illegal route. The Home Secretary, Suella
Braverman, said the bill would push the boundaries of international law. The
director of the European Council on Refugees and Exiles, Catherine Woollard,
told Today it went beyond that. We should note that it's not illegal under
international law to cross a border to seek protection. What does look clearly
unlawful are the proposals that are coming today. And the Refugee Convention
explicitly prohibits penalising people based on the manner of their arrival. And
that's because most refugees have no choice about how they reach a place of
safety. WhatsApp messages leaked to the Daily Telegraph suggest the former
Health Secretary, Matt Hancock, supported the idea of blocking funding for a
disability centre in a Conservative MP's constituency to pressurise him into
voting to extend Covid restrictions. A spokesperson for Mr Hancock has insisted
it never happened. The former Conservative chairman, Sir Jake Berry, said such
an idea was an absolute disgrace. I just think if you look at the issue that
they were proposing to use here, it's beyond contempt. Look, this won't be the
worst thing that happened in the whole of the Covid pandemic. We had an
appalling loss of life and tragedy. But I think for parents who have children,
the idea that this would be used as a weapon, I think it just crosses the line.
Talks are beginning this morning aimed at averting further NHS strikes in
England. The Health Secretary, Steve Barclay, is meeting unions representing
nurses, ambulance workers, physiotherapists and midwives, who all have put
industrial action on hold. A strike by junior doctors is planned for next week.
The bakery chain Gregg's says sales rose by almost a quarter last year to Â£1.5
billion. The company says customers struggling with the rising cost of living
are relying more on low-cost meals. BBC News. Later this morning on Radio 4, in
a new series, the saxophonist Soweto Kinch will be looking at music education in
the UK. And as he'll be explaining, with children's access to free instrumental
tuition increasingly a thing of the past, and music appearing to be less of a
priority in schools, it all begs the question, where will the musicians of
tomorrow come from? That's Rethinking Music at half past 11. And for a
celebration of the sheer joy and power of music, do have a listen to Add to
Playlist, Radio 4's award-winning series. It's all about deconstructing musical
compositions to understand how they've been put together and discovering what
they have in common with other pieces of music. You'll find that on BBC Sounds.
Now though on Radio 4, it's time for the Life Scientific. Here's Jim Al-Khalili.
Basically, I like breaking things. Not my words, but those of today's guest, an
engineer whose fascination with metals and skill for handling both research
projects and people took her from academia to the aerospace and marine
industries to the House of Lords. Julia King began her career as an academic and
spent 15 years happily investigating the structure and strength of materials,
specifically alloys. She says there's something brilliant about loading a big
lump of metal into a machine and watching it go bang. Her work is a great
example of that. Her work on the properties of alloys used in large engines,
like those in aircraft, eventually led to Julia leaving academia and joining
Rolls-Royce. A decade later, she made the move back to university life, taking
on senior positions at Imperial College, then Aston University. And it was
around then that she was approached by the government to look at the UK's
transport sector. Her report, The King Review, published in 2008, made waves for
its assertion that it was entirely possible for the UK to decarbonise road
transport within 25 years. So just a decade away from now. In 2015, she became a
crossbench member of the House of Lords, where she currently chairs its Science
and Technology Committee. She also sits on the UK's Climate Change Committee,
assessing government plans on how we can best adapt to our changing world.
Professor Dame Julia King, Baroness Brown of Cambridge, welcome to The Life
Scientific. Thank you. It's lovely to be here. Well, I mentioned the
introduction. You've had an incredibly varied career, moving from academia to
industry, back to academia, and then to the House of Lords. If it's not an
unfair question, where would you say you felt most at home? Gosh, it's an
impossible question, actually. I felt most at home in everywhere I've been, I
think, except that like quite a lot of women and actually quite a lot of men I
meet, I've always had imposter syndrome, which is that I don't quite believe I
deserve to be here. And you need really nice people around you who remind you
that actually they think you're doing quite a good job. Julia, if you have
imposter syndrome, I think there's no hope for the rest of humanity. I alluded
to the power of science and engineering in tackling the world's problems. Well,
just recently, your Science and Technology Committee issued a report warning
that the government's ambitions for the UK to become a science and technology
superpower by 2030 were in danger of becoming an empty slogan. Why do you say
that? Well, one of the very important parts of that is simply the shortage of
scientists and engineers we have in the UK. All of the firms I talk to are
crying out for more scientists and engineers at every level, at technician
level, at graduate level. But actually, I was with a whole lot of startup
companies earlier this week, and they were all saying, well, we'd like to be
employing more PhDs, but we just can't find them. And that, for me, is a real
crisis. We've got to persuade young people in the UK that there are really
brilliant, exciting careers in science and engineering, and we've got to
persuade them to stick at science at school so they can go on and do that,
whether it's through apprentice routes or through graduate routes. And we know
that for young people from deprived backgrounds, we know that actually having
qualifications in science is one of the most important routes to social
mobility. So we have really got to address this issue in schools. We can't be a
science and technology superpower without the workforce to deliver that. Well,
Julia King, let's go back, explore your childhood, your education, see where it
all started. You grew up in London in the 1960s, but your parents split up when
you were very young. Yes. So I was brought up by my mother and my brother lived
with my father, and I used to see him. It was a very friendly situation. But it
meant that I gravitated to being the person in the house who mended things. So
my mother was very artistic. She wanted to be an actress. She was a linguist. I
gather she was a fantastic dressmaker as well, and that's something that she
taught you. She was a very enthusiastic dressmaker and brilliant at finding
wonderful remnants in shops. And I did an enormous amount of dressmaking. And
actually, it's kind of really interesting when I got to university and you start
learning about composite materials, and you start looking at how the properties
of materials vary with direction. And of course, you know, dressmaking exploits
that, you know, those beautiful bias cut dresses of the 1920s and 30s,
exploiting the fact that on the diagonal, the fabric has a much lower modulus,
and so will stretch much more. A property that we now exploit, of course, when
we build composite structures, those we exploit those different properties along
and across the fibers. And actually, when I visited quite recently the Siemens
turbine blade factory in Hull, where they make the enormous blades that go on
the offshore wind turbines, there are men and women making these blades by
laying up the pieces of composite. And I mean, it looks just like laying the
pattern onto a piece of fabric to make a dress, you know. So these are skills
that you'd be surprised where you might find use for these skills in later life.
Well, you attended a state grammar school for girls in Hammersmith. What sort of
student were you? Oh, I was very swotty. I loved school. And I was able to spend
a long time in both the physics and the chemistry labs, really right through
school, and do things kind of do things beyond what we were actually learning
about, you know, I was given a fair amount of freedom. We had absolutely
brilliant physics and chemistry teachers. Given that you then went on to a
career in engineering, I understand that when you're planning what to study at
university, engineering as a subject as a discipline wasn't even mentioned at
school. No, it was a very, very good, but very traditional girl's school. And I
don't think anybody thought girls would go and study engineering. So no, they
were very keen. I went to study sort of natural sciences or physics or
chemistry, but I don't think engineering ever got a mention. Well, that's what
you ended up doing. You went to Cambridge and you studied natural sciences
there. And it was when you started your PhD, Julia King, that you were able to
really explore this growing fascination with metals, specifically alloys,
combinations of different materials, including one or more metals that give them
useful properties. Of course, alloys have shaped human civilization throughout
history, from bronze to steel to cast iron. Is that something that appeals to
you, just how versatile these materials are? How versatile they are? Absolutely.
I mean, steel is just such an important material from so many things around us,
from the humble paperclip to many parts of your car to the structures of
buildings to, as I say, the critical to our energy system. It's around us and it
can be used in so many different forms. It can be quite soft and very easy to
deform. It can be incredibly strong, depending on what alloying elements we put
into it, depending on how we work it, how we deform it as we're changing its
shape, depending on how we treat it thermally. We can get all of these different
microstructures, all of these different combinations of properties in basically
iron with a small quantity of other elements added to it. I just think that's
sort of brilliant. It offers such extraordinary excitement and prospects to me.
And your PhD work specifically was about stresses and fractures in metals. And I
think you used the example of a pressure vessel for a nuclear reactor. Yes, I
was looking at the kind of steels we might use for reactor pressure vessels for
what was then the next generation of nuclear reactors. And obviously you're
particularly interested in safety. It's hugely important. There are layers and
layers of safety in a nuclear reactor, but the pressure vessel is one of those
layers of safety. And the walls of a pressure vessel can be around about a metre
thick. So you've got these huge, thick steel vessels. And of course they're
inspected to see whether there are defects within the material. But you have to
make assumptions. There may be quite big defects in these very thick vessel
walls. And you need to know that if there's an emergency shutdown, for example,
with sudden shocks to the thermal shocks and loading on the vessel, those
defects are not going to cause the vessel to fracture and for you to lose that
critical layer of safety in your nuclear reactor. So I was looking at how these
materials might embrittle in service and how that would reduce their
performance, for example, in some extreme situations. Well, that work led to a
fellowship with Rolls-Royce and the start of a relationship that would then span
decades. But you started out working on plane engines, more specifically looking
at the detailed microscopic structure of metals to see what extreme conditions
they could withstand, how to manage any cracks that might appear in those
engines. That's rather different, something else that you don't want to fail on
you. Yes, the same, in a way, the same kind of thing, the relationship between
the properties you get and what we call the microstructure of the metal, but
this time in nickel-based alloys and the nickel-based alloys that are used in
the turbine part of the gas turbine. So where the hot gas comes out of the
combustor, it comes out over the turbine blades, but the turbine blades are held
on by something called the turbine disc. That's made of a nickel-based alloy. At
takeoff, that can be rotating at faster than 10,000 rpm, and so that sees very
significant alternating loading, loading that goes up and down, and that's the
kind of loading we call fatigue loading. And things can fail in fatigue at much
lower loads than they do than if you just try and pull them in tension. You
know, I mean, the typical example is the paper clip. If you just try and pull a
paper clip, you can't break it. But if you do some fairly extreme fatigue
loading on it by bending it backwards and forwards, then you can make it break.
Now, that's a rather extreme demonstration of fatigue, but actually if you have
very high frequencies, then quite small load ranges can start to grow cracks,
and those cracks can then grow until something fails catastrophically, and
that's absolutely something you have to design aero engine components,
particularly the discs. You have to design them to make sure that doesn't happen
during service, and you've got to be able to demonstrate to the safety
authorities that you've done your design to absolutely huge safety factors to
make sure people will be safe, and actually the performance of engines in
service shows that indeed that is the case. But as we're trying to reduce the
amount of fuel engines used for the environment, but also to make operating
airlines cheaper, we want to make the discs lighter, we'd like to make them
potentially thinner or smaller, then we're pushing up the loads that we're
putting on those discs, and the danger is that smaller and smaller defects can
initiate the cracks that could cause failure. So you need to make sure you
understand how those cracks grow, but also how can you optimize the
microstructure of those discs to be resistant to the growth of those cracks, and
I spent a lot of my time looking at how we optimize microstructures to get the
very best performance out of these materials and to make them as safe as
possible. So how do you go about improving the structural quality of these
materials? Are you adding extra elements, chemical elements, into the material
to make it less likely to fatigue? Absolutely, but it's not just the chemical
elements. Very importantly, it's also the structure of the grains and indeed to
some extent the grain boundaries. And one of the interesting areas that I spent
a lot of time looking at was that in looking at how things fracture, it's an
area we call fracture mechanics, we tend to look at how things fracture when the
size of the defect or the size of the crack is large compared to the size of the
microstructural features, so particularly the grains. So if the tip of a crack
is sampling a lot of grains, then it kind of sees the average of the material.
And there, if you're looking at fatigue, then in nickel-based alloys what you
tend to see is that you can make cracks grow particularly slowly if the grains
are very big, and that's actually because of the way nickel-based alloys, with
the precipitates they have in them, the way they deform, means you get very
angular growth through the different grains and that inhibits growth. But
actually when you're moving to higher and higher stresses because you're wanting
to get better fuel efficiency and things, you start to have to worry about
defects that are of the same size as the grain or in fact sometimes even
smaller. And then the frustrating thing is that those defects grow faster if the
grains are large and slower if the grains are small, so they behave exactly the
opposite way to long cracks. So if you're trying to optimise a microstructure
for them, then you may actually need to... one of the microstructures we came up
with was something we called a necklace microstructure, where we managed to get
thermal treatments that would give us a large grain with a necklace of small
grains around it. So you would actually get reasonably slow growth if you had a
long crack, but actually also the necklace grains would inhibit the growth of
small cracks. So kind of getting a kind of compromise. Best of both worlds. Best
of both worlds, absolutely. Well there you were, sponsored by industry, but
working as a young researcher at Cambridge. Then in 1980 you left for the
University of Nottingham to take up a lectureship, and after seven years at
Nottingham you went back to Cambridge. But in 1994 you made a jump, a big jump,
from academia to industry, joining your old friends at Rolls-Royce. So you were
initially head of materials with the aerospace group. Was that a difficult
decision to make, to leave university life, going to industry? I don't think it
was for me really. I think I'd always been, in telling my students and my
research students, that it was really good to be doing research that had a
proper application, that to be taking the science and seeing it make a
difference, and that meant seeing industry use it. So I kind of felt that I'd
been advising everybody that that was a good idea, and I ought to go and find
that out properly for myself. But I did have one or two colleagues who thought
it was a... One very senior colleague actually wrote me a note saying he thought
I'd taken the poison chalice. I never quite worked out what he meant by that,
but I think it was something he obviously personally would have felt rather
anxious about doing. There is that attitude in academia, isn't there, that if
you go out into industry and apply your science and engineering in industry,
somehow you've moved across to the dark side. Yeah, moved across to the dark,
absolutely. But one of the things I'm really passionate about now is that I
think we need much more porosity between academia and industry, and indeed
between academia and policy and things, that it's so beneficial if people have a
chance to work in different environments and to understand the different
pressures, the different time scales, and indeed to understand how challenging
it can sometimes be in industry to apply what seem to be brilliant ideas when
you're in academia, because they don't fit into the way things operate, or they
challenge huge investments in systems that are already there. So, you know,
making sure our research can be used is just so much better if people have
experience of different environments. So I would like to see far more programmes
that enable staff to move. Well, certainly for you, the transitions seem to be
very smooth, and it sounds like you were promoted through the Rolls-Royce ranks
pretty rapidly, picking up an ever wider remit. Yes, and the good thing about
moving into being Head of Materials at Rolls-Royce is that, you know, I didn't
know how Rolls-Royce worked, I did know a lot about materials, and you gain
respect very quickly for being, you know, for knowing about your subject. Well,
you left Rolls-Royce and you initially joined the Institute of Physics as CEO.
Now, this is the learned society, the professional body of physicists in the UK
and Ireland. In fact, that's where I first met you, I think. It is, yes. Going
back 20 years. And it's there at the IOP that you take up the challenge of
lobbying the government to address the lack of physics teachers at schools and
to improve the physics curriculum. Do you feel you made headway? I certainly
think we did. I think you quite often hear reference back to the research we did
at IOP in those days, which looked at the number of physics teachers in schools
across the country, and in particular, the number of physics teachers qualified
to degree level teaching physics. And I can't remember what the data were. But,
you know, I think it was the first time we'd shown that on typically a private
school had, you know, something like four or five degree qualified teachers
teaching physics, and a state school was lucky if it had two with, you know,
with much larger numbers of pupils. So looking at the real shortage of physics
teachers in the state sector, and the real impact that was having on both
opportunity for young people in the state sector, but also, of course, on how
many scientists and engineers we were actually training in the UK. It's
interesting, isn't it? Because for a lot of people, they think, well, why
physics teachers? You know, there wasn't there isn't the shortage in the same
way of chemistry or biology teachers. Is it because people with physics degrees
are graduating and going off into industry? Or is it just not enough people
studying physics at university? Well, the physics teacher problem we have today,
I think almost even worse than we had in those days, is because we're not
getting enough people studying physics at university. And the government has
been been missing its targets for recruiting physics teachers by such a long
way. It's terrifying in recent years. Well, just a couple of years later, you
went back to university life as principal of engineering at Imperial College
London, and then as vice chancellor of Aston University, which is a role that
you stayed in for 10 years. That's that's good going back to university is one
thing, but this is a senior managerial role. How did you find that? Well, first
of all, Imperial was great. It was incredibly stimulating. I mean, the staff and
the students are absolutely stunningly good and were very, in many ways, very
exciting to work with. Some of them were very awkward as well. You know, it was
exciting to see the work they were doing. And having done that for a couple of
years, I really got the bug and thought, well, it's great running a faculty, but
I'd really like to run my own university because there are things, you know,
there are things about how the university operates that I'd like to be in
control of, because I think some of them we could do, we could do a bit better.
So and Aston University, when I went to see it, there was just something about
it that pulled at some heartstrings, I think, because it was a university that I
felt had rather lost its confidence in some ways and was sort of veering towards
focusing on teaching, whereas actually it had some real strength in research.
So, for example, it has a brilliant photonics group. It has some excellent work
on in the climate change area in sustainable energy. It has a very good business
school. It had a number of key areas where the research needed building up. But
it also appealed to me because we were able to take students from a whole range
of less advantaged communities and give them a real opportunity, you know, to go
out and get good jobs and get into that social mobility that we need around so
much of the UK. And that part of it I'm really passionate about as well. Now,
then, Julia King, around the time that you take up this role with Aston
University, you're also approached by the UK government to conduct a review into
how to decarbonise the transport sector. The hugely influential Stern review on
climate change had just been published, led by the economist Nicola Stern, which
essentially said our approach to climate change wasn't working and we needed to
look at how each of the major economic sectors could contribute. Do you remember
being asked to take on this review of the transport sector? Yes, it was one of
those telephone calls you never expect to get. So it was hugely exciting. So it
was, oh gosh, yes, of course I'd like to do that. Well, the report, known as the
King review of low carbon cars, was launched in 2007, published in full in 2008.
And it did have a big impact. But I mean, here we are 15 years later. I mean, I
know, you know, electric vehicles are becoming more and more popular. But other
things like hydrogen fuel cells probably haven't taken off in the way we might
have hoped. I mean, do you still think this target, 2033, so 10 years from now,
is still a realistic one? I do. And it's been interesting to see, you know, how,
in a way, how the fact that the technology and the cost of technology and
batteries has come on so fast, much faster, costs of batteries have come down
much faster than we thought they would at the time of the King review, and have
now made that really the dominant technology for light duty vehicles. But I
think, you know, there will still be a role, potentially, for hydrogen in
specialist vehicles and vehicles with different duties, vehicles that have to go
a very long way. And of course, it really also is rather crucial that we don't
just end up with one low carbon vehicle technology. Because the problem we have
now, part of the problem with climate change, is that, you know, we've got all
of these cars, and they all use fossil fuels. By the time we get to 2050, we may
have not just the less than a billion cars we have in the world today, we may
have two billion cars in the world. We don't want them all needing to use
lithium ion batteries. Otherwise, we just create the same kinds of problems
again. So I think, you know, that we do want to be encouraging multiple
technologies, and some of them may be more relevant in different parts of the
world than others. Clearly, this interaction with government, with science and
engineering policy must have whetted your appetite, because in 2015, you became
a crossbench peer, Baroness Brown of Cambridge. Yes, it's a great place. I mean,
you meet some really fascinating people. And of course, you get a chance to
comment on legislation, because we are a revising chamber that we're there to
make legislation better, to ask the government to think again, not to not to
disagree permanently with the government that the voters have voted in, because
we're an unelected house, but to try and make sure that legislation doesn't have
unintended consequences and things. And of course, you look at the House of
Commons, and there's probably a handful now of people with science or
engineering backgrounds in there. I did a quick tot up and so it won't be the
right number of my colleagues just on the crossbenches in the House of Lords.
And I think there must be around 20 of us who are scientists, engineers or
medics. So there's a real concentration of science and engineering and in the
House of Lords that you just don't get in the elected house. And that's why I
think there is something important about the House of Lords. It does mean we
have the chance to make sure that scientists and engineers have a real look at
legislation, and a real think about the implications of it. And I think that's
really important. Well, we've talked a little bit about your interest in
addressing climate change through science. And today you sit on the UK's
independent Climate Change Committee, as well as chairing its subcommittee on
adaptation. What exactly do those roles involve? Well, I was on the Climate
Change Committee, which in the legislation is the committee that looks at
climate change mitigation, which means reducing our emissions, reducing our
greenhouse gas emissions. I was on that from when it started until the beginning
of 2020. And I now don't sit on that, but I do chair the other committee that's
part of the Climate Change Committee that the legislation introduced, which is
the Adaptation Committee. And that looks at the risk that the changing climate
poses to us and how well prepared we are for that in the UK. So it's more than
aiming for achieving net zero, even if there's a question mark on whether we
will achieve that. But even if we do, we need to be ready. And society and
industry, we have to have put in place these adaptations. Absolutely. I think
net zero is hugely important and absolutely essential. But I think people have
slightly got the idea that if we can get to net zero by 2050 globally, then we
don't have to worry. That's the problem solved. And what we need to remember is
the climate goes on changing until we stop putting greenhouse gases into the
atmosphere. And so, you know, the climate is going to go on changing at least to
2050, even if we're on this path to net zero. And it'll be much worse if we're
not. So it's not just about doing the mitigation, the reducing the emissions, we
must mitigate and we must adapt as well. Is there sufficient understanding and
acceptance of all this among policymakers, do you think? I think it's beginning
to come. Whereas I felt that the Adaptation Committee was a bit of a lone voice
in the past few years, trying to say to the government, this is really
important. I have felt the last the last sort of 18 months or so, we're seeing a
lot of people, National Infrastructure Commission, others coming in and saying,
look, this is a real issue we've got to deal with. And of course, it's a very
important issue to deal with, as we make the changes we need to achieve net
zero, because we need to do things like double or even treble the size of our
electricity system by 2050. Because we're going to be very dependent on
electricity to decarbonize our society. So we're going to be hugely dependent on
electricity, we've got to make sure we have an electricity system that in the
extreme weather conditions we may get in 2050, doesn't leave a million people in
the north of England and Scotland without electricity for a week, because their
cars will run on electricity, their heating will run on electricity, their
communications will be reliant on electricity, you know, their lives will be
reliant on electricity, a week without it won't be an acceptable situation for
them. So we're gonna make sure we're designing our infrastructure. I mean, it
isn't even working properly in today's climate, it's got to work properly in the
climate of 2050. Well, it's been a real pleasure. Dame Julia King, thank you
very much for sharing your Life Scientific. Thank you. The Life Scientific was
presented by Jim Al-Khalili and produced by Lucy Taylor. Jim's guest was
Professor Dame Julia King. Now on Radio 4, it's One to One. My name is Susie
Rack. I'm a women's football writer for The Guardian and author, but in a
previous life, long before I had ever realised that football journalism was even
an option available to me, I dreamt of becoming an architect. A love of
buildings and their impact developed when I was eight years old and a student
teacher had my class designing and making models of our dream homes. I had spent
all my life up till that point in our little two bedroom council flat in Hoxton,
used to broken lifts and piss stained stairwells and suddenly the world of
design and its potential was opened up to me. I went on to study architecture at
university and then pivoted to my long term love in sport. I've always been
interested in society and class and how things can be improved for ordinary
people and both of my passions, despite how different they are, architecture and
football, have given me ways of engaging with those conversations in ways I
never would have imagined. My guest today is Professor Loretta Lees, who is
Director of the Initiative on Cities at Boston University. So Loretta, exactly
what does that mean? What do you do? Hi, so I'm actually just here for the last
five months. I lived in London for 25 years in Archway in Islington. Basically
what I do is I pull together all of the urban research that's done across Boston
University and connect it also to policy and practice. Amazing, and what got you
interested in these kind of areas and this topic of design and gentrification
and council housing? I was born in Manchester and lived in council housing after
I was born. Then I moved into a kind of two up, two down in Carrbrook in Mosley,
just outside Manchester. Then kind of moved to a suburban, Bradbury Green, just
outside Stockport. Then my parents separated and I moved to Northern Ireland and
was homeless in Belfast and kind of lived with an aunt for I think 18 months.
Then moved into council housing again. So I've lived in lots of different kinds
of housing. And I think both the housing itself and my experience of living in
different tenures over time really kind of got me interested in this and
particularly in social justice issues around it. Yeah, I think that's very
similar to my journey in that, you know, having grown up on a council estate and
living in a little two bedroom council flat with my mum, my dad and my sister
really impacted the way I look at the world, look at society, look at what
design can do for the way people feel and how buildings can foster communities
all grew from the estate and the experience of growing up there. Beyond, you
know, obviously having an interest in it, what made you want to dedicate your
life to researching it? When I was about 14, 15, we moved to Belfast, Northern
Ireland, because my mum was Northern Irish when my parents separated. And we
lived at my aunt's house for the first 18 months before we finally got council
property. But when I was at school, I was doing an A-level history of art option
called Design for Living, which is all about the lived experience of modernist
council high rises. As part of my geography A-level project, which was around
regeneration, I decided to look at, I think there was like five or six council
tower blocks in the new lodge area of inner Belfast, which was very pro IRA,
very Catholic. Now, I had an English accent, so I could not go into those high
rises to do the research. So I had to give chocolates to a friend of mine in my
class who actually lived in them to go in and do the survey. And I did a survey
on space, on defensible space, which I was really interested in. So they went in
and looked at how people felt about streets in the sky, elevators, the kind of
communal spaces around their blocks, and thinking about what is this
relationship people have with the built environment. And even though this was a
really low income, quite problematic in many ways, it was part of the kind of
segregation and ghettoization that was going on in Belfast at the time, they
enjoyed their space. And they liked being up high, they liked being able to look
out over Belfast, their children played in the streets in the sky, as they call
them. So, you know, that got me interested in a whole host of things that I
subsequently went into as a career. And can you explain what defensible space
is? Because I think I've heard of it before, as someone who studied
architecture, but not many people may have. It was a term that was coined by an
architect planner called Oscar Newman in the US. And basically, defensible space
is a residential environment whose physical characteristics, for example, its
building layout, its site plan, function to allow inhabitants themselves to be
the kind of key agents of their own security. And in many ways, it comes from
the urbanist Jane Jacobs idea of eyes on the street, that, you know, mothers
looking out of their Greenwich Village apartment blocks, their children playing
down on the street and feeling secure in the knowledge that they can kind of
look after their children. The idea was brought from the US to the UK and
utilised by the geographer Alice Coleman in the 1980s, to argue that big council
tower blocks in the UK didn't have defensible space. And that's why they had
criminality, social malaise, graffiti, dog poo, urine in the lifts, that kind of
thing. So in other words, a kind of quite environmentally determined notion that
the design of these modernist high rises was depleting defensible space and
creating the problems in it. And like, say you, like me, spent time living on
council estates when you were younger, like, what was your own experience of
that sense of community and the positives of estate life, as well as the
difficulties of it too? You know, when I was younger, council housing was very
community based, people were kind of working class communities, everybody was
kind of in it together. But then I remember going in the mid 1970s to visit my
grandfather's brother who lived in one of the new council tower blocks in
Salford, which had been, you know, kind of replaced the traditional terrace
street slums. And I had a similar experience to you, you started this
conversation, you know, I remember avidly the smell of urine in the lift. I
remember the lift didn't work, so we had to walk up 10 floors. I remember
walking into his flat, he was disabled, he was an alcoholic, but it literally,
the smell of urine and just everything was overpowering to me as a eight or nine
year old. And in my mind, then that was a failed example of council housing and
what it was doing for this person. So in the early days, council housing was
amazing, lots of space, beautiful communal gardens, you know, kind of
neighbourhood shops, all sorts of stuff. I think that's the key, isn't it? Well,
it's the key for me anyway, is that investment and looking after those spaces
significantly improves the environment. You know, I think back to my council
flat and the windows needed to be redone for a very, very long time. They were
sort of flaking away, letting in damp, weren't maintained well. The lift was
often broken when it was repaired, it was always sort of a temporary thing. All
of the little aspects like that, that just make you enjoy the space around you.
But I still loved every second of living on that estate. When you were talking
about visiting your grandpa's brother and how it smelled and things like that, I
almost reflect semi-fondly on those aspects of my childhood because I loved
estate life so much. I mean, obviously it would have been nicer if those things
weren't there. But the fact that we could go, you know, as quite young children,
walk down into the playground that all of the balconies looked onto and play
football and, you know, go on the swings, till quite late into the evening
whilst our parents could just keep an eye out the window, was quite liberating,
really. It actually gave us a lot more freedom than we potentially would have on
a street with cars going past and things. And in many ways, you know, kids on
council estates were very privileged because kids in kind of, you know, rows of
terraced houses or even suburban houses didn't have that kind of facility. And,
you know, it was all embroiled with social welfare and public health and all of
that stuff that kind of was really important in how the design of public housing
was in the 60s and 70s. But a lot of that has now dissipated. Having gone from
council estate life as a child, to like into my teens, to then private renting,
to now like owning a small home myself, like I've very much felt like whenever
I've lived somewhere newer, whenever I've lived in, say, a new build flat, for
example, renting, the space is like incomparable to the space we had in our
council flat, you know, in terms of like storage space and separated living
areas and kitchen area and all that kind of stuff. And the bedroom sizes all
feel a lot smaller now than they did back in the council flat. But it almost
feels like we're going back a step and moving back towards overcrowding and
tighter spaces and things. Not only are they building higher and more densely,
the internal spaces of the individual apartments and homes are much smaller.
But, you know, back in the kind of early days of the building of big council
estates in London and actually across the UK, space standards were really
important. It was all about letting light and air in. It was about part of the
kind of modernist architectural hygienist agenda, which was related to public
health and other stuff. And, you know, people who lived in slums didn't have
that kind of access to air and light, and they got it by moving into these new
developments. How much can space actually impact us? I've only been in the US
five months now. And just the sense of space here mentally, it's just everything
is just so much bigger. And it feels more liberating. I go back to London,
everything's tighter, including, you know, inside people's residential
properties, unless you're very wealthy. And space is not simply this kind of
abstract thing. It's the relationship between an individual body and other
bodies in that space and what's going on around it. So when you think of space,
you can also think about your individual apartment, but then think about the
neighbourhood outside. So how those spaces themselves are interlinked and how
they play out and how they make you feel and belong. Yeah, and I think people
don't necessarily spend enough time looking at the built environment around them
and how it's engineering society a little bit and is being used to engineer
society a little bit. You know, I think about when I go to football matches in
some of the big men's stadiums, because I mainly cover women's football, there's
fewer toilets for women and things like that, that just create an environment
that make you think you're not welcome here and how spaces can be used to
engineer that feeling of not feeling welcome. But then people just don't notice
it. People just don't realise that that is what is causing the feelings that
they're feeling at times. Yeah, I mean, there's some great work done by a
feminist collective in the 1970s called Matrix, who did a whole pile of work
about how architecture was male dominated and developed a kind of city for men,
not women. And I remember looking at the book and then I realised that the front
cover was actually the archway underpass that used to go under the road, the A1,
near to where I live. That was a dark, forbidding space that went under the road
and then had loads of steps down and loads of steps up. And you know, their
argument was a woman with a buggy with a child in it just could not access or
utilise that space. Also, it was creepy, it was dark. And of course, now it's
been blocked off. It's not just about the four walls, but like the way a path is
lit through a park can have a significant impact on the way you feel safe and
the way you move around space, right? Like, I was walking my son back from after
school activity, I generally will not go through the middle of the park, which
is the quickest route home because halfway down the lighting stops. So I will
generally walk around the side streets, the longer route to take him home, just
because it doesn't feel particularly safe, yet it's not the fastest route for us
to get home. And that's the kind of environmental psychology, it takes us back
to defensible space. And you've just explained it quite well, you know, a space
that's ill lit, and feels threatening, you're not going to utilise it, you're
going to avoid it. How have both your studies, but then also your experience of
growing up in various council flats or houses shaped you as a person? I mean,
I've always, even as a small child, had a kind of interesting kind of social
justice on around cities, which I think was just me, it may also be that my mum
was a health visitor. You know, when during the school holidays, she had no
childcare, she used to leave us with people in families in council estates, and
then give them money. And it was her way of contributing to their household
income, without offending them that she was giving them money, because she felt
that they were so poor, that they were struggling to sustain themselves. So I
spent a lot of time playing with other kids on other council estates, and got a
real sense of the differences of different types of populations and groups on
council estates, which has kind of stuck with me. So I think both the kind of
sociology and geography of council estates is absolutely fascinating. But of
course, we're in a situation now where council estates are disappearing.
Loretta, thank you so much for your time. I really appreciate you chatting to
me. Thanks, Sue. It was lovely to talk to you. And I'll hopefully see you in
London at some stage. One to One was presented by Susie Rack and the producer
was Caitlin Hobbs. It was a BBC Audio production for Radio 4. Music education in
the UK has been in decline for years. We've actually seen an overall decrease in
the number of schools that are offering those qualifications. It's decreased by
about 35% over the last 10 years. But music plays an important part in our
lives, from the classroom. It's very good for the emotional well-being of
children. To the economy. We want to be doing as well as we possibly can do,
because this island exports so much music across the whole of the world. I'm
Soweto Kinch, a musician, and I'm finding out what needs to be done to keep UK
music alive. Rethinking Music on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds starts this morning at
11.30. On Radio 4 Longwave, the Daily Service is just getting underway. Here on
FM, we continue Dasher Kippers, Travellers to Unimaginable Lands, a series of
case studies that blend science with lived experience to explore dementia. The
reader is Teresa Gallagher. In Greenwich Village, along one of the pleasant
streets that converge near the Jefferson Market Garden, there's a small Italian
restaurant, intimate, dimly lit, with red and white checked tablecloths and
candles in the Chianti bottles. Sometimes, after work, Elizabeth Horne would
meet her husband Mitch for a cocktail and dinner. Elizabeth Horne would be the
host of the evening. Elizabeth would usually arrive to find Mitch highball in
hand and joking with a waiter. They'd kiss and she'd order a tancarÃ© and tonic.
They had been friends before becoming romantically involved and bantered back
and forth without missing a beat. Anyone looking at their table might well have
envied them, never suspecting that Elizabeth dreaded these pleasant get-
togethers and their aftermath. Elizabeth, a tall, elegant woman in her late 50s,
talks about those evenings in a composed, confiding tone, which only makes her
story more uncanny. Because once the meal was over, Mitch would invariably give
her a wary, skeptical look and say, now you'll go to your place and I'll go to
mine. Hearing these words, Elizabeth would nod meekly, duck into the bathroom,
take off her heels, put on a pair of sneakers, and run out. She'd cross the
street and wait for Mitch to emerge, making sure he was headed in the right
direction. It always struck her how normal Mitch appeared, casually strolling
along in his sport jacket and Rolling Stones t-shirt, looking pretty much like
the man she had fallen in love with. It was herself she barely recognized, the
nervous, frazzled woman hiding behind lampposts, following a man who looked so
at ease in the world. Then, with a burst of speed, she managed to get back to
their apartment a few minutes before he did. Arriving home, Mitch always gave
her the same cheerful greeting, hey honey, how are you? He had already forgotten
their rendezvous. The nightmare would officially begin after Mitch had made
himself comfortable. Without any warning, he'd look up from a magazine or the
TV, stare at Elizabeth, and ask her to leave. Calmly at first, he'd order her
out of her own home. When she tried to convince him that she was home, he'd
scoff, how could it be her home when he lived there? Although he sensed that
they knew each other, he had forgotten they were married. Moreover, he felt
threatened by her presence. In the early stages of the disease, Elizabeth had
refused to give in. She'd point to things in the apartment and remind him where
they came from. Look, she'd say, our wedding picture, see? Unfazed, Mitch would
reply, yeah, you must have planted it there. Nothing she said did any good. When
patients have an answer for everything, caregivers get caught in a loop. It's
surprisingly hard not to be goaded by a patient's responses. Even if the answers
are nonsensical, the patient's ability to provide them suggests that we are
still dealing with a functional mind. Indeed, that part of the mind which helps
patients produce a steady stream of answers remains intact. It was this part,
what the neuroscientist Michael Gazzaniga has termed the left brain interpreter,
that Mitch was now leaning on. The interpreter is an unconscious process
responsible for sweeping inconsistencies and confusion under the rug. Although
we rely on facts and logic in our daily lives, we tend to massage them when they
fail to conform to our expectations. We see the same process in our visual
system. When the visual interpreter falls for optical illusions or smooths over
visual glitches, it does so in accordance with certain preconceptions.
Similarly, our left brain interpreter fills in cognitive blind spots, hiccups,
ambiguities, and gaps. Thus, the dementia patient will blame the aid for
misplacing a purse or insist that people are conspiring against them. When they
feel internal discord, their unconscious mind searches for an external source,
and this source gives shape to their paranoia. So when Mitch was confronted by
the wedding photo, evidence that Elizabeth was his wife, which contradicted his
impression that she was someone else, his left brain interpreter found
explanations for that evidence, for instance, that it had been planted in his
apartment. The mind's propensity to create believable narratives is all too
human. In a 1962 study, Stanley Schachter and Jerry Singer administered a
synthetic hormone to their subjects. The hormone narrows blood vessels and can
produce anxiety, shakiness, and sweating. Some participants were informed that
they had been given a vitamin that had no side effects. The others were told
that the pill could produce a racing heart, tremors, and flushing. Those who
knew about the possible side effects immediately attributed their discomfort to
the drug. Those unaware experienced agitation and blamed their environment, even
thinking that the other participants were responsible. This need to ascertain
cause and effect is yet another function of the left brain interpreter, and it
plays out in many ways. We'll twist facts, defend misconceptions, and opt to
believe whatever makes sense of what's happening around us. Sadly, caregivers
like Elizabeth must contend with people who are simultaneously lucid and
confused, impaired yet oddly nimble, themselves and yet not themselves. And much
like their patients, such caregivers do not take this confusion lying down.
After all, the healthy mind also abhors inconsistencies, contradictions, and
ambiguity, which of course is what dementia disorders regularly throw at them.
In effect, patient and caregiver are locked in a battle, each one determined to
fend off the chaos the other one represents. So the more desperate Elizabeth
sounded as she tried to convince him she was his wife, the angrier Mitch became,
as if he was the one indulging a delusional person. Some evenings, he flew into
a rage, grabbed her by the neck like a stray cat, and pushed her out the front
door. And there she'd sit all night in the hallway. Soon, her exile became
almost a nightly routine, she took to carrying a spare key in her pocket and
would let herself in when she thought Mitch had fallen asleep. Telling me all
this, Elizabeth added, people always ask about the patient. How is Mitch? How is
he doing? Let me tell you something, the patient is fine. It's the caregiver
who's going crazy. During one of their nightly battles, Mitch made good on his
threat to call the police. He dialed 911 and claimed that a strange woman was in
his apartment. Twenty minutes later, two cops arrived to find an incensed Mitch
and a sobbing Elizabeth, at which point something totally unexpected happened.
Mitch became Mitch again, Elizabeth told me. How so? I asked. He suddenly
remembered me. After the police left, Elizabeth realized that social stimulation
reminded Mitch of who she was. Human interaction had washed away the agitation
in his body and the chaos in his mind, thus leaving the left brain interpreter
with no discord to interpret. And because Mitch seemed to know her when people
were around, their friends initially didn't understand what Elizabeth was going
through. This in turn made her worry that people thought she was exaggerating
her husband's dementia, since he seemed so normal in company. At one of our
first meetings, Elizabeth remembered her particularly harrowing confrontation.
Instead of throwing her out, Mitch had suddenly relaxed and turned on the TV. He
flipped through the channels but stopped at the opening credits to Dr. Zhivago
and hearing Lara's theme, reached out for her hand. Imagine, she said to me, we
were holding hands. I pictured them together sitting on a couch as romantic
music filled the air, a scene that would be touching if I didn't consider what
such moments did to her. I was like an abused woman, she told me, always on
edge. I never knew which side of him was going to come out. It was the
perpetuation of the sweet Mitch that kept her off balance. Because alongside the
man who didn't recognize her was the man who might stroke her hair and ask how
she put up with him. Alongside the man who threw her out the door was the man
who made a video for their anniversary in which he confessed how lost he'd be
without her. If that Mitch did not exist, if Elizabeth had had only the
delusional Mitch in her life, she would have had less to contend with. Instead,
her brain was badgered by inconsistency and uncertainty. Early in our
development, we attribute to other people a permanent deep down self. And though
our understanding of people becomes more complex as we grow older, our belief in
a true or real self persists. The reason that Elizabeth kept arguing with Mitch
is that she was appealing to the real Mitch, the good Mitch, the one still in
there, who in the past would have come to her aid. For caregivers, the idea of a
real self can be a double-edged sword. If on the one hand, it encourages us to
argue with afflicted loved ones in the hope of breaking through to their real
selves, it can be a source of great frustration. If on the other hand, we start
to doubt the existence of an essential self, how can we account for the person
we're caring for? Who is it that we are suffering and sacrificing for? Seeing
continuity in people is entirely natural and real or not, the idea of an
essential self has valuable, even practical, applications. If we weren't built
to believe that other people have essential selves, it would be too easy to
become disconnected from family and friends. Nowadays, Mitch is much calmer, his
confusion has ebbed along with his cognitive capacity, and so is Elizabeth. Even
so, at our last meeting, Elizabeth told me that he can still on occasion become
upset. One day when Mitch was filling in a coloring book, something he
previously would have found beneath him, he looked up and said, I think there's
something wrong with me. Well, honey, Elizabeth said gently, you have something
called Alzheimer's and that's okay, I'm here for you. Mitch furrowed his brow.
No, that's not it, I don't have that, why would you even say that? Elizabeth
immediately retreated from the statement. I felt awful getting him agitated like
that, she told me. It's hard to resist, I said, you were trying to give your
husband permission to feel confusion by explaining the source. Yes, she said,
that's true, but you're giving me too much credit, I just wanted him to get it
so both of us would know, so we could be in on it together. In on it together. I
nodded. For a moment she believed she had glimpsed the old Mitch, the true
Mitch, so she had confided in him in the way she had in the past, thinking he'd
understand. But the moment passed and she reprimanded herself for forgetting the
lessons the disease had taught her. As she talked about it, her eyes began to
well up and I thought she was going to acknowledge, as so many caregivers do,
how hard and lonely it was to take care of her husband, how there was a part of
her that wished it would end. What she said took me aback. You know, I'm very
grateful for this experience in a way. Don't get me wrong, it's a terrible
disease and I wouldn't wish it on anyone, but I've learned a lot about myself.
I've learned about my limitations and I guess I've learned I can survive. I have
more patience than I thought. I didn't expect to, but I've learned there's still
love and love doesn't go away. Alzheimer's can't take it away. So Travellers to
Unimaginable Lands by Dasha Kipper continues tomorrow when we delve into the
impact of delusions on caregivers. It was read by Teresa Gallagher and abridged
by Christine Entwistle. The producer is Kirsty Williams. Welcome to The Spark. I
feel like the monkeys are juggling chainsaws. They're juggling flaming torches,
but they could just as well be juggling chainsaws. The monkeys might be
hypothetical, but the issues are real. Part of what we need to be well is a
world that we can feel that we belong to. I'm Helen Lewis, back with a new
series of big conversations, talking to people who bring radical new thinking to
vital questions like when to quit, social prescribing, scientific fraud and
preventing suicide. Small acts of reaching out, small acts of interrupting those
thoughts could be life-saving. The Spark, this morning at 11 on BBC Radio 4 and
BBC.