TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-14H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 On FM, longwave, digital radio and BBC sounds, this is BBC Radio 4. Hello and
welcome to The World at One with me, Sarah Montague. Shamima Begum's bid to
regain British citizenship has been rejected. The 23-year-old who joined IS
Group at 15 remains stuck in a camp in northern Syria with other British people.
I can't believe the UK is going to be a complete outlier. I think ultimately it
will be a political decision and you could say that if it's going to happen,
particularly with the children who are now growing up, the sooner you do it the
better. The independent reviewer of terrorism legislation tells us at some point
they will probably all have to come home. Nurses start intensive talks with the
government after pausing their strike. Other health unions haven't been invited.
Are they being ignored? We'll speak live to the General Secretary of the GMB
Union. Moments like this are under threat. We'll find out today if Wales' Six
Nations match against England will go ahead. Or if Wales players will refuse to
play over pay. And how long is too long? Why do you come to us? I just want to
keep my family safe. The Avatar sequel clocks in at over three hours. Martin
Scorsese's new film will top it at three hours 20. Do we really have the
stamina? The BBC News is read by Alan Smith. Shamima Begum, who travelled to
Syria as a schoolgirl to join the Islamic State Group, has lost her appeal
against the Home Secretary's decision to remove her British citizenship. The
Special Immigration Appeals Commission accepted there was evidence she had been
a victim of trafficking. But the tribunal said it was lawful for ministers to
bar her from returning to the UK on the grounds of national security. Our Home
and Legal correspondent Dominic Casciani reports. Mr Justice Jay said Ms Begum's
case had caused the Commission great concern and difficulty. Not only had there
been credible evidence that Ms Begum had been groomed as a child to go to Syria
to be sexually exploited there, British agencies had also arguably failed to
stop that from happening. While those findings are unprecedented, the semi-
secret courts also concluded that the then Home Secretary, Sajid Javid, had used
his powers lawfully to strip Ms Begum of her nationality in 2019. The Commission
said those powers were squarely aimed at protecting the public, and Parliament
hadn't told ministers to first consider whether someone was a trafficking
victim. The panel's admission that it struggled to resolve these complex legal
questions means that Ms Begum's lawyers are already planning to challenge the
ruling. Until the outcome of any appeal, the 23-year-old remains stateless and
stuck in a camp in northern Syria. Rishi Sunak has told MPs that Parliament will
have a chance to express its view on any changes to Northern Ireland's trading
arrangements negotiated with the EU. But he said a deal hadn't been finalised.
During Prime Minister's questions, the Labour leader, Sakiya Stama, said Mr
Sunak wasn't standing up to what he called the wreckers on the conservative
benches who opposed the changes. Here's our political correspondent, Jonathan
Blake. Sakiya Stama pressed the Prime Minister on the trade-offs he said needed
to be faced up to, accusing Rishi Sunak of pulling the wool over the eyes of his
own MPs. Northern Ireland, Sakiya said, would have to follow some EU law to
avoid a hard border with the Irish Republic, and there would need to be a role
for the European Court of Justice. The Prime Minister said he was a
conservative, a Brexiteer and a Unionist, and any agreement needed to tick all
three boxes, accusing the Labour leader of talking about a deal he hadn't seen.
Asked if MPs would get a vote on a deal, he said Parliament would of course
express its view. The DUP's Jeffrey Donaldson said EU laws were being imposed on
Northern Ireland. The Prime Minister described that as a democratic deficit,
which he said was at the heart of negotiations. Russia's President Putin appears
to have confirmed that his Chinese counterpart Xi Jinping is planning a visit to
Moscow. Mr Putin has held talks with China's most senior foreign policy official
days before the anniversary of the full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine. Our
China correspondent, Stephen McDonnell reports. Vladimir Putin has become known
for holding meetings at either end of extremely long tables. This was not the
case when Russia's leader spoke to China's Wang Yi. They sat across a small oval
table. When footage of the meeting was released, President Putin could be heard
saying he looked forward to Xi Jinping's visit to Moscow. There's been
speculation that this might happen in the coming months. China has struggled to
convince other governments that it remains neutral in the Ukraine war, that
Beijing's representative and his Russian counterpart said the two countries were
together promoting peace and stability. Just days before the first anniversary
of a full-scale invasion has made this even tougher. Talks between the Royal
College of Nursing and the government are set to take place this afternoon to
try to resolve their pay dispute. The union has suspended planned 48-hour strike
in England next week. Our health correspondent Sophie Hutchinson reports. It's
been a winter of disruption with a series of strikes, but today brings hope.
Exactly which figures Pat Cullen, the leader of the Royal College of Nursing,
and the health secretary Steve Barkley, will thrash out this afternoon are of
course confidential. There has, however, been movement on both sides, with
ministers saying a deal from April might be backdated and the RCN lowering its
original demand for an above-inflation rise. Outside the negotiating room, the
union Unite, which represents ambulance workers, has said it's dismayed the
talks weren't extended to them. But health officials are meeting the doctor's
union, the British Medical Association, today in an attempt to avert their
planned strike action. British Steel has confirmed it's to close its coking
ovens in Skanthorpe, with a loss of up to 260 jobs. The company's Chinese owners
are blaming high inflation and energy costs. Unions say the plan is devastating
for the whole UK steel industry. Our North of England reporter Nick Garnett is
in Skanthorpe. Coke is the fuel used to power the blast furnaces which make
steel. The process involves partially burning coal in huge enclosed ovens, but
it creates a lot of carbon emissions for which British Steel has to pay for. The
company says there was a Â£70m rise in that bill last year and it would be
cheaper to shut the ovens down now and import ready-made coke from elsewhere.
Unions want the company to move the affected workers into the steel production
side of the factory, which they say has a large number of vacancies. But they
fear job losses are likely. The company says it will begin negotiations with the
trade's unions immediately. The Queen Consort has pulled out of a visit to a
food redistribution charity more than a week after she contracted Covid. The
King carried out the engagement in East London without her this morning.
Buckingham Palace said Camilla, who is 75, had made an excellent recovery from
the virus, but needed time to prepare for other events she is planning to attend
tomorrow. Alan, thanks very much. Now, when the former Home Secretary Sajid
Javid stripped Shamima Begum of her British citizenship ship, he was acting
lawfully. That is the decision this morning of the Special Immigration Appeals
Commission. Mr Justice J made the ruling despite accepting that there was a
credible suspicion that she was trafficked. She was 15 when she travelled to
join the so-called Islamic State Group in Syria. She is now 23 and will remain
barred from returning to the UK and stuck in a camp in northern Syria. Her
lawyers, Gareth Pierce and Daniel Ferner, spoke after the judgement. You have a
judgement in which the court is effectively saying, as things don't now, we are
stuck in a way that we do not think reflects the findings we are making. In
terms of the legal fight, that's nowhere near over. We're not going to go into
details about exactly what that means at this stage. I think what else this
judgement calls out for, though, is some courage and some leadership from the
Home Secretary to look at this case afresh in light of the clear and compelling
factual findings that this court has made. Well, those were Shamima Begum's
lawyers. Dominic Casciani is our Home Affairs correspondent. Dominic, we should
be clear about what the decision today means, because it wouldn't have meant if
it had gone in their favour that she could have come home, but it would have
what? Removed an obstacle? Yeah, I mean, in essence, well, it depends really,
because the government would have appealed had it lost today, but we certainly
wouldn't have seen her literally chocks away the flight of Special Forces going
to pick her up tomorrow morning. But in essence, she had to win this case to get
her nationality back, and in doing so, then she could actually have tried to get
back in the country, although the government could have blocked her temporarily
under other powers. But in essence, Sarah, this is really important what's
happened today, because what the Special Immigration Appeals Commission, this
semi-secret court has had to grapple with, is something which no court of judges
had to deal with before, which is this basically really unique argument that
while someone could be labelled a terrorist, they can also be a victim of
grooming and trafficking. And you've got to take that into account. And Shamima
Begum's team are saying, look, you know, the state has failed to take into
account that she was trafficked as a child, all those plausible evidence she was
trafficked as a child. That meant she'd basically been groomed into sexual
exploitation, effectively, you know, effectively raped as a child by an IS
fighter who she was then married off to, and had three children who we know
died. That left her in slavery and servitude. So no matter what you think about
what she did and who she aligned herself with, you have to take that into
account. Now, what Mr. Justice J, the lead judge at the commission, said about
this is really, really interesting, because these arguments started to feel like
a bit of a long shot from her team, months and months ago when this was being
floated. But today he said this case had caused great concern and difficulty to
the panel. And that went further than a lot of people expected the court to go.
And they accepted this was a legally unprecedented issue with finely balanced
decisions. There was credible suspicion that she had been trafficked. It was
credible to argue that the state had breached its duty to protect a child by
preventing her from leaving, by failing to prevent her from leaving. Now, that
points to something that a lot of us have thought a long time, that there could
have been a possibility of stopping her getting on the flight at Gatwick in the
first place with her friends. But taking all that into account, Sarah, the
critical thing here for the court is, does that override the Home Secretary's
legal obligation to deal with and combat terrorism? And what the Special
Immigration Appeals Commission said is, notwithstanding all of that, the Home
Secretary has this obligation to deal with terrorist threats as he or she finds
them. And in this case, Sajid Javid, the then Home Secretary, had this evidence
from the Security Service MI5 that she had aligned herself with IS, and
therefore she should not be allowed back into the country. And therefore it was
credible in those circumstances for him to say, I'm going to bar her. And he
didn't need to take into account this allegation of trafficking. Now, that is
now going to really be fought over all the way up to the Supreme Court. I mean,
it's so important for so many other cases. OK. And when we talk about other
cases, she stays in northeast Syria in a camp. And there are other British
people with and without citizenship there. Yeah, there are. I mean, we think,
it's difficult to say for sure, but we think there are about 60 Brits left in
these camps, and possibly as many as 35 children, some of whom were born out
there, some of whom were basically trafficked out there by their parents. And a
lot of these other cases, some of them are already before our courts, but not as
high profile, certainly not as public as Shaimima Begum. Those cases are riding
on this one. So everything kind of comes in behind the scenes. It's a very,
very, very complex issue. But critically, the court said, even though it had its
concerns about what has happened to Shaimima Begum, it couldn't substitute its
own views for those of the Home Secretary, that the Home Secretary was legally
entitled to access he had. Dominic Casciani, thank you very much. Well, I was
been speaking this morning to Jonathan Hall Casey. He's the independent reviewer
on terrorism legislation. And I asked what he made of the judgment. I mean, for
about, I don't know, for the last five, almost 10 years or so, there's been this
big debate in legal circles about whether it's for judges to decide what
terrorist risk is when there's an appeal or whether it's really for the
Secretary of State advised by officials. And you saw this last year because in
Shaimima Begum's appeal that went right up to Supreme Court, the Court of
Appeals, so really senior judges said, we think that Shaimima Begum is safe
enough to bring back so that she can have an appeal. Supreme Court said, no,
absolutely not. Those sorts of judgments are really for politicians and for
spooks. And what you're really seeing is, in this judgment, today's judgment,
that playing out. So the commission, so that's the judges who decided on the
appeal today, they said, even if we might think, or someone else might think
that she was, for example, trafficked or her coming to Syria was less than
voluntary, it's really not for us. It's part of the National Security
Assessment. We've got to leave that to politicians. But it's also clear that
they found it quite difficult. And there are plenty of signals in there that
this is something that will probably go up to the Court of Appeal. And I mean,
ironically, even if she had won, it wouldn't have meant that she would have had
the right to return because there are plenty of British citizens who are in
camps and they can't get out because the government says, we're not going to
help you get out. We're not going to give you what's called consular assistance.
So there's plenty of chapters left in this. Because there are. I mean, there are
other women who are in these camps in Syria who have their citizenship but are
not allowed to come back. Exactly, exactly. There was a famous case last year
where this was all explored and the government's policy has always been, and
here it's becoming slightly different from the rest of Western countries, from
Australia, from France and Germany, certainly from America. The position was we
only repatriate unaccompanied minors and orphans and we leave women there. So
there were two women British citizens and they were told, you simply can't come
back because we don't want you back. And I do wonder whatever happens in this
litigation now, you know, bringing it forward to 2023 when the camps are just
beginning to be emptied out of Europeans, whether the UK is prepared to be a
sort of an outlier on that. Right, because other countries are bringing their
nationals home. Exactly, exactly. And the pace seems to be increasing. I mean,
there is quite a lot of repatriation. I mean, the Germans are now at 100, the
French are well over 100. The Swedes have done more than us. So a lot of
countries are doing it. Right. There is something else, though. This idea of
stripping citizenship is something that I think apart from the UK, it's only
Bahrain who does. Is that right? No, it's not completely right. And let me be
clear, I had a lot of sympathy for reaching for the deprivation tool in sort of
2017 when the prospect of hundreds of these foreign fighters coming back could
have overwhelmed the system. I really understand that. And actually other
countries either tried to use but were told they couldn't. I think there was a
problem with the French constitution or they created their own instruments, but
they, in practice, they didn't use it half as nowhere near as much as the UK. So
there are one or two other countries did use it. I think the thing that the
nettle has to be grasped is, okay, deprivation upheld by the courts. But if a
decision was taken by the UK to bring back UK linked women, for example,
eventually, because they didn't want the UK to be a total outlier, that would
involve, wouldn't it, a really difficult decision to reverse the effect of the
deprivation. One would have to say to someone like Shmima Begum, even though I
took your nationality away at the time because I thought you're risk, even
though that's been upheld by the court, I'm now going to allow you to come back
into the UK. So in a way, the deprivation policy has made it slightly more
difficult for the UK to reverse the effects if that's what the UK eventually
wants to do. Now, all of this, therefore, from what you're saying, seems to be
based on the assessment of the threat that Shmima Begum represents. Do you think
that the UK is safer with her here or there? I haven't seen the closed risk
assessment for her. So I don't know. But I think on the whole, we'll get an
increasing risk to the UK if people are left out there. And I mean, a good
example of that is children. So Islamic State run a programme called Cubs of the
Caliphate. And the UN have said very recently that's still in operation. So this
is getting the kids, teaching them to be fighters, basically bringing them up
for the next iteration of Islamic State whenever there's an earthquake or Turkey
has an incursion and the camps have to be emptied. To some extent, it would be
good for the UK just to bring them back now so that they don't turn into the
Cubs of the Caliphate. And to some extent, true, that's true of women.
Obviously, it's a really balanced issue. But, you know, the UK has got a good
record in managing risk. And my overall view is, let's say, ultimately, it's a
matter of politicians. But my view is that the UK has the capability to manage
this risk. And certainly we're no worse off than other European countries who do
feel they can manage the risk. And ultimately, that decision should be the home
secretary, should it? Yeah, absolutely. I mean, as the law stands at the moment,
that is what the courts are saying. They're saying these are political
decisions, judgments taken, advised by officials, but ultimately political
rather than legal decisions. And in the case of Shamima Begum, more information
has come to light about what happened, not least on that journey, the possible
involvement of somebody who was actually acting for the Canadian spy agencies,
that she might have been trafficked. All that is irrelevant, is it? The
Commission said that even if she was trafficked, that doesn't give her a right
to return. So it doesn't give you a platform to say, come what may, whatever the
risk is, I'm allowed to come back. In terms of whether it was irrelevant, I
think the Commission really, really wrestled with this. There was a policy the
government had, which is that if you're going to deprive someone who traveled
over as a child, they had to have traveled voluntarily. And ultimately, the
Commission said, whether you like that judgment or not that the Secretary of
State took, that's part of her assessment of national security, that as part of
the assessment, she did travel over voluntarily, and we're not going to
interfere with that. So they didn't say it was irrelevant, but they said really
it was an assessment that was for the politicians and ultimately not for the
judges. So a new government comes in, a new home secretary perhaps, and decides,
look, Shameema Begum, all these people can come home. That's, it's ultimately,
that's what will change the situation. I think so. I think that ultimately, it's
going to be a political decision. I think that, although it's hard to predict,
the camps will start to empty out. I really don't think the UK would want to
find itself in a position where the Belgians, for example, have brought back all
their women and children. If nothing else, it would create this sort of awful
spectre of Britain's Guantanamo. I'm sure it would be a propaganda coup for
Britain's enemies. So I can't believe the UK is going to be a complete outlier.
Quite how you structure it. I mean, there are all sorts of legal tools you can
use. There are various things you can do to safeguard the public when they have
returned. But I think that's, I think ultimately it will be a political
decision. And you could say that if it's going to happen, particularly with the
children who are now growing up, in a way, the sooner you do it, the better.
Jonathan Hall, independent reviewer of terrorism legislation. Coming up on the
programme, the Ukrainian musician's unique new album, a series of love songs to
Kyiv using everyday sounds from the city. The whole mood of the album is not
really depressive or melancholic. I would say it's hopeful. It is dealing with
the themes of the past. We don't have access to it anymore, so we can't really
return to this past. To get in touch on social media, hashtag BBCWATO, email
address, worldatoneatbbc.co.uk. Now, what prompted the Royal College of Nursing
to call off their strikes next week and sound so optimistic about striking a pay
deal? We know that the government has now submitted its recommendation to pay
review bodies that nurses, doctors, teachers and police officers should be
awarded a pay rise for the year from April 2023 of 3.5%. That would not be
enough to break the strike deadlock, so there must be more on the table. The
Financial Times suggests that the offer actually could go up to 5% and it could
be backdated to sweeten the deal. The chair of the Health Select Committee,
Conservative MP Steve Bryan, said other unions should also pause strikes. This
is not reopening last year's current pay deal, nor is it preempting next year's
pay deal. I've always said I think the landing strip to end this, for the agenda
for change start after 1.3 million on IFC, which remember this is more than just
nurses, is for the pay review body to report quicker than it ordinarily might
and for that to be backdated further than it would ordinarily be. If the RCM are
prepared to be big enough to suspend their strikes to have meaningful
conversations, then we, brackets the NEU closed brackets, could maybe do the
same instead of this posturing. Well, Andy Prendergast is National Secretary of
the GMB Union and they represent workers at almost every pay band in the NHS,
from nurses to cleaners, porters, healthcare assistants and paramedics. Good
afternoon. Good afternoon, Sarah. Just to be clear, you do represent thousands
of nurses, but you're not in the talks and weren't asked to be. No, and we're a
little bit confused by that. It betrays a complete lack of understanding as to
how the NHS pay system works. The agenda for change is an agreement with
numerous unions and you can't do what is basically a tawdry backroom divide and
conquer deal if you're hoping to resolve the disputes. OK, you see this as
divide and conquer, that what the RCM have been offered something that has made
them think this is worth going for. Well, we're not entirely sure what the RCM
have been offered. I mean, the only thing we've heard about is the pay review
body's, or the government's recommendation to the pay review body, which is
three and a half percent. Now, bearing in mind, we have persistent double digit
inflation. The idea that you're going to solve this dispute by an offer which is
less than one third of current inflation after 13 years of effective pay cuts is
quite frankly insane. And we don't quite entirely know what the government are
doing. What we're also somewhat confused about is the fact that, you know, the
RCM have been brought to the table after refusing to have derogations for the
next dispute. Now, as a union who've been trying to strike responsibly by
providing emergency care, it seems completely bizarre that the government's
reward for those who aren't entering into those discussions is preferential
treatment and talks. To be clear, until now, have you worked very closely with
the RCM? Well, I mean, ultimately, we work in terms of being on the NHS staff
council with them. Each union is responsible to its own members and its own
democratically elected reps. We do try to take joint positions, but as you'll
have seen with strike days, they are different for different unions. We always
work when we can with our sister unions. But I think on this one, we are very
disappointed that the RCM have decided to try and what looks like strike a
separate deal, ignores the hundreds of thousands of nurses who are members of
other unions. If they get a deal, your members will presumably automatically get
it too, will they? Well, in theory, yes. But on that basis, the expectation
would be that the government enter into talks of all unions represented in the
NHS. And the fact that they've only talked about having talks with one union
does raise serious questions about that. And when you've approached the RCM,
which I imagine you have done this morning, what do they say? I think
discussions between unions are kind of behind closed doors. I think it's fair to
say we have expressed our unhappiness about the situation. We're quite clear
that this can only be settled with talks with all of the relevant unions. And
we're disappointed that one union appears to have decided to go off on its own.
OK. But the presumption must be that there is more on the table that they have
been offered. That's your assumption, is it? Well, it's difficult to say. We're
hearing similar numbers to what you talked about. There's a 3.5%, which we know
is the government's submission to the pay review body. We've seen this Financial
Times report, about 5%. I mean, it's fair to say that both of these offers are
significantly below where they need to be. OK. But if that 5%, because what the
Financial Times is reporting is a memo that they've seen from the Treasury
indicating that a public sector awards of 5% for next year could be offered with
basically only a low risk of setting a benchmark and setting a precedent. And
the suggestion is that that could be backdated, I mean, possibly to the
beginning of January. Would that be the kind of thing that would be enough for
you to say, OK, we'll suspend our strikes and we'll go back into talks? Well,
what I'm not going to do, Sarah, is undertake negotiations live on the media.
That's something for our negotiators in the room. What I would say, though, is
that we've been talking about having a pay rise that addresses a longstanding
pay issue, which has led to 130,000 plus vacancies in the service. It's why the
public aren't getting the treatment they need. It's why the service is on its
knees. And personally, I don't think what the government are talking about is
serious. I represent huge numbers of members in a private sector. We're
routinely settling pay talks, paid disputes for far more than this,
significantly more year on year. And our members in the health service who
worked all the way through the pandemic have actually said, look, we have a
serious pay problem. These figures don't resolve that. And the government's view
seems to be put your head in the sand and ignore it. And frankly, it betrays a
complete lack of understanding as to how the system works and a palpable anger
amongst our members. Although the health minister, Maria Caulfield, has said
this lunchtime that nurses wouldn't effectively be a special case. She said that
because of agenda for change, it would apply to all staff. Well, that's welcome.
And it shows at least they understand the basis of the negotiations they're
undertaking. But at some point, we have to talk about numbers and what we've
seen so far is not going to resolve this. Andy Parendigas, thanks very much.
Well, Jerry Cope knows how these things should work. He chairs London Southbank
University now, but he has previously chaired the NHS pay review body as well as
the prison service pay review body before that. Good afternoon. Hello. From what
you've heard from the various people involved in these talks, what is your
thinking of what is going on at the moment? So I think there are probably two
things going on. One is some sort of discussion between the RCN and the
government about how the pay review body will operate for the forthcoming year,
starting April. And, you know, can the unions secure an agreement from
government that they will accept whatever the pay review body pronounces and how
quickly that will happen? And then secondly, the thing that's sort of being
speculated about in the press today is will there be any sweetener in terms of
last year? And that's probably not an issue for the pay review body. That's an
issue to be addressed directly between the government and the trade unions. So
the pay review body wouldn't say, look, we'll backdate this settlement that
we've got for 23-24. It could be asked to consider whether it should be
backdated. That's a question. I would have thought, though, that government and
unions would probably settle that directly. I mean, would we know? Will that
information be made public? Yeah, oh, yes. Well, everything that the pay review
body does, not everything, but virtually everything that pay review body does is
made public. So we will know in time what government have asked the pay review
body to do or not to do. I think the key is, you know, and the 5% is probably a
budgetary number that's being talked about. Sorry, what do you mean 5% is a
budgetary number? And then the Treasury has said is sort of acceptable, is an
issue of budgeting between the Treasury and the Department of Health. The pay
review body is not bound by that at all. It could go less than that. It could go
more than that. The issue is, will the government then accept a recommendation
from the pay review body if it was above 5% or indeed if it was below 5%? Okay,
so irrespective of what the government has said, that it would affect its other
budgets, and this is what this 5% seems to be relating to. The pay review body
could just say, well, hang about, inflation was over 10% last year. We've got to
give much higher than that. Yes, and it's not only inflation that the pay review
body will take into account. It's competitiveness. It's what pay awards are in
other places, and over a period of time, not just in a single year as well.
Okay, so you would expect that. So just to be clear, Gerry, given what we know
of all those factors from this past year, you would expect the pay review body
to be much higher than what the government suggested. No, not necessarily,
because the key things are recruitment, retention, motivation, all those sorts
of things, and the pay review body has to decide how much of that is pay and how
much of that is working conditions, which I also understand are part of the
talks that are going on between government and the RCN. You know all about
negotiating about pay. What do you make of the government's decision to call in
the RCN, the Royal College of Nursing, rather than other unions to negotiate
with them? Well, I think it probably depends on what sort of informal contact
was taking place. If the RCN said to the government, if you call us in, we'll
call off our action, then that might be pleasing to government. If other unions
were not saying that, and you heard that the teachers are refusing to call off
their action, then government might not talk to them. Right, well, Gerry Cope,
thank you very much for talking to us. Moving on, and Kiv, as we know, has
changed enormously in the year since Russia's attempt at a full-scale invasion.
The Ukrainian musician Oly Shbudeko's new album, Kiv Eternal, is a series of
love songs to the city. It includes recordings that were made before the war
from railway stations, from the sound of traffic and birdsong, the dripping of
water in a tunnel, the sounds of a world that has disappeared, and a document of
a city that the artist says has changed forever. We try to capture the sounds
that make Kiv Kiv some sort of sound symbols of the city, as well as sounds that
will be absent, and will go away in maybe 10 or 20 years. For example, we
recorded the shuttle bus criers. Basically, we have this shuttle bus system.
It's like a public transportation alternative. It's small buses that are owned
by people like private companies, and they usually hire either criers, or the
drivers themselves cry out their destinations, like Odessa or Hirsan. They, with
time, develop a very certain, specific, idiosyncratic way of saying this
destination. It's almost like melody. So we thought maybe this is a very unique
sound that we should preserve, because they wouldn't be there in five or ten
years. I returned to Kiv after the battle of Kiv was finished, so I experienced
Kiv right after the battle, and it was very different from what I imagined it
would be. I could hear every car that was passing, every short or explosion I
could hear distinctly. I come from a Russian-speaking family, and I used to
admire Russian culture before that, and I used to read in Russian mostly, like
in English and in Russian, and now I just stopped reading in Russian. I can't. I
still speak Russian with my friends who still speak Russian, but publicly, like
in officially, I use either Ukrainian or English. As for sounds that made Kiv
Kiv, I think they're still there because maybe in a month or two, Kiv kind of
got back to the usual, more or less peaceful mode of functioning. I remember the
most exciting experience was when I actually was stuck in a traffic jam in Kiv
during the war, because it meant that the city is alive, and it was a very
positive experience back then. The whole mood of the album is not really
depressive or melancholic. I would say it's hopeful. It's more like light and
hopeful. It is dealing with the themes of the past that we don't have access to
anymore, so we can't really return to this past before the full-scale invasion.
We had a certain image of our future, every past has its future, and so we can't
really have anymore this future that we had in this past, and we can't return to
it. This is what this album is about for me. Olesh Boudecaux on Kiv Eternal, his
new album. Welsh rugby players have said they'll decide today if they too are
going out on strike. It could mean that Saturday's Six Nations game against
England does not go ahead. Tom Shanklin is a former Welsh rugby union player,
played for Cardiff Blues and Wales. Tom, good afternoon. Good afternoon. Can you
explain to us what is going on and whether this match for a start on Saturday is
likely to go ahead? Well, I'll do my best. I really hope it does go ahead,
because this is what Cardiff and the Principality Stadium is built for, these
types of matches. It's an incredible atmosphere. It's one of the best stadiums,
if not the best stadium in the world, and it's suited to big games like this.
Now, the issue is with the players, with their regional teams and the union at
the moment, so the deal that was meant to be done between the union and the four
professional teams in Wales was meant to be done last year, and it's still
ongoing because all parties haven't come to an agreement yet, which means the
rugby teams cannot sign any players that are out of contract. Now, this is
normally done prior to Christmas, and with three months left of the season, and
players who are out of contract still don't know where they are, and this is
unheard of because you're putting your body on the line, every game could be
your last game, you're not sure whether you're going to pick up long-term
injuries, and you still don't know what you're doing next year, whether you're
going to be kept by the club, whether you're going to have to try and find a new
team to play for, but it's quite late down the season now to try and find teams,
and a lot of teams have already got their playing squad sorted for next year.
There's loads going on, but that's the main part of it, because players don't
know where they are next year because contracts aren't being signed. And why
not? Why is this happening now? It's happening now because we're in a big
situation now where everything over the last 10, 15 years looks like it's been
okay because Wales have been performing and winning grand slams and winning
titles in the Six Nations, but below that, the professional rugby in Wales has
slowly been going downhill. Now we've come to a point now where the money isn't
there. There isn't money there for four professional teams, and the money that
the WIU, that's where the majority of funds come from for the four professional
teams, isn't enough. It's not sustainable for teams, Jocar with Osprey, Scarlett
and the Dragons to survive on, and wages are going to have to be cut, which
means squads are going to have to be cut. The funding isn't there. The funding
isn't there from European rugby. That's a million pound less. The funding isn't
there from the URC, which is a league these teams play in. It's less as well. So
all of a sudden, they're looking at the finances and there's just not money
there. So, regions want more. The WIU doesn't want to pay anymore, and this is
where there are loggerheads because it's just not being resolved. What do you
think the answer is? I understand from both parties, I understand that players
have been overpriced in Wales because a lot of that is down to 38 players that
contracted 80% by the Welsh Rugby Union. That has a knock on effect, and we're
overpaying players then in the league. But I think there has to be more funding
from the WIU for the regional teams because what are the four professional teams
in Wales? What's their strategy? Is it purely to produce say 30 players to the
national team? It can't be. It's got to be to be competitive in the league, and
they're not. But to do that, you need more funding. So the WIU has to look at
one would be the loan they took out during COVID times, which is five million
pound each to each regional team so that they could survive. But the teams have
to pay that back. So that has to be looked at. There has to be greater funding
for the regions. The WIU made a long term strategy investment of a hotel. And
that is going to reap rewards a lot later down the line. And I don't understand
why they did that when we've got so many short term problems right now. There
has to be greater funding from the WIU for me. Literally, in a word, Tom, is
this match going to go ahead? I've got a hospitality company, so if it doesn't,
I've got to pay 470 people back all their money. My fingers are crossed. I hope
it will. Tom Shankton, thank you very much. Let's go. Jimmy, Jimmy, Jimmy, give
it a chance. Give it a chance. Give it a few more minutes. This isn't right.
This isn't right. You don't do this. You don't keep a man waiting. I know. I
know. The only time you do is when? When you want to see something. It's the
only time. Well, you might recognise that as The Irishman, Martin Scorsese's
2019 Netflix film, renowned for its length, and it looks like he's at it again.
Scorsese's newest film, Killers of the Flower Moon, clocks in at a whopping
three hours and 20 minutes. It makes the recent movies all quiet on the Western
Front and Elvis seem rather short at their two and a half hour length. So what
is going on? Do people really want longer movies? LaRushka Ivanzadeh is the
Metro's film critic. No, it doesn't seem surprising to me. There seems to be a
definite trend towards films getting longer and longer, particularly by Martin
Scorsese. I mean, his last film, The Irishman, was three hours, 29 minutes. So
this is practically, you know, a short film compared to that. He is going to
have to cut it down, though, isn't he? I think he is. I mean, they seem to be
insisting on it at Cannes, which is almost surprising. I'm sure they've shown
films at that length before, but I guess maybe they just have to cram enough in.
I'm not sure. I think there is definitely a perception now that you can't be a
serious film unless you're of a completely epic length. Recently, they had the
sight and sound film poll of the greatest films of all time, and that was topped
by a Chantal Ackerman film that's three hours and 21 minutes long. So, yes, I
think there's a definite you can't be heavy weight unless you're bum-numbing at
the same time. And is this because people actually want movies at that length?
Well, it is surprising, isn't it? You wouldn't think that most people would want
this. But I mean, I think it's at both ends of the spectrum. So you've got these
very highbrow films that are winning all these awards. We're in the middle of
Oscar season at the moment, and all the serious contenders are over two hours
long. All Quiet on the Western Front was about two and a half hours long. Elvis,
two and a half hours long. Tard, over two and a half hours long. But at the
other end of the spectrum, these hugely populous films are massively long as
well. So, of course, we've just got Avatar, The Way of Water, which is now, I
think, the third highest-grossing film of all time. And that's three hours, 12
minutes long, which is only, I didn't realise, it's only three minutes shorter
than Titanic. And I remember very fondly that Titanic had an interval because
everyone went, it's so extraordinarily long. And now it seems to be just half
the course. And yet so often we're talking about a generation and in a world of
TikTok and mobile phones where we don't have the concentration for anything
that's particularly long. I know you can't actually imagine people flocking to
cinemas to sit there without their phones, presumably, and watching a film for
that long. There's two things, I think, to get people into the cinema, these big
studios are creating these huge films that are meant to be an event. So it's
like you get your bang for your buck. If you're going to pay up to, say, Â£15 to
go to the cinema, you're going to get an amazing, huge experience. On the other
hand, most of these films are eventually going to be watched at home. And then,
of course, you can just watch them in segments as much as you like, can't you?
You just sort of create your own ad breaks, as it were. It's a headache for the
cinemas, though, isn't it, when they're wanting to schedule film after film?
Well, this is the thing, I mean, the reason we sort of think of a film as
roughly 90 minutes long was all to do with cinema scheduling, because there are
only so many films that you could fit in a day. So this is why they don't like,
I mean, cinemas don't really like having these really big films, because you can
only sort of show maybe two films kind of in the sort of evening, prime evening
section of viewing. So it's, yeah, it's very tough on cinemas. Isn't there also
an argument that someone thinking, shall I go to the cinema and I won't be able
to leave, I won't be able to snack, I won't be able to look at my phone, I might
need to go to the loo, that actually you're just thinking, let's just wait for
it to be on telly, because it's going to become come on my telly soon. I know
you would think that, wouldn't you? I mean, I feel like these films are quite
indulgent by the by the people who are making them, because they seem to be
making them with their own sort of artistic, I just want to create my own epic
in mind, rather than thinking of the audience at all, who, as you say, would
rather just maybe, I don't know, I can't see why they won't have an interval,
actually. You'd think actually, it would be very canny thing for cinemas to do,
because it means they could break up the film, more people can't get a popcorn
in the middle, bring back the interval, I say, but I think it is this merging
also of the genres that we're seeing in this century. So film and TV used to be
so separate. And now there's this rise of long form storytelling, which we've
seen. And it almost films like I often think that I'm seeing a film that it, I
feel like this could be a mini series. I feel like I'm binge watching a mini
series, particularly, I think of the recent film, Elvis, which is a biopic of
Elvis's life. And you think, how can you cram a whole amazing life into, you
know, the length of a film? I think you can't. So I think there is this trend
for sort of feeling like you're getting a whole sort of mini series within one
film. LaRouche Gettie Van Zade there, the film critic at the Metro. Well, that's
pretty much it from us. Just a reminder of our headlines. Shemeema Begum, who
joined the Islamic State Group in Syria when she was 15, has lost her latest
appeal against the decision to revoke her British citizenship. The Prime
Minister has told MPs that Parliament will have a chance to express its view on
any changes to Northern Ireland's post-Brexit trading arrangements. And the
Royal College of Nursing is to hold talks with the government this afternoon to
try to resolve their pay dispute. PM will be at five o'clock this afternoon. I'm
Sarah Montague. That's the World of 145. Studio Direction was by George Thomas.
The editor was Mark Faulkner. Now on Radio 4, Matthew Seyd continues the story
of a word that divides society. When was the first time you heard the word woke?
Now that we're woke, we should stay woke. Potential woke fury. So food eating,
woke-erarting. Maybe it was just now. Maybe it's in the last few years. Or maybe
it's a word you've known about for a long time. I'm Matthew Seyd. I've grappled
with the term in my work as an author and columnist, but I've never looked into
its origins until now. This is woke. The journey of a word. And in this series
I'm tracing the evolution of a term that I believe offers a key to understanding
our times. I've gone back to the 1930s to the very first uses of the term to
find the stories of those who said it, written it and been defined by it. I've
learned how a word for awareness in African-American communities has been
twisted into a vague political insult and an obsession with identity politics.
In this episode I'll meet the woman whose use of the word woke brought the
world's attention to police violence and ignited one of the most significant
protest movements of the modern age. In the last episode we looked into the
story of one of the first uses of woke in print by a young African-American
writer in the early 1960s. In the subsequent decades the word woke remained
primarily within black communities. It was a way to describe an alertness to
malevolent forces, from a cheating lover to systemic racism. It wasn't until the
turn of the millennium that the rise of woke would be supercharged. In the
noughties the singer Erica Badu released this song, Master Teacher. The song's
message of perseverance through difficulty and refrain of I'd stay woke brought
the phrase firmly into the lexicon of a new generation. In 2008 when Master
Teacher was released, Janetta Elsie was at school near St. Louis, Missouri. She
went away to college and came back home a few years later to hunt for jobs. Soon
the eyes of the world would be fixed very close by. Ferguson is a small suburb
in the St. Louis County area. It is about maybe 10 minutes from where I actually
grew up. It's segregated for sure. There's a black side and a white side of
Ferguson. It's probably the most unlikely place I thought that this would
happen. It's interesting you say unlikely given that it's racially segregated,
but this is a legacy of history. In Ferguson on the 9th of August 2014 a black
teenager called Michael Brown had an encounter with a white police officer,
Darren Wilson. It ended in the young man's death. He was shot upwards of seven
times and his body remained at the scene for four hours. I first learned about
Mike's death via Twitter. A woman that I followed, she sent me a picture of
Darren Wilson standing over Mike Brown's body. What did you do when you heard? I
shared it with all of my friends, everybody that I knew, shared it with my best
friend. And her and I decided that we were going to go down there when she got
off of work. By the time Janetta and her friend arrived, people had been
gathered in the street for most of the day. It was so hot. St. Louis summers are
no joke. Super humid. And they left his body out there for so many hours in the
hot sun. So his blood just stained the concrete. And you could see it underneath
the street lights. In that moment, it was just so much going on. You could just
feel like the air was really charged. And seeing his blood on that ground just
really did something. It changed me. I was like, okay, I'm coming back tomorrow.
The community held a candlelit vigil the following night alongside a heavy
police presence. From there, tensions escalated. There were clashes between
crowds and armed officers in riot gear. A nearby gas station was set on fire,
beginning several days of unrest, including looting. Police used tear gas and
rubber bullets. The curfew would be imposed. And the National Guard were ordered
in. Demonstrations were being held to campaign against the injustice of Brown's
killing and to see Darren Wilson charged. Janetta's first instinct was to
document it all using the same platform on which she had learned of Michael
Brown's death. Twitter was the fastest place to get the news. And it was just
the easiest for me to type something really quick, not even looking at my phone,
take a picture, type a description of it, hit send, and I know that it's going
to spread. She began posting hundreds of photos and videos live from the
protests, relaying information and offering a view of events while they
happened. In so doing, Janetta became an unofficial spokesperson for the
Ferguson demonstrations. It was just way more eyes on my account than I was ever
used to. There were publications showcasing like, if you're looking for news out
of Ferguson, here are the four people you should follow. And I was the only
woman who was like on these lists at the time. The activity online galvanized
the early Black Lives Matter movement as people across the globe coalesced
around hashtags. Janetta and others chose the words that black people had long
used to maintain awareness of racism. Stay woke. Before 2014, what did that term
mean to you and how did you use it? It would just be like in a joking kind of
way, like, say, well, you know, watch out those people out there and by those
people, like the police, the cops, whatever. It's a kinship type of thing. It's
definitely communication to and from black people. Could you give a sense of the
way that the term began to become more mainstream? I think one of the things a
lot of us were asking is literally making white people wake up, especially in
St. Louis at the time. So many people were upset at the protest. Why are you
shutting down the highway? And everything that the protesters were doing were
agitating white people to get out of that place of comfort and wake up to what
is going on in this country. It's almost like it's changed from black people to
other black people stay alert because of the potential for injustice. Now it's
black people to white people or woke white people, people who are awake to other
white people. You need to wake up to what's going on underneath your noses.
Yeah. And the months that followed hashtag stay woke became a rallying cry, an
emotional focal point for those speaking out against racial injustice and in
particular police brutality. And it was embraced by Twitter's founder, Jack
Dorsey. Everybody in St. Louis knows that Jack is from St. Louis. Jack came to
St. Louis during the Ferguson protests in the very early months. After that,
there was a lot of interaction between myself and the engineers at Twitter or
the Blackbirds cohort of black staffers at Twitter. I was brought in at one
point to sit in on a Twitter trust and safety meeting, which was super
interesting. It was the whitest room in America. I was talking about what is
going on with other protesters, other black people, other just marginalized
users on the app. And here's our experience. So far in this series, we've seen
the word woke tiptoe into the mainstream. But Ferguson 2014 was really the
moment the term exploded. Nicole Holliday is a linguist at Pomona College in
California. So when we see words become new or sort of newly prominent, it's
frequently in response to some social or political movement that's happening. So
when Michael Brown was killed in 2014, people start talking about issues of
inequality more, which means that vocabulary terms associated with those gain
and prominence. So I know that, for example, like Google searches for the word
woke went up a lot in 2015 and 2016 because people outside the community were
seeing this discourse and wanting to understand what it was. And they were
seeing it on shirts and posters. And then we had between 2014 and even up to and
through now. There was so much conversation about the ways in which black
Americans were disenfranchised by the criminal justice system. And because that
keeps happening and always part of the news cycle, the terms associated with
that. So talking about racism, white supremacy and yes, woke just get used more
because the issues that are related are things that we use more. Nicole has
traced how woke has followed the trajectory of many other slang terms. So what
usually happens is you have young people, frequently young people of color in
their community sort of inventing new words that then spread up the age
demographics of society, but also into the mainstream. So you'll have young
black people using a term and then it'll move to like slightly older people.
What difference did the Internet make to the speed of spread of new words? I
believe that words move through this process of going through society up the
sort of age and mainstream continuum much faster with the Internet than they did
before. And it's just because people have access to communities that are doing
these innovations in a way that they never had before. So now people that are
sort of older are witnessing what's happening with the language change that's
being driven by the young people and then being able to adopt it for themselves.
And it also means the term has reached the next stage of their life cycle even
sooner. With terms that are political in particular, they tend to undergo a
process of what linguists would call pageration. So I think woke is really
analogous to political correctness, for example. So political correctness was
originally used in activist communities to talk about being aware in terms of
fairness and equality. It wasn't negative. It became very negative in the 1990s
because there was a sort of backlash, quote unquote, against political
correctness. And so now if you say political correctness, people sort of think
like that means somebody is policing my language. The exact same thing has
happened with woke. Now there is a lot of criticism of woke. There's people who
identify themselves as anti woke. So it's become sort of a boogeyman in the same
way that we saw with political correctness in the 1990s. And this process of
pageration is particularly visible in Twitter HQ where Janetta once spoke.
Today, the company is no longer led by Jack Dorsey, but by the billionaire Elon
Musk. Musk has tweeted that the woke mind virus is either defeated or nothing
else matters. I think that Elon Musk is kind of an edgelord. So he occupies this
position where he says things that he may or may not really believe because he
gets attention. And it's part of why people love him so much. He's edgy, right?
So when he says woke mind virus, he is taking on the persona of a person who
thinks that everybody to the left of him politically in the United States has
been sort of indoctrinated. And you hear a lot of the woke people are
indoctrinating our kids or whatever. Focus on activist Janetta Elzy. They have
turned this word into something that is so far from the origin and almost like a
laughable joke where they're like, oh, this is woke culture. In 2020, after a
reexamination of the case, prosecutors in St. Louis said they would not bring
charges against Darren Wilson for the killing of Michael Brown. It must be
strange for Janetta to see a word that came to define such a formative period of
her life used in a completely different way. But her use of social media and
hashtag stay woke did set a template for a movement that has changed attitudes
towards race in America and across the world. All kind of things are happening
because people are watching what's happening to us in real time because of
Twitter. Everyone who is in that wave, the first wave of 2014 protests, they've
gotten older. It's unfortunate, but also it is fortunate that people are alive
to choose to do something else after that time. Next time, how in 2017, one
toddler, along with Donald Trump, helped to change the meaning of woke forever.
That's at 1.45 tomorrow. The presenter is Matthew Seid and the producer, Sam
Peach. And in fact, Matthew will be back later this afternoon exploring what
happens when pain interrupts the relationship between musicians and their
instruments. The new series of sideways continues at four. Music, radio and
podcasts available on most smart speakers. Just say open BBC Sands to get...