TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-04-12H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Safe saving. The Spark. Tuesday mornings at 11 on BBC Radio 4 and BBC Sounds.
BBC News at 11 o'clock. The deputy mayor of the besieged Ukrainian city of
Bakhmut has said there's fighting in the streets as his country's forces try to
repel Russian advances. Taking the city in the eastern Donetsk region would be
Russia's largest combat success of the past six months. Our correspondent in
Kiev, James Landale, says British military intelligence believes Ukrainian
forces are under severe pressure. Western analysts say Bakhmut, a small
industrial city, has little strategic value. Its capture would, however, provide
the Kremlin with some rare good news and potentially a stepping stone to further
territorial gains in the Donbass. But at great cost. Many thousands of Russian
troops have died trying to take the city. Ukrainian commanders estimate that
Russia has lost seven times as many soldiers as they have. New leaked messages
published by the Daily Telegraph show that the former health secretary Matt
Hancock and his officials spent hours discussing whether he had broken Covid
guidance when he was pictured kissing his aide. He resigned shortly afterwards.
A spokesman for Mr Hancock says there's no public interest in publishing the
messages. A ferry which broke down in the Channel after a fire in the engine
room yesterday evening has been towed to Calais. 183 passengers and crew were on
board the Isle of Innisfree when the fire broke out. They've now been allowed to
disembark. Detectives investigating the attempted murder of an off-duty police
officer in Northern Ireland have been granted until tomorrow evening to question
two men. Police believe the dissident Republican group the New IRA was behind
the attack. On Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell, he remains in a critical
condition in hospital. Northern police in Australia say they've made what's
thought to be the country's biggest ever drug bust after cocaine worth Â£800
million was seized. In a joint operation with the United States, the drugs were
seized not long after leaving South America, replaced with fake packages and
tracked. Twelve people linked to a Mexican cartel were arrested trying to
retrieve the cargo in Perth. BBC News. In half an hour we'll have dispatches on
events around the globe in the past week, including Nigeria's presidential
election and the sinking of a boat carrying migrants off the coast of southern
Italy. From our own correspondent is at half past eleven. First on Radio 4,
we're turning to matters closer to home as Bloomberg's Emily Ashton looks back
over the week in Westminster, where MPs have been busy digesting those leaked
WhatsApp messages and a significant development on Brexit. Just when you thought
you'd seen the back of Brexit and Covid leading the bulletins, both were back in
force this week. Rishi Sunak unveiled his long-awaited deal with the European
Union on trade with Northern Ireland, presenting himself as the Prime Minister
who finally tied up Brexit's loose ends. Almost seven years on from the
referendum, the Prime Minister held a high-profile press conference with EU
chief Ursula von der Leyen in Windsor, hailing what he called a historic deal.
Known as the Windsor Framework, the agreement aims to put an end to tensions
over trade and get the power-sharing government in Northern Ireland back up and
running. Rishi Sunak hailed the new deal in a statement to the Commons late on
Monday. It does what many said could not be done. Removing thousands of pages of
EU laws and making permanent, legally binding changes to the Protocol Treaty
itself. That is the breakthrough we have made. Those are the changes we will
deliver and now is the time to move forward as one United Kingdom. But the
Democratic Unionist Party, crucial to restoring power-sharing, is yet to deliver
its final verdict. The party leader, Sir Geoffrey Donaldson, outlined his
concerns. There can be no disguising the fact, for example, that in some sectors
of our economy in Northern Ireland, EU law remains applicable in our part of the
United Kingdom. My party will want to study the detail of what has been
published today, as well as examining the legal text, the political declaration
and the government's command paper. Where necessary, we stand ready to engage
with the government in order to seek further clarification, reworking or change
as required. I spoke to two veterans of the parliamentary battles over Brexit,
Labour peer Jenny Chapman, a former shadow Brexit minister, and the Conservative
MP David Davis, who was Brexit Secretary under Theresa May, to ask what they
made of Rishi Sunak's new deal. Just how significant is the agreement? I think
it's very significant. The Conservative Party has agonised over Brexit for all
sorts of reasons since 2016 and got itself into all sorts of cul-de-sacs, most
notably in Northern Ireland. And what Sunak has done this week is delivered a
solution to that problem. And he's done it in terms which are amicable with the
European Union. And that is, you know, it's a pretty big success, I think, for
him. And I think, although it's not the end of Brexit discussions, it's a major
completion of the first stage of Brexit, if you like. Jenny, do you agree it's a
significant moment? Oh, it is. I mean, my regret about it really is that it's
taken a very long time and that we got ourselves into this situation in the
first place. And I think, you know, there are people on all sides of Parliament
who feel like that. But there's no doubt that this takes us into a much better
place than we were a couple of months ago when we were arguing about the
Northern Ireland Protocol Bill, which was just such a destructive way to go
about this. It was always going to need to be a negotiated settlement. That's
what we've now got. And I absolutely agree with what David has said, you know,
that this is progress and we're very pleased to see it. So, David, you're saying
it's not the final step of a rather arduous Brexit process. What more is there
to come then? The actual exploitation of the freedoms given by Brexit have
really barely started. You get the hoary old story about, you know, we're
allowed to progress vaccines faster and it gives us more freedom on Ukraine,
which is true. But the real focus on developing the economy, developing our
international relations in other dimensions and so on, has been sort of
handicapped by a mixture of things. Covid and Ukraine and so on have been such a
distraction. And Jenny, do you see this as the end of Brexit or is it going to
keep going? I think what everyone is now getting their heads around is the fact
that we are never going to be in a position where we're not negotiating over
something with the European Union because things will change all the time. You
know, they're not going to stay the same. They're going to develop the European
Union. There's going to be new regulations. There will be innovation. We will
always be negotiating over fish, if nothing else. But that's going to become a
normal part of politics and it needs to be de-dramatised from where we've been
in the past. And I do worry whether the Tories are actually capable of that. We
expected something from Eurosceptic rebels on the Tory backbenches. Maybe they
could derail the deal. But there has been limited criticism so far. David, were
you surprised at that? Look, pick three names for you. Steve Baker describes
himself as a Brexit hard man. Jacob Rees-Mogg, a sort of massively symbolic
figure in the Brexit movement. And myself. All of us very, very quickly came out
and said, no, we like this. This is sensible. This is a good approach. This is
the right way to deal with this. That makes it much more difficult for some of
the others to jump up and say, no, no, this is a betrayal. But I think the rapid
movement of a few fairly well-known Brexiteers didn't stop any potential Brexit
rebellion. It just meant it would be very considered. Jenny, I really like the
optimism there. Even your most arch-Brexiteer, I think, would have to concede
that the deal that we have now is an improvement on where we were before, which
was very, very rigid, shouldn't ever really have been agreed. But nevertheless,
I do think that the stability that we see this week, I don't see how that stands
the test of time. We've already got the retained EU law bill, which is in front
of Parliament at the moment, which is a sort of madcap way of making law and has
the potential to rub up against what's just been agreed in Windsor. Because
where we go from here in terms of how closely aligned or how far we diverge from
where the EU is, will still be played out through Northern Ireland. And I think
this just needs cool heads and people who don't get antibodies to anything with
the word Europe on it in charge of these negotiations. And one of those
grumbling voices on the backbenches for a while was Boris Johnson. And I wanted
to ask you, David, could this deal have been done under Boris Johnson's
leadership? No, I don't think so. In truth. Look, one of the things that Rishi
brought to this particular party and actually one of the reasons I voted for
him, just because he is very smart. And actually, even more importantly, we know
he's a workaholic. He actually delves into the detail of everything. Boris is a
more of a sort of grand headlines character. So you don't think there's much
chance of Boris Johnson coming back to be Prime Minister? I think that the Tory
party has probably tested the public tolerance of leadership elections as far as
it's going to go for one parliament. So it's not going to happen before an
election. After the election, it's going to be one of two outcomes. Either we'll
win, in which case Rishi is entrenched for another five years and the Tory party
loves winners, or we lose. And if we lose, it's a contest for leader opposition.
Do you really think Boris Johnson is going to waste his time on that? Well,
let's move to Labour because Keir Starmer has dismissed any talk of a second
referendum, a plan to rejoin the single market or customs union. He's made it
clear Labour will vote for this deal. So is Brexit now a settled issue? Well,
the fact that we've left settles it, I think, because I don't think anybody
seriously thinks that we're going to have a referendum on rejoining the European
Union. It's just not what anyone who aspires to be in government certainly
thinks would be a good idea for the country. So to that extent, yes, it is
settled. So if Labour wins power next year, there'd be no renegotiations of
anything, but you'd want a deeper relationship with the EU? We don't want to
join the single market. We don't want to rejoin the customs union because all of
the European Union, the thing that people who advocate for those things need to
understand is that the EU hasn't been sitting by the phone for the last couple
of years waiting for us to call. Things have fundamentally changed. Once you're
out, you're out. And that's how the EU sees it too. So yes, we want to work
properly and sensibly in our interests, but it's not going to involve rejoining
those structures that we were in before. Jenny Chapman and David Davis.
Eurosceptic Tory MPs and Democratic Unionists are largely keeping their powder
dry for now, but all should become clear in a House of Commons vote, which Rishi
Sunak has promised but not yet set a date for. Katie Haywood is a professor of
political sociology at Queen's University Belfast. I asked her to outline the
key changes in the Windsor Framework. The key change is I think primarily in
relation to goods moving from Britain into Northern Ireland. The idea is that if
they are staying in Northern Ireland and not at risk of moving into the EU
single market, there'll be minimal checks and controls and paperwork associated
with those movements. Also, very significantly, some of the goods that are
restricted from moving into the EU single market will now be allowed into
Northern Ireland. So the infamous sausages for example, will be allowed to be
moved from Britain into Northern Ireland and certain other products that would
have been restricted from moving across the EU's external border are allowed
across the Irish Sea now, as long as they don't move into the Republic of
Ireland. So alongside these new lifting of restrictions, we also see a careful
watching I think on the part of the EU in terms of safeguards to be able to make
sure this careful balance of Northern Ireland's unique position is maintained
and protected. Can you tell us about the Stormont break and what that means for
politicians in Northern Ireland? So a big issue of concern that has been raised
consistently, I think from all parties in Northern Ireland has been about the
so-called democratic deficit. So this Windsor Framework addresses that in two
ways. So the first is actually the consultation with Northern Ireland
stakeholders including civil society and businesses prior to a new EU law
applying in Northern Ireland or even amendments and replacements to EU law
applying in Northern Ireland. So I think that's really important. The second
dimension is the role for the Northern Ireland Assembly. So what this Windsor
Framework allows is that the Northern Ireland Assembly will have the chance of
scrutinising the EU law that will be amended and replaced and applying in
Northern Ireland and then they will get a chance to have their say on it. After
exploring various different means of addressing the implications of that
amendment or replacement in Northern Ireland, if it will have a significant
impact and a lasting impact on everyday lives of communities, it will be
possible if 30 or more MLAs object to it from two or more parties for them to
notify the British government to put a break on that law applying in Northern
Ireland. The DUP have so far been broadly supportive haven't they but the state,
they still have concerns. So what will they be mulling over at the moment? So
the DUP are in a really difficult position and you can see that in some of the
rather differing messages that we're having from some of their elected
representatives. Essentially they have very much expressed deep concern about
the protocol. There's a sort of split in the party at the moment with some MPs
being very vocal that they reject this Windsor framework and don't see it as
going far enough, i.e. they object to the fact that EU law continues to apply in
Northern Ireland. Sir Geoffrey Donaldson as the leader of the party is
essentially asking for more time and more time to consider the implications of
this Windsor framework but also to engage with the party. And they have to make
a decision before a House of Commons vote presumably? Yes, that'll be
interesting to see. That potential House of Commons vote increases the time
pressure I think and it would be unusual if there's a split still in the party
by the time it comes to that vote. Professor Katie Haywood. By Wednesday,
chatter in Westminster had turned to a different yet familiar story, the
government's handling of the Covid-19 pandemic. The Daily Telegraph said it had
obtained 100,000 WhatsApp messages linked to Matt Hancock's time as Health
Secretary during the height of the crisis. The paper has published a number of
his exchanges with ministers and officials. It sparked fresh criticism over the
government's strategy for curbing the virus and prompted Labour leader Keir
Starmer at Prime Minister's Questions to demand that the independent Covid
inquiry act more quickly to get to the bottom of what happened. The Covid
inquiry has already cost the taxpayer Â£85 million and hasn't heard from a single
government minister yet. So can the Prime Minister assure the House, no more
delays, that the inquiry will have whatever support it needs to report by the
end of this year? The massive cache of messages was handed to the Telegraph by
journalist Isabel Oakeshott, who obtained them while working with Mr Hancock on
a book about his experiences of the pandemic. She told the BBC she had been
acting in the overwhelming national interest, but Mr Hancock has accused her of
a breach of trust and said the messages are misleading when read out of context.
I brought together Liberal Democrat MP Leila Moran, who chairs the all-party
parliamentary group on coronavirus, and the Daily Telegraph's associate editor
Christopher Hope to discuss the revelations. I asked Chris whether he agreed
with Isabel Oakeshott that publishing the messages was in the national interest.
There's no question it is. And I think the fact it's kind of swamped Westminster
with a kind of expenses-style tsunami of news this week is testament to the work
of the Telegraph, where I work, in pulling together and making sense of 100,000
leaked WhatsApp messages from Matt Hancock's mobile phone. It gives you almost
an immediate result of what was in the minds of ministers as they did things in
a way which an email chain wouldn't, and certainly minutes wouldn't. So it gives
you the drama as they fought with this pandemic in real time. Hopefully it may
put some rocket boosters under the pace of this inquiry, because just this week
the PM, Rishi Sunak, was asked, will it report back this year? No answer from
him. And Leila, what do you make of it? Do you think this tells us anything
substantially new about how the government handled the pandemic? There's
certainly public interest, and I think it's of interest to everyone to
understand the mindset of ministers as they were looking at this evidence, as
they were learning on the job about actually some quite complex scientific
concepts. And I think the thing that really sticks in the throat with a lot of
it is the attitude of Matt Hancock in particular, when it became about making
himself look good rather than acting in that public interest. We trusted them at
that stage. I mean, the all-party group on coronavirus set up in the summer
because we recognised there just simply wasn't enough real-time scrutiny going
on. But in those first few months, that didn't exist. And so it gives us a bit
of a glimpse into what they were trying to do and how they were doing it. My
thoughts go out to those bereaved families and indeed anyone who's been affected
by this, because I think they will find that attitude rather callous and rather
cold and self-serving when we just hoped that they were putting the country
first. And it doesn't look like that from those texts, I'm afraid. Chris? Leila,
on that point, of course, you're right. And we were told at the time, weren't
we, how the government was following the science. But in fact, these WhatsApp
messages show how in fact they brought in masks into schools to avoid an
argument with Nicola Sturgeon because they were doing it in Scotland. There was
no good reason for the rule of six, but ministers still backed it. These are the
headlines we're seeing in the Telegraph. And they give some kind of context to
following the science was really a defence mechanism to stop people challenging
what they're up to. In Matt Hancock's defence and others, he says that the
messages have been taken out of context, you know, that there were operational
meetings in between the messages. You're not seeing the full picture. Yeah, we
do need to bear that in mind. And I would agree in terms of the outcome, putting
some rocket boosters under the inquiry is definitely a good thing. But we do
need to see this as one strand in what will have been other briefings, other
evidence that was coming into play. So I don't quite accept that it proves that
they weren't following the science all the time. I think the approach was what I
worried about. But I would say that I think we need to wait and give credence to
the inquiry. It's worth saying in the terms of reference that Baroness Hallett
has said explicitly, they will release interim reports as quickly as they can. I
think the thing that I am concerned about is that all of this stuff, the who
made what decision when and on what basis is only covered in what they're
calling module two, which actually won't start taking evidence until the summer.
They're starting with module one, which is all about preparedness and
resilience, which is fine. I actually wonder if they'd consider bringing some of
those hearings forward so that we can have at the very least the interim report
of that module before the end of the year. Because at the end of the day, we
have an election looming. We see that already political parties are setting out
their stall looking forwards to potentially a 2024 general election. The
electorate need time to digest who did what, how well they did it and on what
basis they did it before they are voting for those same politicians at the next
general election. That's absolutely critical. Chris, do you think it needs to
report before the next election? There's no question that's what Keir Starmer
wants and everyone wants that. Look at other countries. They're getting much
more quickly on the issues there. Of course, I'm not saying that they were not
following the science all the time. It's just that that was used as the blanket
defence on anything. And that's part of the problem. To the point of out of
context taking some of these messages, we are running literally 20 or 30
WhatsApp messages in a line to show the context of what they're saying. We're
trying to look at the whole picture and plot what actually happened. And this is
the nearest we're going to get. I do think though, the way this inquiry is
going, they are apparently redacting names of officials, that kind of thing.
That will be alarming to families who want to see what happened. Another defence
ministers and former ministers might have Chris is that, you know, it was a
really difficult, unprecedented event. You know, they were working in a very
stressful environment making up policy on a move, hadn't dealt with this before.
And I think a lot of people might be sympathetic to that. I think they would.
And at the beginning, everyone was. No one doubted that the lockdowns had to
happen in the beginning. But the later lockdowns are certainly in question. And
certainly the decision, as we saw on the front page on The Telegraph on
Thursday, whether to close or not to close the schools, that battle between
Gavin Williamson and Matt Hancock appeared to be a battle of egos more than
anything else. And one of the ministers, I think, who comes out very well from
this is Helen Wakely, who at the time was a social care minister, is now back in
the Department of Health. I think her gentle prodding, her gentle attempt to
bring these men to heel about how to deal with this problem and look at the
actual evidence, I think, is to her absolute credit. If I may just quickly
defend science, though, because I've got a science background. I was a science
teacher before I was an MP. So I have an interest here. When you say you follow
the science, you can only ever follow the best thrust of the science, given the
information that you've got at the time. And so I would just say when they, I
think you're right, Chris, insofar as they were hiding behind this phrase,
follow the science. And I think they could have been braver with the truth,
which is that very often science has degrees of uncertainty. There are different
paths you can take. And to explain why you were taking of the three paths
available, this is the one we're taking. I think that would have been a better
message. And what we kept hearing from the all party group when we took evidence
was how important trust was in this pandemic, how by building trust with the
electorate, by being honest with them, which let's face it, doesn't always come
necessarily naturally to politicians for the sake of clarity of message, apart
from anything else, that that trust was key to getting people to comply with
what in their view was the best science at the time. The fact that it was
uncertainty is just because it's science and because it was new. We shouldn't
take that as they were hiding anything necessarily. It's the nature of the
beast. Chris, can I ask you about the volume of messages here? We're talking
about 100,000 WhatsApps. Are there any lessons to be drawn here about the
conduct of government, this use of informed routes of communication rather than
the proper channels? It's been worrying, I think, historians certainly for a
while, the informal nature of modern day government. 100,000, that's on one
person's mobile phone. We are assured also that the inquiry, if it asked for
WhatsApp messages from any minister, it will get them. But there's big concern.
Lots of cabinet ministers I speak to, they have this disappearing messages app
on their phone. So their messages that you send to them have then disappeared.
That might suit them in almost like the sea washing over the footprints in the
sand. But where does that leave record keeping and understanding why choices
were made? There should be some way of controlling and making sure these
messages are not deleted. Chris Hope and Leila Moran. Meanwhile, the political
clock is ticking and the next general election looms ever closer. On Thursday,
Sakia Starmer confirmed he wanted to appoint senior civil servant Sue Gray as
his chief of staff. That prompted fury from some conservatives because she led
the investigation into lockdown parties at Downing Street, which contributed to
Boris Johnson's downfall. Riding high in the polls, Labour hopes it can win back
power after languishing in opposition for over 13 years. But the conservatives
are feeling buoyed by Rishi Sunak's Brexit deal and hope they have enough time
to turn things around. On Thursday, Tory MPs took part in an away day to plot
the course ahead. I spoke to two political insiders about how preparations are
going. Olivia Bailey, Keir Starmer's former head of domestic policy, now a
director at Think Tank Public First, and Sebastian Payne, director of centre-
right Think Tank Onward. I asked Seb to explain the process of how a manifesto
is drawn up. Well, on the conservative side of this, we've not had a normal
election cycle since 2015 and the party has done very different ways of
producing manifestos. In 2010, it was a very consensual thing where lots of MPs
were brought in because the Conservative Party was in opposition. In 2015, it
was Joe Johnson, who was then head of the Downing Street Policy Board, who had a
formal process to feed in. In 2017 and 2019, it was small teams of special
advisors and policy experts who essentially sat in a room, people fed into them
and they figured out what was right. For the 2024 election, because we've not
had that normal cycle, we don't quite know how the Sunak government's going to
do it. Olivia, on the Labour side, how will that policy be developed over the
next year and a bit? So, there's the policy development which is led by the
Leader's Office and the front bench and then there's the formal policy-making
structures in the Labour Party. There's something called the National Policy
Forum, which is going to have a big meeting this summer, which will agree a sort
of programme for government, which will be presented to conference. In terms of
the front bench, Keir is obviously setting out his vision at the moment. There's
plenty of policy that has been developed and there's plenty more to come. And of
course, a lot of it will have to come quite close, a lot closer to the election
when we know the situation with the economy. Because the manifesto itself
doesn't come until right at the last minute, is that right? Yeah, it will be
something which we campaign on in the short campaign. Yeah, it's going to be, I
don't know quite what point it will be, but it will come a lot closer to the
election, yeah. Because there's been criticism, as I said, from both parties for
failing to set out enough detail at this stage. But it's that detail that comes
at the end of this process, really. I think we've all become a bit too addicted
to the chaos in Westminster because we're still talking 18 months away from the
next general election. I hate to say this, but we could have a whole other
pandemic before the next election. So I think really where things are now is
just setting out the framework of where things are going. So on the Conservative
side, you've got Rishi Sunak's Five Point Plan. That is what's going to dominate
2023, to set out the fact that there is a competent government that's delivering
on those priorities, that's away from the personality chaos of the last year.
But then I think when we get into 2024, for me, the last moment of when normal
governing will start to end is probably the budget next year. Because at that
point, it will be the last big fiscal moment the government can do things to try
and improve the economic situation. For example, they might take in a penny off
income tax. If you did that, you'd get more money flowing to people's coffers
over the summer, which would tee very nicely into a general election within the
autumn. You expect that to happen, a penny off income tax? I would be very
surprised if there is not something in the budget next year that is very
doorstep sellable. And I think the calculation for this year's budget by the
Chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, is to steady as she goes, keep the economy as it's
going, don't do any major changes. But then next year, hopefully the recovery
has been secured, inflation is way back down towards target, debt is starting to
get into a slightly better place, then you can start spending a bit more.
Olivia, we heard from Seb there about Rishi Sunak's five priorities, but we've
also heard Keir Starmer's five missions. I don't know what it is about the
number five, but there's lots of that going on. But some criticism this week of
Keir Starmer's failure to set out more detail on those five missions, how
they're quite kind of vague ideas at this point. But what would your answer be
to that? I think they are pretty specific. I mean, to be the fastest growing
economy in the G7 is ambitious when we're at the bottom of that table at the
moment. And that is something that the Labour government will be held against.
His pledges on climate are very ambitious. On health, he's got a very ambitious
policy fully costed on mental health, for example. On crime, there's 13,000 more
police officers. These are already policies which are costed. But I think that
what Keir's trying to achieve by setting out the missions is saying that he's
going to be the kind of prime minister who is not interested in short term
fixes, but is interested in long term goals, which he can be measured against to
the electorate, which I think will be a breath of fresh air. And how do you
think the issues compare between the parties, Seb? With five priorities, five
missions, a lot of those issues kind of overlap. At the moment, I think I would
disagree with Olivia about how specific they are that, you know, Keir Starmer
saying he wants to have more growth. Find me an MP in Westminster who doesn't
want to have more growth. It's all about the specifics of how you get there. I
think what Rishi Sunak has set out is essentially, in a way, trying to put him
forward as a bit of a problem solver, a fixer. And I think what we saw with the
Windsor framework on Brexit this week is an example of that. I'm sure small
boats, when we get the package on that, that will be the similar idea as well.
And I think at some point there will need to be that kind of big visionary thing
to quote Tony Blair for Rishi Sunak, because we are getting quite a lot of that
from Keir Starmer. Olivia, when we talk about the ideas, the missions that Keir
Starmer has, do you think Labour needs to do more before the next general
election to sell these ideas? I know everybody harks back to 97, but for
example, tough on crime, tough on the causes of crime. We haven't quite heard
the slogans that are kind of burrowing into people's brains from Labour at this
point. I mean, look, Keir has said very clearly that he is not a sticking
plaster politician and he is not the kind of guy who is going to be governed
like I'm afraid several successive Conservative leaders have been governed by
slogans and soundbites. Slogans are simply about delivering a message to people
who don't know who they are, but they don't listen to Radio 4 on a Saturday
morning and people who only have a tangential relationship with politics. So,
you know, if you think of the slogan in 2019, which was get Brexit done, you
know, Boris Johnson said that relentlessly, remorselessly over and over again.
Is it harder for Rishi Sunak this time round because you talk about the get
Brexit done, take back control messaging of Boris Johnson. It's not quite that
simple this time round for Rishi Sunak, is it? It is going to have to be for the
Conservatives a slight change moment because they've been in power for four
terms, asking for a fifth term. You can't just say keep doing things as they
are. It's going to have to have something new and a bit bolder and it's going to
be harder because Rishi Sunak has obviously never fought a general election
before. So that will be a big test of his political strength. Seb Payne and
Olivia Bailey. That election will be here before you know it. That's it for this
week. Next week in the chair is The Telegraph's Ben Riley-Smith. Emily Ashton
there. The editor of the Week in Westminster was Maddy Trimmer. And for a
lighter take on events over the past seven days, the News Quiz is at half past
twelve. Before that, at midday, it's Moneybox and we can speak now to Felicity
Hanna to hear what's coming up. Hi Felicity. Hi Ron. It is a really tough time
to be a renter. Moneybox has learned that rents are going up, but the number of
rooms being advertised is going down. Some of them have been alright and then
some of them have been like very, very overpriced, like a tiny little shoebox.
Can't even fit any furniture in here. And it's not just rents that are rising.
The cost of food is too. We'll be digging into our shopping baskets to see where
the hikes hit hardest. But could there be a glimmer of hope in this sea of
rising prices? Speculation is growing that the government will extend energy
support for households. So what would that mean for your bills? Moneybox in half
an hour. Felicity, thanks very much. That's just after the midday news. Now on
Radio 4, it's time for From Our Own Correspondent, presented by Kate Adie. Good
morning. Today we hear the story of migrants making the voyage from Libya to
Ravenna on a rescue boat in a week where tragedy struck the coast of Calabria.
The verdict in the trial of a former Mexican government drug czar has shattered
people's faith in the country's ability to tackle the drug cartels. Banana
farmers in Lebanon are having a difficult harvest like many other fruit growers.
We hear how they're trying to adapt. And in Ukraine, amid a reporting assignment
following a Ukrainian soldier and the lives of his two daughters, our
correspondent recalls his own life-threatening incident. First Nigeria elected a
new president this week against a backdrop of voter intimidation and claims of
electoral fraud. Bola Ahmed Tinubu returned the governing All-Progressive
Congress party to power, winning just over 36% of the vote. But although the
wealthy former governor of Lagos defeated his main opponents, Atiku Abubakar and
Peter Obi, he managed to lose control of his home state. Mr. Obi's victory there
was seen as symbolic of how far voters have become disillusioned with the
political class, and a reflection of Nigeria's more galvanised youth vote.
Controversy has now centred around the newly introduced electoral voting
machines, which it was hoped would make the process more transparent and less
vulnerable to manipulation. But as Yemesi Adegoke discovered, this did little to
quell people's concerns, especially among young people. When covering elections
in Nigeria, the rule of thumb is to expect the unexpected. But there are things
you can count on. Delays at polling stations, voting technology fails and voter
intimidation. I've lived in Nigeria for over a decade now, and this is the third
election I've reported on, so when I heard about these things happening again
this time around, I wasn't surprised. Nor was I surprised by the final outcome,
that Bola Ahmed Tinubu, successor to the outgoing president, ended up winning
the election. But I was surprised to hear what Nigeria's youth population were
willing to do to make sure their votes were cast and counted. When election
officials struggled to get to polling booths, voters gave them free rides. When
poor mobile networks prevented those officials from uploading results, voters
shared their hotspots. When delays stretched the process into the evening and
officials complained about the darkness, some young people switched on their car
headlights, full beam, for hours, to help. I went there with the mission to stay
there until the end, said one 30-year-old first-time voter whose picture of her
car lights illuminating a polling booth went viral. I told myself, I don't care
what time I leave. I've seen people's vote not count before. Not this time. She
ended up staying at her polling point until midnight, monitoring the entire
process. One of the defining images of these elections was a video of a young
woman in a blood-splattered t-shirt, her right eye swollen and partially covered
by a crudely applied bandage. Blood was running down her chin as she waited in
line to cast her vote. Thugs had descended on her polling unit and attacked her,
but after receiving treatment at a nearby hospital, she still returned to cast
her vote. I could still walk. I had life in me, she said later. I know my vote
can make a change. It's important I vote. I think it's fair to say that the grit
on display by many young people in these elections was forged two years ago, in
the embers of the NSAR's protests. Those demonstrations shook Nigeria's
establishment to its core and have been credited with waking up young people who
were politically aware but not necessarily engaged. Back then, for close to a
fortnight, peaceful demonstrations took place across the country, calling for an
end to a notorious police unit renowned for harassment, abuse and extrajudicial
killings. The protests came to a bloody end when security operatives shot at
unarmed protesters at the Leki toll gate in Lagos. The shock of the shooting
quickly morphed into anger and wider demands for better governance. The
government disbanded the controversial unit but denied the shootings at the toll
gate took place at all. For many, this incident changed everything. It broke
something in me is the response I've heard multiple times. But it ignited
something too. And with the same fervour that launched and sustained the
protests, young Nigerians decided to push for change through the ballot box,
first by registering to vote in record numbers and educating themselves about
the political process. Then by throwing their weight behind a surprise third
party candidate, Peter Obi and his Labour Party. Since the country's return to
democracy in 1999, elections have always been a two horse race here, and yet
none has been as fiercely contested as this one. Mr. Obi might seem an odd
choice on paper. He's a wealthy businessman like the two other leading
candidates. And up until nine months ago, he was a prominent member of the
leading opposition party, even running for a presidential ticket there during
last year's primaries. But his supporters, known as coconut heads during the
NSAR's protests for their refusal to break easily, now rebranded as Obedience, a
pun on the word obedience and Mr. Obi's name, fell hard for his simple,
unassuming nature and promises of accountability. The president-elect,
Bolotinubu, is nicknamed the Godfather of Lagos, but Obi won the election in
Lagos state. The two major political parties, the All Progressive Congress and
the People's Democratic Party derided the obedience for their supposed naivete.
A common criticism of their campaign was that Mr. Obi lacked the necessary
political structure to attain high office. We are the structure, his supporters
would retort. When the election results were announced, there was disappointment
and anger reminiscent of the protests. But it's clear that this newly galvanised
youth population are undeterred. They're already talking about how to contest
the disputed poll and organising for a next set of gubernatorial elections in a
week's time. Two years ago, the NSAR's movement woke them up and they're still
very much awake. Yemisi Adegoke. The sinking of a migrant boat off the coast of
Calabria, killing at least sixty people, has once again highlighted the dangers
of migrant crossings on the high seas. Migrants from Iran, Somalia, Afghanistan
and Pakistan were on board the vessel, which sank after it crashed against
rocks. Italy's Prime Minister, Giorgia Maloni, who was elected on a manifesto of
stemming the flow of migrants to Italy, expressed her deep sorrow and blamed the
deaths on people traffickers. Her government this year introduced a new law
tightening the rules on rescues in a bid to deter the smugglers. Frey Lindsey
travelled on a rescue boat run by a charity from Libya to Ravenna in Italy and
heard from those on board about what they left behind. It was the day after
Boxing Day and I was standing on the deck of the Ocean Viking. It's a 70 metre
supply ship which had been chartered by a charity called SOS Mediterranean. We
were heading north from just off the shores of Libya, across thousands of miles
of wide open sea to the North Italian port of Ravenna. On board with me were 113
people, most of them from West Africa, including Joseph, a cheerful 16 year old
from Cameroon wearing the hat of his favourite football team, who played game
after game of Ludo on his phone. He was shocked I'd never played and he insisted
on showing me how. I lost every single time. Also on board were half a dozen
children and a few infants, the youngest just three weeks old. The older
children ran around the deck laughing, playing, occasionally fighting. They were
mildly obsessed with singing into my radio microphone. The adults were much more
reserved. While they come from many different countries, these 113 people had
been rescued together by the Ocean Viking while trying to escape Libya, a place
they never want to see again. They told me of the horrors that they experienced
there. Many of them had stories of violence, even torture, and the scars to
match. Extortion was also very common, they said. One teenager told me he'd been
kidnapped by a militia and his family desperately collected the thousand dollars
it took for his ransom. But, he said, not before he had seen other people
murdered in front of him. The women were most wary of speaking. Sexual violence,
rape and transactional sex are very common themes in migrants and refugees'
stories. One word recurred in all of these conversations I had. Hell. But these
113 people had got out. The previous day I'd been woken up at 1am and told a
boat in distress had been spotted in the vast, moonless Mediterranean, just
north of Libya. I threw on a life jacket, helmet, personal protective equipment
and COVID mask and climbed onto one of the rescue power boats. As we neared
their flimsy, black rubber dinghy, we had heard them first. The cries of people
who'd feared they were about to drown, suddenly animated by renewed hope. A few
hundred metres more and suddenly there they were, spread out over every surface
of the boat, its engines sputtering. Very few had shoes on and none had life
jackets. After the rescue, the survivors spent the day resting, most of them
sleeping deeper than they had been able to in a long time. The crew on board
call this the golden hour, reflecting the peace which comes over the relieved
survivors. The Ocean Viking had more than enough room to hold everyone. The
children were free to run around, the adults had the space to walk the deck and
take a moment to themselves. There was even room to dance. Every night as we
sailed towards Italy, the music started, either from speakers or the djembe
drums the crew keep at hand. If this had been happening a few months earlier,
there would have been a lot less room on board. That's because in early January,
the Italian government brought in a law which limits how many people NGO boats
can rescue. The Italian authorities claim the presence of NGO boats only
encourages people to make the perilous crossing, and that ruthless, professional
smugglers, knowing they will be rescued, send them off in the cheapest boats
they can get. Some researchers argue that putting up barriers only forces people
to try more dangerous routes. In 2022, the Ocean Viking rescued around 300
people per mission. Since the law, it's been a third of that. Estimates of how
many people perish trying to cross the Mediterranean are only ever provisional.
You just don't know how vast that sea is until you're out there. There's no way
to know how many people never made it across. Back on board the Ocean Viking on
New Year's Eve, the rescuees prepared to disembark in Ravenna and take their
first steps into Europe. Joseph from Cameroon held onto his phone and a small
bag holding everything he owned. He asked what was going to happen to him, and
if it's always this cold in Europe. Huddled on the deck, the survivors peered
nervously at the massive crowd of policemen, medics and others waiting for them
on shore. Most didn't have a clear idea of what would await them, but they all
agreed on one thing. Whatever happened from that point on, they believed it
would be better than what they had left behind. Frey Lindsey. Earlier this month
saw the conclusion of the trial in New York of Genaro Garcia Luna, the highest
ranking Mexican official to face drug trafficking charges in the United States.
Mr. Garcia Luna had been Mexico's top law enforcement official, and his alleged
involvement with organized crime came as a huge embarrassment to successive
Mexican administrations, and particularly to ex-President Felipe CalderÃ³n, who
appointed Mr. Garcia Luna as the Secretary of Public Security. Mr. CalderÃ³n
denies any wrongdoing. As Will Grant reports, this has been a spectacular fall
from grace for a man Mexicans saw as corrupt but untouchable. In a New York
courtroom, US prosecutor Sarita Comatereri employed some vivid imagery to
describe the illegal cross-border activities of the Sinaloa cartel. "'These guys
are like the FedEx of cocaine,' she exclaimed. "'They use trains, they use
ships, they use containers, they use submarines. They even use the Mexico City
airport,' she said of the group's smuggling operations, which brought tons of
cocaine into the United States each year.' But this wasn't a trial of any of the
Sinaloa cartel's leaders. None of the criminal organization's members were in
the dock. Rather, nine of them, convicted drug traffickers serving jail time in
the US, testified for the prosecution. The man on trial, Genaro Garcia Luna, had
supposedly been leading the battle against them. Between 2006 and 2012, Garcia
Luna was Mexico's public security minister. He was, in effect, the country's
anti-drug czar and the public face of the much-vaunted war on drugs. He was
meant to bring the cartels down, or at least be working towards that aim.
Instead, alleged US prosecutors, Garcia Luna was working with organized crime,
hand in hand with the Sinaloa cartel, taking millions of dollars in bribes to
protect their organization and direct the might of the Mexican state against
their rivals. When I moved to Mexico in 2011, at the tail end of President
Felipe CalderÃ³n's administration, two men stood out in the country's drug war,
mired in one of its most violent periods. The first was the notorious leader of
the Sinaloa cartel, JoaquÃ­n El Chapo GuzmÃ¡n. Today he is Federal Prisoner No.
89914-053, serving life plus 30 years in a supermax high security prison in the
state of Colorado. The other was Genaro Garcia Luna. With his crew-cut hair and
pristine suits, he tried to project an image of Mexico's supercop, the director
of Mexico's equivalent of the FBI. He founded the Federal Police Force in 2009.
It was meant to be a new arm in the fight against organized crime. Yet rumours
about his vast and unexplained wealth wouldn't go away. The mud was beginning to
stick. In court, captured Sinaloa cartel members began to point the finger at
the ex-Security Minister, implicating him in a vast cocaine smuggling
conspiracy. Eventually he was arrested in Dallas in 2019. The two men, El Chapo
and Garcia Luna, the cartel boss and the supercop, were tried in the same
courthouse in Brooklyn. GuzmÃ¡n himself didn't testify in Garcia Luna's trial,
but another former kingpin, JesÃºs el Rey Zambada, the brother of one of the
Sinaloa cartel's founders, did. Zambada said he'd personally delivered $5
million in bribes to Mr. Garcia Luna at a restaurant in Mexico City. Others
testified to making similar payments, which ramped up in price as Mr. Garcia
Luna rose within the chain of political command. They paid the defendant bribes
for protection, said prosecutor Cometha Reddy in her closing argument, and they
got what they paid for. The Sinaloa cartel had created a global cocaine empire,
she said, and couldn't have done so without Mr. Garcia Luna's complicity. Still,
as the jury prepared to consider their verdict, there was the nagging sensation
the case wasn't, as the Americans say, a slam dunk for the US government. No
money, no photos, no videos, no texts, no emails, no records, Mr. Garcia Luna's
defense attorney had said at the end of the trial, repeating a line that he'd
used at the very start. On some level it was true. The prosecution had relied
almost exclusively on witness testimonies, including those of the nine
incarcerated cartel members, or relied on the words of killers, kidnappers,
torturers and fraudsters, some of the most notorious and ruthless criminals in
the history of the world, as Mr. Garcia Luna's defense attorney had
characterized them. When the five men and seven women of the jury retired to
consider the case, there was some optimism in the Garcia Luna camp that things
might go his way. After all, he'd met successive US presidents, been a trusted
confidant of the US Drug Enforcement Administration, held one of the highest
posts in the Mexican government for years. Did he simply know too much, went one
theory in Mexico, to be prosecuted successfully? Would he somehow avoid a US
jail sentence? The answer was a resounding no. Garcia Luna guilty on all
charges, I said, reading the news alert which popped up on my phone. I was in
the region where the drug war began, in the west of Mexico, and where it still
rages today, almost two decades after Mr. Garcia Luna was put in charge of it. I
was having lunch with a priest who'd had two good friends murdered in the drug
war violence during that time. He nodded, slowly digesting this development in a
distant courtroom. An architect of a narco-state, he replied deliberately,
before reaching for the rice. Well Grant, food shortages have been much in the
news in recent weeks. Tomatoes, along with other popular fruit and vegetables,
are in short supply, partly due to bad weather. It's prompted some stores to
limit the purchase of certain foods. Farmers in Lebanon have also had to
navigate changes in climate with a shorter rainy season. Hannah McCarthy met
some banana farmers in central Lebanon who've also been hit hard by the
country's financial crisis. As the fruit has a short shelf life, their crop has
to be sent quickly to wholesalers, but they're often left weeks before being
paid. Now, she says, they're looking to diversify. The sound of the call to
prayer rings in the damp midday air, while our feet squelch on the ground
beneath the banana trees growing on Karim Ossorun's farm. The nearby hives are
quiet. The worker bees, like most people today, are staying inside to avoid the
winter rain that has finally arrived in south Lebanon. Karim's farm lies near
the mouth of the Litani River that flows from the Beqa Valley in central Lebanon
down to the Mediterranean Sea. The farm's closer to the Israeli city of Haifa
than to Beirut. Many decades ago, Karim's family sold their produce in
Palestinian markets. But the hard border imposed when Israel was established in
1948, and the successive conflicts that have followed, put an end to farmers
like Karim selling to their immediate neighbours on the other side. Karim's
family have grown bananas since the 70s. It's an exotic plant that grows well in
the hot Mediterranean climate here, he says. Today, bunches of bananas on trees
are wrapped in blue plastic bags to protect them from the harsh rain and hail.
This helps to avoid the bruising that puts off fickle customers in air-
conditioned supermarkets far away from this rural outpost of south Lebanon. On
rainy days like this one, bananas absorb a lot of moisture and become heavier.
Karim has to make sure to cut down the bunches of swollen fruit before their
branches crack and send part of his farm's revenue stream crashing to the
ground. Farming has always been risky in Lebanon. On average, you have one bad
crop every five years, says Karim, and you don't make enough in the other years
to cover the one bad year. But more recently, that risk has spiralled, with
small farmers caught in the brutal economic crosswinds buffeting Lebanon and
left to fend for themselves by an absent government in Beirut. Despite
increasing levels of hunger in the country, growing bananas is putting many
farmers like Karim out of business. For starters, bananas require large
quantities of water to grow, and climate change has reduced the annual rainy
season in Lebanon. Fifty years ago, the rainy season started in September, and
you had heavy rains until March, says Karim. But now, the rains are starting
later and later, and only lasting two months or so. And in the summer it's
becoming hotter, and we have sandstorms a couple of times per year, which never
happened before. My grandfather didn't water his olive trees, but irrigation is
now 50% of my costs. It's becoming a bigger burden, he says. Before the onset of
Lebanon's financial crisis in 2019, farmers like Karim could buy seeds and
fertilizer on credit from suppliers. Whether they paid in dollars or the local
Lebanese lira didn't really matter, as the exchange rate was fixed. That all
changed when the value of the lira began to tumble. Suddenly you had to pay back
your debt for the year in dollars, says Karim, and if you needed seeds or
fertilizer, you had to pay for that up front in dollars too. It's a losing
battle for farmers who earn their money mostly in lira, a currency that's become
almost worthless over the last three years. Farmers are often in weak bargaining
positions. But the situation is even worse for anyone growing crops with a short
shelf life, such as bananas. Once a bunch of the fruit matures, it needs to be
harvested and sent to the wholesaler within a few days. No matter what the price
is, Karim has to hand over the bananas he spent six months growing and wait two
weeks to be paid. The whole system is rigged, claims Lebanese agricultural
activist Serge Harfouch, so that the maximum profit goes to a few individuals,
and the farmers who do most of the work are left with very little money. After
decades of growing bananas, Karim has begun the slow process of shifting to a
higher margin fruit, avocados. The Dutch government found a gap in the
Netherlands' annual supply of avocados and turned to Lebanon, whose hot climate
can ensure a constant supply. It's not easy to switch, says Karim. Avocado trees
take five years to produce anything. And what if five years later you discover
there's no market for this crop? What do you do, questions Karim. From
experience, he already knows the answer. You're by yourself then. Hannah
McCarthy. And finally, the stories we've followed of people in Ukraine over the
last year include people from all walks of life, from civil engineers to
business people turned soldiers, as well as actors and musicians. Last year, our
correspondent was following the story of one man who decided to enlist in the
army to fight against Russia after witnessing a missile attack. During this
assignment in Sumy in Ukraine's north, Nick Sturdy describes how his own life-
threatening experience in a car accident threw everything around him into sharp
relief. We had been standing by a lake in the June sunshine with Yaroslav Buri,
a 56-year-old member of the Ukrainian Territorial Defence Forces. He was
stationed just outside the town of Sumy, 10 miles from Russia to the north. Sumy
had been one of the towns that the Russians had tried to take at the start of
the war last February, but they'd been beaten back. Yaroslav was hundreds of
miles away from his home in Lviv on the country's western border with Poland. In
camouflage fatigues, Kalashnikov slung over his shoulder, Yaroslav had described
the moment that had made up his mind. It was, he said, the pain and fear in the
tearful eyes of his 80-year-old grandson rushing to a shelter to hide from a
missile attack on Lviv. Better for me to go than young men in their twenties,
with their whole lives in front of them, he said. Yaroslav's daughters have all
their lives in front of them too. Both a violinist in the Ukraine Freedom
Orchestra, talented and driven musicians, we were filming as they prepared to
tour the world to remind audiences of the war. Anna, Yaroslav's younger
daughter, told us she hadn't tried to dissuade her father. Of course I'm worried
about him, she told us, but I'm also proud. Yaroslav clambered into his pick-up
with two other soldiers. We headed off towards Kiev in our armoured minibus,
along the same road that the Russian columns had no doubt planned to advance on
the Ukrainian capital after their expected victory in Sumy. The video I shot on
my phone shows the lush, green meadows and mistletoe-laden trees lining the
clear, peaceful road. Then it kicks into slow motion for some reason, for a long
20 seconds or so, the sound distorts, and then, miraculously, it lurches back
into real time. During the three weeks I lay unconscious in my local hospital in
the UK, my family watched it. They told me they imagined this lurch into
normality was the moment that I survived and clawed back to life. I don't
remember the crash itself, but my colleagues recall the sharp bang and whistle
as the tyre blew out, apparently of its own accord, and the moment our car
careered into the trees, flipping over two or three times. It must have been
terrifying, but thankfully my companions escaped without serious injury.
Something ruptured my spleen, broke my ribs and damaged my spine, possibly my
camera on my seat next to me, and my head took some heavy blows. Judging from
the long vertical dent that you can see in the photos of the crashed car next to
my door, my head may have bashed against my window when we hit something,
probably a tree. That night my spleen was cut out at Poltava Hospital. I was put
on a ventilator, driven to Lviv, where my wife had travelled to accompany me,
then Warsaw. I was flown back to the UK, where doctors found that my brain had
been injured, potentially seriously. I woke up two weeks later and I imagined I
was variously in Moscow, St Petersburg, the south of France, Belfast and
Pyongyang, a drug-resistant infection I picked up in Poltava Hospital flared up
in my spleen area and lungs. But I was extremely fortunate that after a summer
and autumn in hospital, my brain seems to have largely recovered. I feel
fatigue, I think a lot about ageing and death, and have a sense of being
irrevocably separated from everything in the past from before the crash,
including the precious times when our children were small. I experience just
flickers of my old self and want my life fully back. I'm told that's typical of
head injuries and coma cases. I can't travel yet or make films, which is what
I've done for the past 30 years, but I am definitely recovering, however slowly.
But in Ukraine, there's no let-up in the war. The struggle for survival there is
bitter and long. Towns across the country are still hit regularly in missile
strikes, the winter's been cold with energy hubs targeted by the Russian
military, and heavy fighting continues in the east. And how about Yaroslav? His
daughter Anna tells me he's back in Lviv, undergoing rehab after months of
defending his country, which have damaged his back and given him high blood
pressure. But at least he can see his family, and Anna's orchestra has just
played a concert to mark a year since the Russian invasion. We used to wonder
when victory would come, says Anna, but now we just live day by day, knowing
that one day it will be over, and we will be victorious. Nick Sturdy. And that's
all from us today. We'll be back next week with two programmes, Thursday and
Saturday morning. Do join us. From Our Own Correspondent was presented by Kate
Adie and produced by Serena Tarling. Rising Rents are among the topics on
today's Moneybox. Next. BBC Sounds Seven years ago, I was filming East London
Mosque when the story broke. The three schoolgirls from the area had gone
missing. They were heading to Syria to join the Islamic State Group. Breaking
news this morning, three British schoolgirls are reportedly missing. Shamima
Begum was the only one of the girls to emerge from the ashes of the so-called
caliphate. I've retraced her steps from the UK through Turkey and into Syria to
find people who knew her and to investigate the truth of her story. What do you
think people think of you? As a danger, as a risk, as a potential risk. On BBC
Radio 4, The Shamima Show.