TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-22H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Perhaps you're right. Saturday mornings at 10.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. I
mean, get the message. BBC News at nine o'clock. Gary Lineker has vowed to keep
speaking out, despite criticism for using social media to describe the
government's new asylum policy as beyond awful. The BBC says it's having a frank
conversation with its match of the day host about impartiality. But Labour's
former communications chief, Alistair Campbell, who presents a podcast owned by
the presenter's production company, believes he should be allowed a personal
view. I think he's absolutely within his rights. Totally different if he was
presenting the Today programme or he was doing a job covering politics. The idea
that a sports presenter isn't entitled to say what he thinks on Twitter, he does
a tweet and there's this synthetic outrage by Tory MPs. German investigators say
they've searched a ship suspected of transporting explosives used in attacks on
Russia's two Nord Stream gas pipelines last September. US media have quoted
anonymous intelligence officials suggesting a pro-Ukrainian group carried out
the sabotage. Kiev has denied any role. The RMT suspended planned strike action
at Network Rail next week and said its members should decide how to vote on an
updated pay offer. The union's industrial action at a train operating company
represented by the Rail Delivery Group will go ahead. The RMT says it's been
invited to talks but can't accept the group's condition that strikes later this
month are called off. The trial of the nurse Lucy Letby has heard that the
parents of a newborn triplet begged for him to be transferred to a different
hospital after his two brothers died in her care. Miss Letby, who's 33, is
accused of murdering both boys by injecting them with air in June 2016. She's
denied murdering seven babies and attempting to murder ten others while working
as a neonatal nurse at the Countess of Chester Hospital. The former head of a US
drugs company, the Rochester Drug Cooperative, has been jailed for more than two
years for conspiring to illegally distribute highly addictive opioids. There
have been thousands of civil lawsuits in the US opioid scandal but this is the
first criminal case of its kind. BBC News. This is BBC Radio 4. The Media Show
is coming up at half past nine. Tonight they discuss Elon Musk, algorithms and
Garalineka on the subject of the balance between free speech and impartiality.
Now time for our environment show, Costing the Earth. Today Peter Hadfield is in
Southeast Asia in search of the source of the world's prawns. Oh hi, can I order
one ibikatsu, the chicken and prawn donburi and a pad thai. Onion bhaji, two of
the spicy shrimp, ginga tikka masala, pilau rice and the prawn booner please.
Chicken prawn with hoisin sauce, three of the sesame prawn toasts and a bag of
the prawn crackers please. Thank you. Whatever your preference when it comes to
a Saturday night takeaway, Thai, Japanese, Chinese or Indian, there's a pretty
good chance that prawns and shrimp are in there somewhere. The market's worth
Â£50 billion annually and consumption of our favourite crustaceans keeps on
rising. What you probably won't be told by your favourite restaurant is where
those shrimp and prawns come from. 55% of them are raised on farms rather than
fished from the ocean and that really does matter for the environment. We are
sure that some of the species in here will be totally destroyed. I just saw a
monkey passing by. This was the habitat, this was the area where the monkeys
used to live. Now it's completely destroyed. They're just looking through to
find scraps, whatever they can find. They will burn the wood and then they will
clear all the land here. Otherwise they make a pond for the shrimp. There are
global assurance schemes that inspect prawn and shrimp farms to check that
they're being as environmentally friendly as possible, but most of the small-
scale tropical farms don't sign up. Only 5% of farmed shrimp and prawn are sold
with those stamps of quality. That means that most consumers around the world
have absolutely no idea of the impact their dinner is having on the environment.
So we've come over the river and we're looking at just the other side of this
ditch. Just the other side of this ditch is a tangle of dead mangroves that have
been bulldozed. Siti, what have they done here? They're basically opening up a
new shrimp farm. This is going to be a new shrimp farm? And so the next step
will be they will dig this out, make a pond and then put shrimp in there? Yes.
Most kinds of fish farming have a serious impact on the environment. Just like
farmed salmon, the shrimp are fed on ground-up fish and the waste from each farm
has to be disposed of. That often means that antibiotics and other chemicals
pollute groundwater and coastal estuaries. But the most damaging impact of prawn
farms can happen when they're first built. A traditional tropical prawn farm is
created by cutting down mangroves. Mangroves are an incredible habitat for
wildlife as nursery grounds and spawning grounds for many fish species, but
they're also a very crucial habitat for humans. They provide us with trillions
of dollars worth of ecosystem services annually through carbon capture,
fisheries production, coastal stabilisation and we really do need to value them.
David Koenig from the ZSL's Institute of Zoology is an expert on mangrove
forests. That tangle of shoreline vegetation that hugs tropical shores all over
the globe. At Whitsnade Zoo, he gave me a beginner's guide to their mangrove
display. Yep, so we've got some Rhizophora propagules here. This one here in
front of us? Just in front of us right here. So Rhizophora are one of the most
widely distributed species groups within mangroves. Kind of the classic
mangroves you'll see, the ones you see with the large kind of prop roots and
species like these are often cleared to make way for coastal developments, one
of which being fishpond development. Now even as a non-expert, I can see that
the effect of this would be to bind the sediment together and it does stop a lot
of coastal erosion, doesn't it? Absolutely. One of the best ecosystem services
that are provided by mangroves is their ability to absorb wave energy. So in
scenarios where we have tsunamis, etc, mangroves are really that first line of
defense in many coastal systems. So not only can they protect human development,
but they can also stabilize sediments and then that comes onto their second key
ecosystem service they provide, which is carbon capture. So mangroves themselves
can store about four times the amount of carbon that a tropical rainforest can
and the main mechanism behind this is actually the entrapment of sediments
within the root structure. So that is actually where the vast majority of carbon
is stored in mangrove systems. It's in the soil themselves. It's in the sediment
rather than in the wood structure. Now let's get onto prawn farming then. The
destruction of these through prawn farming, how bad is that getting and how bad
has that got? Since about the 1970s, it's estimated we've lost about 35% of
mangrove cover globally and one of the primary drivers of that has been the
establishment of fishponds and prawn ponds and the driver behind it is that
mangroves exist in prime real estate for prawn aquaculture. They get regularly
inundated with seawater. They make for a very good area with which to build a
fishpond. However, they have a very limited lifespan because of the fertilizers,
the pesticides and the feed and the chemicals they need to put in to maintain
them. They only tend to last seven, eight, nine years. So once a pond exceeds
its life expectancy, they simply move and create a new one. So therefore you get
this long kind of creep and gradual erosion of mangrove forests. After seeing
that display at Witsnade Zoo, I'm now confronted on all sides by mangroves in
the wild. Along the banks of the Raja Hitam River, which is on the west side of
Malaya. The sky is blue and it's a rather beautiful day to be going up the
river. So how long have you been living here? Yeah, 80 years. My father also
here. To me as a stranger, this looks beautiful now. Now not beautiful. Yes,
looks can be deceiving because these lines of mangrove trees are just a thin
green curtain hiding a dirty secret behind them. I'm Peter Hadfield and on this
week's Costing the Earth, I'm traveling up the west coast of the Malay
Peninsula, looking at how millions of acres of thick mangroves have given way to
dirty black ponds farming shrimp, also known as prawns, and the consequences
that has for wildlife, for human welfare and for coastal protection. Forty years
ago, when the owner of our boat used to swim in these waters, he tells me the
fish were plentiful, the water was clean and thick mangroves stretched deep into
the interior. So now we're going to go ashore and see what's replaced them. This
is a bit firmer. Yeah. So we're going to see if I can get over this barrier and
get up and see the shrimp farm up close. We're looking over this barrier with
the river behind us. We've just scrambled up the bank. Each of these ponds is
probably about an acre in size, maybe half an acre. And they've got paddle
wheels going at one end to sprinkle water onto the mosquitoes, onto the site in
order to oxygenate it. And the two that we can see here in front of us, there's
another one behind that and another one behind that and some palm oil
plantations to the left. There is a pipe that's going directly from this down
into the river. So although that's not flowing at the moment, there's no doubt
that discharges the waste directly into the river. So we've come over the river
and we're looking at just the other side of this ditch is a tangle of dead
mangroves that have been bulldozed. Siti, what have they done here? They're
basically opening up a new shrimp farm. This is going to be a new shrimp farm?
And so the next step will be they will dig this out, make a pond and then put
shrimp in there? Yes, basically that's what's happened. I think they're doing
work with it. They're doing it right now? Yeah. Are we able to get over there?
Can we go around? Yeah. Can we go around? Yeah. Can we go around? Yeah. Can we
go around? Yeah. Can we go around? Yeah. Can we go around? Yeah. My guides are
with a local NGO called KUASA, which is trying to document and stop the
destruction of mangroves in this area. My name is Smadi Razwan, chairman for
KUASA. Right, which is the local NGO here. You're really fighting against this
mangrove destruction. OK, look, we're standing here in an area where they just
destroyed very recently this mangrove. When was this done? Around three months
before. They already have a shrimp farm there, and then now they plan to make
more big shrimp farm. So there is a shrimp farm already, just the other side of
this, which we can't see. And this is an extension. We've got a beautiful
original mangrove just next door to this disgusting brown muddy field that is
full of dead mango trees. How does that make you feel? Sure, very bad. And also
we are sure that some of the species in here will be totally destroyed. I just
saw a monkey passing by. This was the area where the monkeys used to live. Now
it's completely destroyed. They're just looking through to find scraps, whatever
they can find. They put all of the cut mangrove trees into piles. They're now
dead wood. Will they burn that? We can see they will burn the wood and then they
will clear all the land here. Otherwise they make a pond for the shrimp. There's
another monkey going through there, he goes. Yeah, it's a very sad sight to see
the monkeys looking at the wreckage of their home, isn't it? Yes. Their home has
already been destroyed and it's more critical now. Mangrove areas were once a
rather unloved feature of tropical waters. Shrimp and prawn farming seemed like
a pretty sensible use for this wasteland. All that changed on Boxing Day 2004.
It hits Banda Aceh with the force of 60 hurricanes, destroying everything in its
path. 45 minutes later at 9.30, a 60-foot wave crashes into Thailand. 30 minutes
on, it engulfs the island of Phi Phi. At the same time, on the other side of the
ocean, the wave travelling west hits Sri Lanka. So the tsunami that hit a few
years ago, there were images where you could see this effect of mangroves
absorbing wave energy. Where mangroves weren't present, you had waves
penetrating hundreds of meters inland. But where mangroves are present, they
absorb all that wave energy, they stop it at source and therefore it doesn't
have that same destructive impact. So unfortunately, across most of Southeast
Asia, we've lost large swathes of mangroves and therefore we've lost that
natural coastal defence system. Are local people aware of this? Do they realise
just what the value of these mangroves are where they live? Since the events of
that tsunami, definitely there's been an increase and there is a real want and
desire to not only protect but enhance the mangroves they've got. So definitely,
since that has happened, there's been an increased awareness and kind of
appreciation of these habitats. I'm standing at a dockyard at the estuary of the
Beruas River, looking out across the straits of Malacca towards Sumatra. With me
is Wu Mei Ying, a member of the State Assembly who's been campaigning against
the destruction of mangroves in this area. So what happened here when the 2004
tsunami struck? The waves were very, very high and here is the wave that didn't
directly hit the fisheries. They went inside the river. Oh, it went up the river
too. Yeah, so it just destroyed boats, but the fisheries, the buildings, they
all survived. So this whole part of the mangroves protected the whole fisheries.
So anywhere where you did not have mangroves, they suffered damage from the
tsunami, but where you had the mangroves, they absorbed the tsunami. The wave
did not go through. Yes, there is a direct lesson. The tragedy of 2004 was a
turning point for mangroves in the region. Governments realised their value as a
coastal defence and some shrimp farming companies changed their business model.
Historically, shrimp farming developed in mangrove areas. These are low-lying
coastal areas of relatively cheap or otherwise underused land. And they provided
what was believed to be an ideal opportunity for developing the ponds that
shrimp are grown in. Anton Immink is the CEO of Think Aqua, a charity that works
with small-scale shrimp farmers to reduce the damage they do to their local
environments. When you farm shrimp in mangrove areas, then very often the ponds
are not as productive. And many shrimp farms today are in higher areas where
water is pumped into the ponds from the sea. If you site the ponds above the
high water mark, then you're at less risk of flooding. The soil quality is
actually better and you have a much better chance of managing the water quality
within your ponds more effectively. So we can make an economic case for the
farmers to convert ponds back to mangroves. But in many areas, governments are
also encouraging farmers to do this. We see in Thailand that there's been
regulatory control to remove shrimp farms from mangrove areas. In Vietnam, in
Indonesia, the governments have signed up to international declarations that are
supposed to be protecting mangroves. Changes to industry practices were also
driven by retailers in the UK and the United States. Under pressure from
campaign groups like WWF and Greenpeace, many supermarkets decided to distance
themselves from companies involved in land seizures, modern slavery and mangrove
destruction. When you buy shrimp in a supermarket in the UK, you can be pretty
confident that the product that you're getting will come from a farm where
mangroves haven't been damaged. But it's less easy to know in a restaurant
whether those shrimp all come from areas where mangroves haven't been damaged.
We can always ask the restaurant where they source their shrimp from, but many
of them don't have the detailed information that we need to really understand
where those shrimp have come from. While mangrove destruction continues in the
areas I visited, on a global scale, the movement to protect them has made most
remaining mangroves a little safer. But what about the trail of destruction that
the industry left in its wake as it spread around the tropics? Anton's charity,
Think Aqua, is just one of the conservation groups advising local people on the
post-shrimp clean-up. Rejuvenating old shrimp ponds is a relatively
straightforward process technically. When you farm shrimp, you end up with silt
very often in the bottom of ponds, and if the ponds are still quite natural and
originally dug into the mangrove sediment, then you can plant new mangrove
seedlings. And there are local NGOs in many of the countries that we're working
who are actively growing mangrove seedlings and looking to plant them in old
shrimp ponds and other coastal areas. Near the town of Barit Puntar, the Penang
Inshore Fishermen's Association has set up a mangrove restoration area to bring
back the spawning grounds of fish that once thrived along this coastline. This
one is a national arm. Starting from that side, here, 33,000. 33,000 mangroves
you've planted. So we planted in year 2000. Now the age is 22 years. And they've
grown up very well. They're looking very healthy. You're happy with these ones?
Yeah. My name is Suhaiza. Actually, I assist the FIFO when they have the
programme. FIFO is Penang Inshore Fishermen Welfare Association. How many
species do you have in here? Actually, we have 50 species of mangrove, but in
here we have 31 species. 13. At the moment, the water level is down and the
roots of these mangroves are exposed. This one is the rhizophora. Does this give
fruit, this one? Yeah. It looks like a string bean hanging down. So when it
drops, it drops directly into the mud and then just grows. But if it falls
sideways, no good. So it has to fall. It's very pointed, sharp at the bottom
end, and that goes straight through into the mud. So you see our nursery, we
make sure they're all like that. You have to make sure you plant them the right
way. To make sure that they will grow. Right. At the Rajahitam River further
south, Wu Mei Ying of the State Assembly showed me another area that's been
replanted. And what's happened to the mangrove on the side here? In 2018, there
was a group of people who wanted to apply for this land for shrimp farming. And
they just made application to the authority, never get approval, but they start
to destroy. They start destroying it anyway. Yes. They considered that I already
applied, the land belongs to me. Even though they never get any black and white,
they say authority already approved with them. So even though they won't give
approval, the company still goes ahead and destroys the mangrove. Yes. During
that time, the police came and took the people away. There are some mangroves
trying to regrow. Have these been planted or is that natural? Yes, with the
effort by Kwasa and I joined together with them. We plant here for two times. We
planted how many? Three thousand over. Three thousand? Wow. All along this
riverbank here. Yes. Mainly for this area. So these are now growing up in
between the dead logs of the old trees that they've cut. Eventually, will this
mangrove regrow, do you think? We hope so. Oh, there's some fish down there.
There was a fish just jumping. So there are fish in here. The problem isn't a
lack of will or effort. Local people really want their mangroves back. The
problem, as I discovered, is that these muddy estuaries are a battlefield
between environmentalists who want to reclaim land for mangroves and the shrimp
farming companies who see a need for more shrimp farms. Nor is Madhya Razaan of
the local conservation group Kwasa showed me what can happen. This area was an
area of mudflat and you started planting mangroves here. How many trees did you
plant? Seven thousand. Seven thousand? Yeah, with the local community. That must
have taken an awful lot of work. Yes, we take two, three months to finish it.
And then suddenly the local villagersâ¦ We plant about two months, then we get to
know that they're demolishing our mangroves that we just planted. So this strip
in front of us, about 50 metres wide and about a kilometre long, they have dug
this out and destroyed all the mangroves you planted. How did you feel when you
saw that? We cannotâ¦ One of the villagers, she cried. Oh no. Because it's not
easy to plant the mangroves. Very, very angry, very upset. And then we decided
to plant here because of the community request. They want to repair. Oh, repair.
Yeah, something to repair. Right, yeah. And when you're planting this, you have
to go in up to your knees in mud. Yes. And I mean, it's difficult work, hot
work. Yeah, and also on the hot weather. Yeah. You can feel now. Like it is now,
very, very hot. What will happen now? Can you replant? Because this land now
belongs to the government agency, right? Yes, SADC. And they are planning to
make the prawn, the shrimp pond, so they will proceed whatever theyâ¦ Some state
governments in Malaysia are protecting some mangrove areas, especially as
buffers against tsunami. The national government says it wants to strike a
balance between the environment and the economy. The prawn industry, after all,
is a huge employer. But it comes at the expense of another local industry,
fishing. We are in Kampung Baru, the nearest fisherman jetty from Kampung Aceh.
And we're going to talk to some fishermen here. And Siti here is going to
translate for me. How long has he been fishing? I'm 17 years old, now I'm 40. He
started fishing when he was 17. Now he's 40. What does he think about them
cutting down the mangrove to make the shrimp farm? The prawns are all cut up,
cut up into pieces. He thinks because of the shrimp farm, there's this one
species ofâ¦ Bandeka. Bandeka. OK. It's gone now. It's gone. It's gone
completely. It's really hard to find. What does he think is the reason? The
shrimp farm is basically dumping all the chemical waste water into the sea. So
maybe that's why. Have the fishermen here been protesting against that? No, they
don't want to cause trouble. Why? He feels there's nothing that can be done. Who
says you can't do it? They did last time, but they gave up. Oh, they've given
up. Here's another sluice pipe. And this is absolutely filthy black water, man.
Yes, you can see it's totally black and directly to the river. Just coming
straight out of one of the shrimp ponds. So I'm going between the mangrove area
and the ditch. On one side, there's a sluice pumping waste water out of the
shrimp ponds. And it's going into this muddy ditch filled with green algae. And
on the other side is a mangrove that's been torn down. Now I have to admit that
as someone who loves sailing, mangroves have always been a bit of a nuisance. So
it takes a lot to learn to love a tangle of roots and spikes planted in mud. But
even if you just see mangroves as an area or a swamp, and you don't appreciate
their value as a carbon sink or a spawning ground for fish, or protection from
tsunami, or a filtering system for water, even if you undervalue all of that,
you just have to look at the alternative, which I'm standing in front of, a
fetid yellow and black ponds of scum that are the leftovers of shrimp farms.
Just down the road, I met a local resident called Ismail. So how close is your
house? It's about five kilometers from here. Okay. What do you think about all
of this development? I mean, not just here, but the ponds over there?
Personally, I think it's very annoying for me because it's harming the
environment. Basically, it's giving a hard time for the fishermen here. So
basically, they don't have any source of income because of this shrimp farm. Is
it good for the economy, though, do you think? Directly, I don't think so,
because basically what I know, all these prawns or shrimp, they're exported
outside. And doesn't that help Malaysia? I mean, exports? For the locals, no,
no. If they say they can provide jobs, they didn't hire locals. They hire
outsiders. Actually, we don't mind if they want to make some money, but please
take care of our environment. Casting the Earth was presented by Peter Hadfield.
The producer was Alistair Cross. The media show is coming up next. Then at 10
o'clock, we'll have The World Tonight with Razia Iqbal, who joins us now. Good
evening, Razia. Good evening, Neil. On the programme Georgia, caught between
Russia and the West, what could the determined protesters in the streets of the
capital, Tbilisi, achieve? Their aim is to get rid of a proposed law that they
say is based on a Russian one, which has all but destroyed civil society there.
We'll hear from a young protester and bring you full analysis. We also speak to
a German politician about the latest details brought to light in the German
investigation into the explosions which damaged the Nord Stream pipelines that
carry Russian natural gas to Germany. And we hear from a former chief inspector
of borders and immigration on the government's new illegal immigration bill.
We'll hear from him in half an hour. Many thanks, Razia Iqbal. Now on BBC Radio
4, here's Ros Atkins with The Media Show. Hello and welcome. Well, today we'll
look at how Elon Musk picked a Twitter fight with a sacked employee and then
ended up saying sorry. We'll talk to Cara Swisher on that. We'll also look at
algorithms. They play a huge part in deciding what media content we all consume.
But how do content producers factor that into what they make when so little is
known about what these algorithms are doing? And we need to talk about Gary
Lineker. The BBC says it's having a frank conversation with him after he tweeted
about the language setting out the government's new plan for small boats
crossing the channel and said it was not dissimilar to that used by Germany in
the 30s. We're told by the BBC that Gary Lineker has been spoken to about his
responsibilities. Well, let's bring in Roger Mosey, former head of BBC TV News,
former head of BBC Sport, now Master of Cell and College at Cambridge
University. Hi, Roger. Thanks for coming back onto The Media Show. What would
you do about Gary Lineker? Well, I think what we now have is fundamentally
incompatible positions. So the BBC says it has its editorial guidelines. And Tim
Davies said if you want to be a social media campaigner, fine, but you can't
work for the BBC. And you then have Gary Lineker saying it's about freedom of
speech and he's someone I very much like and respect. But at the moment, he
doesn't seem to be willing to tailor his views to what the BBC thinks its
guidelines are. So I think this is something of a car crash, I'm afraid. And if
it's that, if you were director general, what would you do about it? Well, I
think it's an incompatible couple of positions. I mean, one thing the BBC could
do is say, actually, Gary Lineker, for various reasons, that he's a national
figure, for historical reasons around his contract, he is outside our editorial
guidelines. And he alone can differ from the BBC policy. It's something you
could do. I don't think it's ideal. Or if you say you have to live by the
editorial policies. The problem is the BBC has been a bit weak and wobbly about
this for the last sort of five or six years, in that it's been pretty obvious
that Gary isn't really complying with the letter of the law of the BBC
guidelines. The BBC has upheld complaints against him and fretted about it all
the time. And it's sort of pretended that it's all right. But a lot of people
have felt it's not. And there have been people in BBC Sport and BBC News who
say, well, if I said that, I'd get fired. And they're right, really. So it's
very hard to have that outlier of Gary Lineker. Well, as you allude to, Roger,
the issue of Gary Lineker tweeting on political subjects has come up before. In
fact, it came up when he and I spoke for the media show in 2021. And this is
what he told me. I don't really tweet much about politics, a little bit. I'm
interested in politics, but I don't, you know, I try to be sensible. I think
that's that's why I try to be. And I think I don't know. I've never had any
phone calls from. Tim Davie, when he came in, didn't. I've had two or three
conversations with Tim Davie since he's been in. But he didn't mention
impartiality. He's never called me up and said, you can't tweet about that or
you can't tweet about this. But when you met him, did he did he talk to you? I
don't think they could do that anyway. I mean, I'm my own person. Well, that was
2021. And today, Gary Lineker has not taken this tweet down. He hasn't
apologised and he's tweeted that he'll continue to try and speak up for those
poor souls that have no voice. An apparent reference to those on the small
boats, all of which has given the BBC plenty to think about. Not as Roger was
saying for the first time. And Gary Lineker's opinions came up in a
parliamentary select committee in September last year when MPs asked the BBC's
director general, Tim Davie, about this. Gary and I have had a conversation that
says, and I think it's a massive improvement to where he was a few years ago in
terms of his entry into party politics. I think that banning people completely
from getting to any issues based tweeting is probably the wrong position to do.
But there's a standard there. We talk about it. I'm very supportive of him.
Well, that was Tim Davie last September. This is Tim Davie today being
doorstepped by a BBC journalist. I haven't spoken to him, but... What would you
be saying to him? I wouldn't reveal anything in terms of... I think it's totally
appropriate that we speak privately to members of the team. How many strikes
will someone like Gary Lineker get writing on social media? Well, again, I
wouldn't talk specifically about individuals. It's been a couple of times though
now, hasn't it? I don't think it's right. I think the BBC absolutely puts the
highest value on impartiality and that's clearly important to us. Thanks very
much. The BBC has also sent the media show this statement saying, But, Roger
Mosey, isn't the problem here that while for news journalists the rules are
very, very clear on what can and can't be said, it's not quite as clear for
people who work for the BBC, in particular in a freelance capacity, who are
outside the news division? Well, let me say I like and respect Gary Lineker very
much and many people listening to this programme will think actually they agree
with him on quite a lot. And so do I. I think the problem is if you imagine that
it was somebody tweeting the opposite, if they were saying Suleila Brabham is
right and refugees should be turned back and actually, you know what, Brexit is
working, I think people would find that difficult coming from a BBC presenter
paid by the licence fee. And the fact is that if you take Â£1.4 million a year
from licence fee payers, there are some obligations on you to keep your views
more private. And I think there are ways of doing it. If you do want to dance on
the hair of a pin, if Gary had tweeted, I support refugees and refugees should
be treated humanely, that might have been OK. The problem is once you start
attacking Suleila Brabham and then the reference to Nazi Germany in the 1930s
comes in at some subsequent point, it's very hard indeed to see how that fits
with BBC guidelines on being impartial on current politics as a BBC presenter.
And as you're unpacking for us, this isn't just a media story, it's a political
story as well. Here in the Media Show studio with me is Alva Ray, host of
Politico's Westminster Insider podcast. And in a week, Alva, that the government
and Rishi Sunak wanted to talk about small boats, this story, I guess, gives
additional momentum to that. Yeah, I think so. Absolutely. I mean, I think
there's probably a feeling in number 10 that they were quite happy with the
front pages this morning. Pretty much an equal division of people announcing the
small boats policy itself in quite positive terms, the Times and the Express
sort of saying that Rishi Sunak was laying down the law, being clear, we decide
who comes here. And then some other papers leading on the Gary Lineker story,
but sort of suggesting that maybe he should be sacked from his role. So I think
that they they've been kind of happy with with this with the spin on it so far.
And Sweller Bramberman alluded to Gary Lineker on BBC Breakfast earlier. Her
appearance, all appearances by ministers will be controlled by the number 10
comms operation, communications operation. Help us understand how that's running
at the moment. Well, it's very interesting. So because this is a media show and
we can get into it a bit more, the person behind all of this is a woman called
Amber de Botton, who used to be the head of home news at ITV, which is a sort of
abstract title. But really, she was one of the most senior people, one of the
people behind all the Partygate stories. Really well known around Westminster,
really well regarded. Politicians have tried to poach her before unsuccessfully
to run their comms. But she finally made the move into number 10 to help Rishi
Sunak, having essentially brought down Boris Johnson with her own journalism. So
she's really highly regarded. Lots of people know her really well. Someone like
Beth Rigby or Robert Peston, who you see on TV, would have a really close
personal relationship with her from working with her before. And really, she's
come in and has brought in a number of changes. But I think the main one, which
listeners might have noticed, is really kind of trying to slow down the news
agenda. I think basically they've done some polling, which suggests that people
are sick of hearing about politics, don't want to have this sense of chaos that
we've had for really the past few years. And so they've made this decision not
to put ministers up on the morning broadcast rounds every morning, basically to
slow down the news agenda. And they really feel that's working. And how do you
judge her and Rishi Sunak's approach to the BBC? Because some of their
predecessors have made no secret of their hostility towards the BBC on certain
issues. Well, I think they're clearly leaning in to this division over Gary
Lineker and thinking that maybe that can expose a bit of a dividing line between
themselves and Labour. Also, I suppose Amber de Botton is not a BBC person, even
though she's a media person. She was an ICB and a Sky person. I think that comes
through in some small choices around who's given an interview and so on. And
Roger, if I can bring you back in here, another dimension that's awkward for the
BBC here is that it doesn't want to be on one side of an argument, as Alva's
just been describing with reference to this small boat story. It doesn't want to
be having one of its main stars seen as being on one side or the other. No, I
think that's right. And I think the difficulties of the BBC is that the people
lining up to say Lineker must be sacked are not people that they would
instinctively agree with, nor would I. Unfortunately, they do have some argument
about impartiality in the BBC, which the BBC has to take seriously. And
impartiality is difficult because, again, I sympathise very greatly with Emily
Maitlis for her views on the Dominic Cummings thing. But to me, the script
wasn't right. It wasn't quite as impartial as it should be. And therefore, the
BBC's complaints process sometimes has to call that out. And people then say,
oh, it's a Tory plot. It's not really. It's just that you will always get
political pressures. The BBC has to do the right and independent thing. And if
it's going to be right and independent, it needs to show it's thoroughly
impartial. OK, Roger. Thank you very much indeed. That's Roger Mosey. Thanks to
Alva Ray, who you can listen to on Politico's Westminster Insider podcast.
Thanks for coming in, Alva. Well, next on the media show, we're going to talk
about algorithms. We've all become familiar with how algorithms shape the
content that we're offered on social media and on video and audio streaming
services, too. And this relationship between algorithm, the people who make the
content and all of us, the consumers, is fundamental to all of our media
experiences. Put bluntly, the algorithms shape what media we see. And yet
there's quite a lot we don't know about how they work. It's often far from clear
what the rules of the game are, both for the consumer and for the content
creator. Let's bring in three people who can help us with this, beginning with
Cara Swisher, journalist, host of a couple of hit podcasts, on with Cara Swisher
and Pivot. Cara, great to have you back on the media show. Thanks for your time.
Thank you. Does it seem strange to you, as someone who's followed tech for many
years, that this vital element of the media equation, the algorithm, is not
brilliantly understood either by a consumer or creator? No, it doesn't. I think
that they've tried to make it their secret sauce, as if they're like a Kentucky
fried chicken, what's in it kind of thing. But these things determine a lot of
how we behave and what influences us and everything else. And so it's really
important to have transparency around these algorithms and how it's working.
They, of course, again, as I said, they try to protect them vehemently, but they
do have an impact socially, they have an impact politically and everything else.
And we don't know what they're doing with our data. And so it's very important
to understand how these algorithms are working and make them available to
consumers so they do understand how they're being manipulated. Let's bring in
someone who knows them very well. Noah John Syracuse is Associate Professor of
Mathematics at Bentley University in the States. Professor John Syracuse, you're
an expert on media algorithms. Do you think those behind them understand their
power? Yeah. I mean, I think one interesting dynamic with these algorithms is
that, as Cara mentioned, there's a lot of complexity and mystery around them.
But at the heart, there's really just kind of a simple math formula that
explains them. And this was what struck me the most. I actually started in
theoretical math and then moved into this more social media algorithm stuff. And
the thing that leapt out is there's basically the same formula that drives
Facebook's algorithm, Instagram, Twitter, and TikTok, even though they're very
different platforms. And the basic idea â you don't need much math background â
is the algorithm uses artificial intelligence to predict what kinds of actions
you're going to do on each post. If you're going to like it, retweet it, share
it, comment on it. And behind the scenes, the engineers assign a certain number
of points to each of these actions. We know a lot about these points for
Facebook because of the whistleblower leak, Francis Haugen. A like was one
point, a comment was 30 points. But other than that leak, we don't know what
these point values are. So for TikTok, we don't know how many points it is to
comment versus watch a video. But there's really just this formula that tries to
see how many points do we think each of these posts or videos will earn from
each user. And whatever post earns the most points is what it'll show us first.
So the system may be â So it's a simple idea. So it's a simple idea, but of
course not simple to know the values being assigned. Let's also bring in Katie
Leeson, managing director of â former managing director of Social Chain, which
is a social media marketing and tech company. And Katie, you've recently become
CEO of the media division at Gary Neville's Relentless Group. And it sounds like
someone in your job has to spend your time trying to second guess what the
algorithm's doing. Yeah, and it changes all the time as well. That's the thing.
It's very unpredictable. What they're all doing is watching each other and then
changing the algorithms effectively, because ultimately the main thing is each
platform wants you to stay on there as long as possible. So they will change it,
watch what the others are doing, and then mirror it. So a lot of time when it
comes to marketing on social is spent trying to understand how to hack the
algorithm, so to speak. But that's interesting. They want you to stay, but at
the same time, they're keeping you guessing. They want you to stay. It's where
they make their advertising money. The longer you're on platform, the more
likely they are to be able to serve you the ads, which is the thing that drives
the revenue for the platforms. Yeah, but they don't tell you what it is that's
going to keep you there. You just get served content that they think or the
computer thinks you're interested in. And Cara, tell me about conversations
you've had or you've listened in to when media content creators of all sorts,
from big operations like international media organizations right down to
individuals, say, come on, tell us more, help us know the rules of the game.
Well, they don't want to tell you. They don't want to tell you because that's
how they manipulate and make their business. You know, to quote a famous media
mogul, Rupert Murdoch, it's not red or blue, it's green. It's about money and
making money. He was talking, obviously, about the lies that Fox News has been
telling around January 6th and more in election denial. But it's really
important to understand that we as a society have, it's as if advertisers were
allowed to do anything at all to manipulate people on radio or television. This
was not allowed. There are rules around advertising all over the world, a lot of
them in the United States, too. And in this case, there's no rules of what
they're doing to entice you. As AI becomes ever more powerful, it gets even
worse because they used to be able to send a million different messages to a
million different people. Now they can just do it endlessly and in ways that
make you feel like you have a relationship with these algorithms. And so bearing
that in mind, Noah, do you think there should be some greater form of
transparency so that anyone who's creating content, who's placing it on these
big platforms, understands the system that they're about to take part in? Yeah,
and I think this is where the shady business aspect comes in. The tech companies
try to hide behind this veil of corporate secrecy that we have proprietary
algorithms. We did all this research. We're entitled to this intellectual
property. But there's so much more they could reveal about the algorithm that
would help us as users have better experiences, help content producers. Just to
give an example, as I mentioned, this basic math formula, they try to predict
what things you'll comment on and like and do these various forms of engagement.
I think they should tell us what types of data they're using to make these
predictions. My gender, my age, my friends on Facebook, if I'm on YouTube, are
they using my Google search history? Even if they don't tell us the secret sauce
recipe of how they make these predictions, the fancy AI that they developed,
just telling us the basic ingredients, what goes into that prediction, I think
that would be fair game. It wouldn't give their competitors a leg up and it
would really help us know what they're listening to and what they're using to
manipulate us. And so that's the look at the equation from the perspective of
content creator. But, Katie, what about the consumer? Do you think there's an
appetite from people to understand better why they're being served up what
they're being served? Or do you think actually on the whole, people will go
along with however the algorithm is working? I think there's two sides to it.
There's one where you're actually getting served things that you want to watch.
But unfortunately, because the algorithm is a machine, there is a risk with it
as well. And one of my big things is young people not understanding that they're
getting served things that they've watched. So they're getting if they're
watching something dangerous to them, the algorithm doesn't know whether that's
good or bad. They'll get served more of that and then they're trapped in this
loop. And that is really a problem for me. But on the other side of it, you can
look at it in a way where it's very tailored to you and you're getting served
things that is actually very relevant. So say you're into golf and you consume a
lot of golf content, you'll get served more of that, which will keep you in
there longer. But you're right. It's very tricky because we don't know what it
is that is making that algorithm work. And people are very naive to it as well
and the dangers that it can also bring. And I'm struck listening to all three of
you, how much power these platforms have because they're keeping people
guessing, but people are keeping coming back. But Cara, we've talked before on
the media show about Twitter and Elon Musk taking over. And it's been striking
on that platform how you see people every day complaining. I used to do this and
it did well on Twitter and now it's not happening. And I just have no idea why.
Do you think there's a risk with some platforms that people in the end will get
sick of that experience? Yeah, I mean, a bad product is a bad product. Let me
just add one thing. The two things that are critical here is enragement equals
engagement. And so that's why they want to keep you there. That's one part
that's really important. So the constant knowing of what upsets or it's like
being at a casino, essentially, with the machines. They know which cherry makes
you want to push the button over and over again. The second thing is the
addictive nature of it is the problem, right? Because if you do algorithms
right, you get very addicted. It's not unlike cigarettes. It's not unlike a lot
of things that are addictive. And so it works on our, it goes, crawls down our
brainstem and makes us want to click more. That's the segment with Twitter. A
bad product is a bad product. And the product's getting worse because Elon Musk
fired everybody and can't make changes to the platform or else it collapses. And
so that's going to be a problem. The problem is a lot of people are very
addicted to Twitter and they like the enragement. That's really what's the game
there right now. The good thing is Twitter is real small. I know it isn't to the
media and I know it isn't to politicians, but it's a really small and small
footprint in the world. It has an influential and loud one, and it's also a
terrible, terrible business and has been for most of its life. And I've got a
couple more questions for you about Elon Musk and Twitter, which we'll get to in
a couple of minutes. But Katie, before I let you go, I just want an insight into
how you and your colleagues work and how you used to work at Social Chain as
well. Will you sit down each day at the beginning of the day with the range of
content you might want to put out there and try and work out, try and pick out
the trends of how the algorithm's working that day? Or is that to overstate it?
No, not at all. That's exactly what we did. We had teams of people who were just
constantly looking at what was working and what types of content, for example,
now at the minute, Instagram is preferring people to really learn something from
the content that's on there. So saving of content and sharing it and commenting
it is really high value. So we had people who literally sat there all the time
to understand what was going on on each platform, how to make the most out of it
for the content we were creating for our clients. And so that's quite different
from the more traditional background which you started your career in. Yeah,
very much so. Just buying an ad in a magazine or a newspaper was fairly easy in
comparison. You knew what you were getting. Yeah. I can imagine. And just
before, Katie, thank you. And Noah, before I let you go, too, in terms of the
algorithm, is this something where there's a big policy shift every few months
or is this something that's constantly evolving for the platforms? There's macro
changes that are maybe once a year, every few months, where they really revamp
something substantially. But they're constantly running these experiments,
thousands of experiments every day all the time. If you know medical studies,
the best way to do a medical study is these randomized controlled trials where
they split people into placebo and treatment groups. Well, they have all the
users, they have all the data, they can run endless number of experiments. So
that's what they do nonstop. And they use that data to tweak their product, to
tweak their algorithm, to do as Kara said, to keep people as addicted as
possible. So it's a tremendous data supply and they leverage it as much as they
can. So there is an insight into the core, really, of the media experience,
certainly through the big tech platforms. Thank you very much to Noah, John
Siracusa from Bentley University. Thanks to Katie Leeson as well from the
Relentless Group. Kara, you're staying with me just a couple minutes longer
because we've got to talk about yet another argument that Elon Musk has had on
Twitter. This time it was a Twitter employee who tweeted that he wasn't sure if
he'd been sacked or not. Musk replied, made a number of disparaging comments,
including about this man's health. It then turned out the man had been sacked.
He also revealed that he has muscular dystrophy. And then after a while, Elon
Musk apologized again. With any other CEO, this would be just extraordinary. But
somehow this isn't particularly surprising. Well, he's a troll. I don't know
what to say. He was wrong, as usual. You know, he's frequently wrong, but never
in doubt. Most of the time, it's an expression we use here in the US. And so he
attacked someone relentlessly and quite cruelly. This man has muscular
dystrophy, a terrifically regarded technologist and entrepreneur. Didn't know
what he was talking about, as usual, and then realized he possibly had a lawsuit
on his hands, given what he was saying. With lack of information. I had bad
information. Give me a break. He's twitchy. He's id. He tweets whatever he wants
and he doesn't check. And there's no consequences for this behavior. And that's
gone on for years and years and years. And how does that saga play into what
you're hearing more broadly about the culture within Twitter and the efforts
that Elon Musk is making to change it as a business and a product? Well, it's
not doing well. It never does well. It's not a new and fresh thing for Twitter.
But, you know, he's making it worse. We'll see if he can cut to the bone to
create a cash flow positive situation. If it's cash flow positive, that's great.
It's been that before. But he's managed to make it worse and he's made it into
sort of a free for all. It's you know, he's, of course, bragging about what he's
doing and blaming the previous administration for all the problems that he
himself is causing. That's typical of a of a badly raised 10 year old. And so so
I think that we'll see what happens with it. Maybe he'll make something out of
it. He'll probably try to take it public again and make some money and get back
the overpayment he made, the 44 billion dollars by, you know, selling it to the
next sucker down the street. And we'll see where it goes. And just for those
listening who didn't follow this, this exchange, this is just one of the things
that Elon Musk said. He said, the reality is that this guy who's independently
wealthy did no actual work, claimed as his excuse that he has a disability that
prevented him from typing, yet will simultaneously tweeting up a storm. Can't
say I have a lot of respect for that. That was a tweet. Since then, we have an
apology. I would like to apologize to Hali for my misunderstanding of his
situation. It was based on things I was told that were untrue or in some cases
true, but not meaningful. He is considering remaining at Twitter. Now, my
question for you here, Cara, is as we see Elon Musk behaving like this, is this
different to the same Elon Musk who you've reported on for years? Yes. I mean,
there was shades of this. He's always trying to dunk and do things like this. He
had that about 10 percent of his personality. He seemed to have curdled into
some sort of weird right wing trope. I don't know. Probably a lawyer got to him
and said, he now has a terrific case to sue you. And then he tried to walk it
back. It's always in his self-interest. So that's probably why he did it here.
He never apologizes unless there's some risk to him financially. And obviously,
we get one view of Twitter through and Elon Musk through the headlines that he
generates. But in terms of the products, the media product, in this case, the
Twitter product, can we say that it's fundamentally shifted because of him being
in charge beyond the headlines? No, he hasn't done anything. There's nothing
new. He can't launch anything. He's not been able to launch Twitter Blue. And by
the way, all of his ideas were things that Twitter was working on. So he's
probably pulling things out of the cupboard. Nothing fresh and new has happened
here on this platform. It's just gotten to be a worse experience. Now, a lot of
people are addicted to it, so they'll use it. But, you know, we'll see what
happens. He's not improved it by for sure. And, you know, he should probably go
back to cars and rockets where he actually has some expertise and actually makes
great products. And by the way, Tesla's under siege because lots of car
companies are catching up, not totally yet because he's ahead in manufacturing
and technology. But they will. There's so many good cars out there now and at
affordable prices. And meanwhile, there was just a new report that steering
wheels fall off of Tesla's. So he's got to focus on the stuff he's good at, like
cars and the rockets and everything else. That's my feeling. But he seems to
want to troll all day long and thinks that's the best use of his considerable
brain. Just before I let you go, Cara, just two quick questions. Last time we
spoke, you said he'd stop replying to messages from you a little while back.
Have you heard from him since? No, he called me an asshole and I feel like I
don't want to talk to someone who emails me. Right. So that was that. Yeah, he
did it before a couple of years ago. So we'll see. And finally, we were talking
about algorithms. You've got two very successful podcasts. Do you rely on
algorithms to generate some of that success? Do you feel exposed? No, no, no. We
rely on doing great storytelling and great journalism. That's what we rely on.
It's really hard. I was trying to Facebook tried to drag me into their their one
of their news tests many years ago. And I thought, how does this help me? No, I
didn't do it. I was like, it's a waste of my time. I don't know if there's any
efficacy. So lovely to have you on. Cara, thank you very much indeed. That's
Cara Swisher. Thanks to Roger Mosey, Alva Ray, Noah John Siracusa and Katie
Leeson. We'll be back at the usual time next week. Bye bye. The media show was
presented by Ross Atkins. The producer was Helen Fitz Henry. The World Tonight
is coming up shortly. Then in tonight's episode of our book at bedtime. Months
after Zanobi is sentenced in absentia for sheep theft, his boss is found dead.
That's in The Advocate by Marcello Foyce. It continues at a quarter to eleven.
Now, though, let's take a look at the weather tonight. The South will see sleet
and snow gradually ease to a few isolated showers. Western areas will see a band
of rain, sleet and snow move in towards dawn. Northern areas will have clear
spells with snow showers in northern Scotland and near North Sea coasts. Now,
tomorrow, the South will be cloudy with heavy and blustery spells of rain. But
northern and central parts of England, Wales, Northern Ireland and southern
Scotland will see spells of snow move in, which will bring significant
accumulations in places. Northern Scotland will be brighter. On Friday, early
rain and snow will clear east to leave many places bright, but cold. On
Saturday, northern and western areas will see rain move in from the west, which
will turn to snow across Scotland.