TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-19H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at 6 o'clock. This is Jane Steele. Good evening. The Home Secretary
has announced new legislation to try to stop people crossing the Channel in
small boats. They will not stop coming here until the world knows that if you
enter Britain illegally, you will be detained and swiftly removed. But in a
letter to MPs, Suella Braverman acknowledged the plans might fall foul of the
European Convention on Human Rights. A murder trial has heard that a nine-year-
old girl screamed Mum, I'm scared, seconds before she was shot dead through her
front door. The UN has put the cost of reconstruction after last month's
earthquake in Turkey at $100 billion. The Scottish Prison Service is facing
prosecution for corporate homicide in relation to the death of a man being
restrained by 13 prison officers who were later given immunity. Also tonight...
Of itself, it's a real victory for fan activism. It's a first step on the road
for UEFA to accept their culpability. European football's governing body is to
refund 19,000 Liverpool fans at last year's Champions League final. The
government has insisted that its new bill to tackle illegal migration will stop
people crossing the English Channel in small boats. Under the proposed
legislation, anyone who enters the UK illegally will not be able to claim
asylum. Instead, they will be detained, removed to what is deemed a safe
country, and barred from re-entry. Unveiling the plans, the Home Secretary,
Suella Braverman, said the UK asylum system was in urgent and obvious need of
reform. In a letter to MPs, she said she was confident about the bill, but that
there was more than a 50% chance it was not compatible with international law.
The charity Amnesty International said there was nothing fair, humane or even
practical in the plans. Our political correspondent Jonathan Blake has the first
of tonight's reports. A perilous journey for tens of thousands of people trying
to reach the UK every year, a political problem that governments have so far
failed to tackle. Rishi Sunak has made stopping small boat crossings one of his
five priorities. In the Commons, the Home Secretary told MPs the continued rise
in the numbers arriving illegally, under laws that came into force last year,
showed an obvious and urgent need for reform. Schemes for people coming from
Ukraine, Afghanistan and Hong Kong provided safe and legal routes, Suella
Braverman said, for those fleeing harm. But she acknowledged the asylum system
was overwhelmed and that the government's efforts to deter people from crossing
the Channel so far had not been enough. They will not stop coming here until the
world knows that if you enter Britain illegally, you will be detained and
swiftly removed. Removed back to your country, if it's safe, or to a safe
country, a safe third country like Rwanda. And that is precisely what this bill
will do. That is how we will stop the boats. She said new laws would create a
legal duty on the Home Secretary to remove those deemed illegal entrants and
significantly narrow the number of challenges and appeals that could be made.
Migrants would be detained until they could be removed, without bail or judicial
review, within the first 28 days, Ms Braverman said. Only those under 18, unfit
to fly or at risk of serious and irreversible harm would be able to delay their
removal. There would also be an annual cap set by Parliament on the number of
refugees the UK would accept. Labour says the plans are unworkable. In the
Commons, the Shadow Home Secretary Yvette Cooper was scathing. Enough is enough.
We can't afford any more of this slogans and not solutions, just government by
gimmick, ramping up the rhetoric on refugees but picking fights, simply to have
someone else to blame when things go wrong. This bill isn't a solution. It is a
con that risks making the chaos worse. Britain deserves better than this chaos.
Britain is better than this. The SNP spokesperson, Stuart C Macdonald, said the
government's plans wouldn't lay a solitary finger on people smugglers, but harm
those who'd already suffered. Some Conservative backbenchers urged ministers to
further limit the influence of the European Court of Human Rights on UK law in
order to tackle migration effectively. Speaking at a news conference in Downing
Street, the Prime Minister said the new proposals were tough but necessary and
fair. He also said the government believed the bill was lawful and would meet
its obligation to the British people. Now I understand there will be debate
about the toughness of these measures. All I can say is we have tried it every
other way and it has not worked. So I say again, my policy is very simple. It is
this country and your government who should decide who comes here, not criminal
gangs. More than 3,000 people have reached the UK in small boats so far this
year, most of those making the crossing arrive on the Kent coast. Our
correspondent Duncan Kennedy has been speaking to people in Dover. The Kent
coast has been the main point of embarkation since the start of the large-scale
migrant crossings and yesterday saw another 197 people brought ashore here.
Towns like Folkestone and Dover, more used to large car ferries than small
dinghies, have absorbed many of those who want to make the UK their home. Some
people here support the government's plans to reduce illegal migration. We've
got veterans, we've got people on the street and yet these people we are paying
for to live in hotels when they have come from safe countries. I think it's a
step in the right direction, not necessarily the right way to go about it, but
we have to do something to curb it. I understand why they're trying to get away,
but I think the government need to strengthen it and stop it happening. And
others take a more sympathetic line. Those like Kay Marsh from the refugee
charity Samfire, based in Dover. She believes attempts to ban migrants and
criminalise them from returning to the UK are unfair and wrong. It doesn't
matter what side of the argument you sit on, stopping the boats is a priority.
People risk their lives taking these journeys. But the way we do that is to
offer safe legal routes. Currently we don't have adequate safe legal routes and
that's what pushes people into small boats. Until we offer these people an
alternative, the small boats will not stop. On average around 120 migrants
arrive by small boat every day last year. Nearly everyone agrees something must
be done to stop it. In coastal places like Dover, which see the issue at close
quarters, any action seems welcome as long as it's prompt and effective.
Hundreds of people in the camps around Calais in France are still waiting for
their chance to cross the Channel to the UK. Our correspondent Lucy Williamson
has spent the day with them. A policy designed for impact had little impact in
the camps of northern France today. Those that were aware of the new UK policy
said it made as little difference to their plans as the policies that came
before it. So nothing here. UK whatever they do, we are going there. Omar was
sitting with friends around a small fire in the Sudanese camp in Calais. If the
UK government says you can't claim asylum, will you stop trying? No, I never
stop. I never stop. I never give up. On the outskirts of the camp, Salah watched
his friends play football as he waited to charge his mobile phone at a power
bank provided by a local charity. I will go to England if there is police, took
me in person in any scene. He told me he'd prefer prison in the UK to freedom
here in France. If they send people to Rwanda, will you still try and go to the
UK? Yes, I will go to the UK. That's my ambition, my dream. I will not return to
Rwanda if that is happening. I can kill myself. I can kill myself in England,
but I am not returning to Africa, Rwanda. Aid workers say they've seen a rise in
suicides among migrants here over the past few years as immigration policies
have tightened and conditions in the camps have worsened. But for many people
here, policy announcements alone won't dim the appeal of British shores. Suella
Braverman has described the government's approach as robust and novel, but
admitted the bill is testing the limits of international law. Our home and legal
correspondent Dominic Cacciani has been reading through the 66-page document.
Suella Braverman told MPs that the government's new plan to stop small boats was
novel. But the most important words are on the front page of this enormously
dense document. There, the Home Secretary admits, the plan may not be compatible
with the European Convention on Human Rights. That means she's been advised by
her lawyers that this legislation is more likely than not to collapse under the
weight of challenges in the British courts and be declared by judges to be
legally unworkable. Even if the plan becomes law, there are more practical and
legal hurdles. If the Home Secretary tries to detain almost everyone who crosses
the English Channel for at least 28 days, nobody knows where they will be held.
Last year's 45,000 arrivals are equivalent to half of the UK's prison capacity.
And with few returns agreements in place since Brexit, immigration judges may
face a flood of claims for false imprisonment if ministers cannot prove the
migrants are definitely going to be removed imminently. The United Nations says
it estimates that the cost of the damage caused by the earthquake in Turkey last
month will exceed $100 billion or Â£84 billion. That's three times higher than
initial forecasts. The 7.8 magnitude quake, which also devastated parts of
Syria, killed at least 52,000 people and left more than 1.5 million homeless.
Our correspondent Imogen Foulkes sent this report from the UN in Geneva. UN
officials described the scenes in Turkey one month after the earthquake as
apocalyptic, with entire towns flattened. Aid agencies warn that a failure to
invest in recovery could have disastrous long-term consequences, lost
livelihoods, disrupted education, unemployment, poverty and child labour. But so
far, the UN Development Programme's Louisa Vinton said donor support has been at
best patchy. We have a new update on the number of destroyed buildings, which is
214,000. So the needs are vast, but the resources are scarce. And of the $1
billion flash appeal that was released in the wake of the disaster, only 9.6%
has been funded to date. But already it's clear that the damages alone will
amount to more than $100 billion. The UN is hoping for more generosity at next
week's donor conference in Brussels. But that could be a challenge. Multiple
crises, from Afghanistan to Yemen to Ethiopia, are competing for cash. Some,
like the World Food Programme's support for Rohingya refugees, are so
underfunded that food rations have had to be cut. This week, the Red Cross
warned that of its ten biggest aid operations, only Ukraine was fully funded.
Ukrainian prosecutors have launched a criminal investigation in what appears to
be the shooting of an unarmed prisoner of war by Russian forces. Graphic
footage, which has emerged online, shows a Ukrainian soldier saying, glory to
Ukraine, before apparently being shot by his captors. From Kiev, here's our
diplomatic correspondent, James Landale. It is an horrific piece of video. A
Ukrainian soldier is shown in some woodland, standing in a shallow trench. A
cigarette hangs from his lips, a hat pushed back on his head. He looks defiantly
at those who are filming him. He says, Slava Ukraini, glory to Ukraine, and he's
brutally cut down by automatic weapons. A voice in Russian is recorded saying,
die, bitch. The footage is difficult to verify. We don't know when or where it
was taken. And the identity of the man is uncertain. Senior Ukrainian officers
named him as a prisoner of war who'd gone missing near the eastern city of
Bakhmut in February. But others identified him as a different soldier, whose
body had already been returned to his family. Ukraine's army accused Russian
troops of breaking the rules of war. Prosecutors in Kiev have launched a
criminal investigation, and the government has asked for the International
Criminal Court to get involved. On television, President Zelensky vowed that
Ukraine would find the murderers. The 12-second video has gone viral on social
media in Ukraine, and the man has become yet another symbol of his country's
resistance. Russia has consistently denied allegations that its soldiers have
committed war crimes in Ukraine. China's leader Xi Jinping has accused the
United States of trying to contain, encircle and suppress his country. Speaking
to business delegates in a parliamentary meeting, President Xi said Washington's
actions brought severe challenges to China. Strained relations between the two
countries were further soured last month when the US shot down a Chinese
balloon, claiming it had been used for spying. Police have been told to
investigate whether the Scottish Prison Service should be prosecuted for the
death of a man in custody. Alan Marshall, who was due to go to jail for 30 days
for unpaid fines and breaching the peace, died after being restrained face down
by 13 officers at HMP Edinburgh in 2015. An inquiry later found the officers had
been mutually dishonest, but they could not be prosecuted because they had
already been granted immunity. Our Scotland social affairs correspondent Lucy
Adams has been speaking exclusively to the family. At the time of the fatal
accident inquiry, the 13 prison officers involved in restraining Alan Marshall
were given immunity from prosecution. Exactly a year ago, the head of Scotland's
prosecution service, Lord Advocate Dorothy Bain, met Mr Marshall's brother and
aunt and promised to review the case and re-interview all the witnesses. She has
now apologised to the family for the way they were treated and for the fact that
the officers were granted immunity. She has completed the review and told the
family she cannot prosecute the individual officers but has ordered an
investigation into the Scottish Prison Service on the grounds of corporate
responsibility, including corporate homicide. If it goes ahead, it would be the
first time in the UK that a government body has been prosecuted for corporate
homicide. Mr Marshall's aunt Sharon told the BBC she was relieved the
prosecution was looking to hold the prison service to account, but she was angry
that it had taken so long to get to this point. It's unbelievable. To me,
they've been given a licence to kill. They think they're above the law and then
the powers that be just cover up for them. You're listening to the 6 o'clock
news on BBC Radio 4, the main news so far. The Prime Minister has said the
government's proposed laws to stop people trying to cross the Channel to claim
asylum in the UK are tough but necessary and fair. The UN has put the cost of
reconstruction after last month's earthquake in Turkey at $100 billion. Still to
come... I don't know which is worse, the heartbreak or the anger. Mixed emotions
as tickets for the Eurovision Song Contest grand final sell out in just 36
minutes. Liverpool supporters who were caught up in the chaotic scenes at last
year's Champions League final in Paris are to get refunds. The club's fans were
initially blamed for the disorder outside the stadium, which saw large crowds
locked behind metal fences and some clashes with police. But an independent
report later criticised European football's governing body, UEFA, for what it
called failures which almost led to disaster. Our sports correspondent Joe
Wilson reports. The final at the Stade de France was delayed by more than half
an hour. French police were filmed using tear gas outside the stadium. And many
Liverpool supporters gave deeply troubling testimony about their experiences. An
independent report said UEFA bore primary responsibility for what went wrong and
praised Liverpool supporters for preventing more serious injuries and deaths.
Now UEFA says its refund plan will cover all of Liverpool's ticket allocation
for the game. That's more than 19,000 supporters. It follows campaigning by
Liverpool Football Club and fans, including the Spirit of Shankly Supporters
Union, chaired by Joe Blott. Money certainly won't heal the hurt of those people
who were traumatised or injured or attacked in Paris last year. But of itself
it's a real victory for fan activism. It's a first step on the road for UEFA to
accept their culpability. UEFA describes the compensation scheme as
comprehensive and fair. Real Madrid fans and neutral supporters also qualify for
refunds if they were in the most affected areas of the ground. The inquiry into
the final included a series of recommendations to prevent similar incidents in
the future. Liverpool supporters now say their focus is ensuring those measures
are enforced. Cricket's Independent Disciplinary Commission for England and
Wales has retired to deliberate on charges relating to the racism scandal at
Yorkshire County Cricket. Seven individuals are accused of bringing the game
into disrepute over racist language first revealed in 2020 by the former
Yorkshire player Azim Rafiq. They include the former England captain Michael
Vaughan, who's appeared before the commission to deny the charges. Our sports
editor Dan Ruin has been at the hearings. One of the most divisive and damaging
scandals in the history of English cricket is nearing a conclusion. On the final
day of the disciplinary hearing the ECB's chief counsel, Jane Mulcahy KC, said
it was inherently probable that the former England captain turned broadcaster
Michael Vaughan had said, too many of you lot we need to have a word about that,
to his then Yorkshire team mate Azim Rafiq, the chief witness in this case and
three other Asian players before a match in 2009. Vaughan denies making a racist
comment, but in her closing submission Ms Mulcahy said he had posted historic
tweets with a similar tone that were essential to this case and pointed to the
fact Yorkshire had admitted systemic racism from 2004 to 2021. She also referred
to an extraordinary amount of bitter and inaccurate correspondence from
Vaughan's legal team complaining about the disciplinary process. For Vaughan,
Chris Stoner KC then criticised a woefully inadequate investigation by the ECB.
Due process, he said, has gone on holiday. Mentioning the impact this case has
had on Vaughan's health, Stoner added the shape of his life to come and his
livelihood are at stake. A judgement on the case is expected before the end of
the month. A man has gone on trial at Manchester Crown Court accused of the
murder of Olivia Pratt Corbell, the nine-year-old girl shot dead in her home in
Liverpool last August. The jury was told that Thomas Cashman, who's 34 and from
Liverpool, had been in ruthless pursuit of his intended victim, a convicted
burglar. He faces five charges including murdering the schoolgirl, wounding her
mother and the attempted murder of the man he was chasing. From Manchester Crown
Court, Judith Moritz reports. Olivia Pratt Corbell was tucked up in bed when she
heard gunshots. The nine-year-old was terrified the court heard. Her street had
become a crime scene, a gunman running along it, chasing his target. As they
went down the road, they reached the area outside her house. The prosecution
says that the gunman was Thomas Cashman, who was armed with two firearms, a
pistol and a revolver. He was chasing a man called Joseph Knee, who was fleeing
for his life, having already been shot once. Having heard the commotion outside,
Olivia's mother, Cheryl Corbell, opened her front door and Joseph Knee ran
towards it. She tried to close it again, but as she did, the gunman opened fire
and his bullet went through the door and through Ms Corbell's hand before
hitting the girl. In court, Cheryl Corbell wiped away her tears as the detail of
what had happened to her daughter was read out. Olivia, bleeding heavily, was
picked up by armed response officers and taken to hospital, where she later
died. For the prosecution, David McLaughlin KC told the jury, this is serious
business, as you'll appreciate. It's about the ruthless pursuit by Thomas
Cashman to shoot Joseph Knee at all costs, without any consideration for anyone
else in the community. Mr Cashman is also charged with the attempted murder of
Mr Knee and the wounding with intent of Olivia's mother, as well as two counts
of possessing a firearm with intent to endanger life. He denies all the charges.
The UK is one of the most socially liberal countries when compared with other
Western nations, according to a survey carried out over the past 40 years. The
data collated by King's College London focuses on issues such as divorce, casual
sex, euthanasia and the death penalty. Richard Galpin reports. One of the most
striking findings of this survey is that the number of people in the UK who
think euthanasia is justifiable more than doubled between 1981 and 2022. And
when compared with 24 other countries, only Germany, Australia and France had
greater proportions of their populations believing euthanasia was acceptable.
The shift in attitudes comes alongside a substantial increase in the number of
British members of Dignitas, the assisted dying association. All this despite
euthanasia remaining illegal in this country. In 1999, only 10% of the UK
population said casual sex was justifiable. That figure has now more than
quadrupled, placing the UK well above countries like France and Germany where
only around 25% of people hold the same view. A breakdown of the nations of the
UK showed that on the topic of divorce, Scotland and Wales were the most
accepting, with 67% support, and Northern Ireland the least, where only 48% of
respondents said divorce was justifiable. The issue on which the UK as a whole
held less socially liberal views was the death penalty. More than half think it
is or may be justifiable. Parts of the UK have been covered with a blanket of
snow as a cold snap from the Arctic begins to sweep across the country. In
preparation, the National Grid has asked two coal power plants in
Nottinghamshire to generate electricity. They were due to close last year but
have been kept on standby this winter. The extra energy is also needed because
of a lack of wind and solar production in the UK and strikes taking place at
power plants in France. A deadline has been extended to allow people to plug
gaps in their national insurance record and boost their state pension. The move,
part of a transition to the new flat-rate state pension introduced in 2016, has
been widely welcomed as some people were struggling to contact HM Revenue and
Customs ahead of the original cut-off time. With the details, here's our Cost of
Living correspondent, Kevin Peachey. Some people may have gaps in their national
insurance record, for example if they've lived abroad or taken time off for
caring responsibilities. The government has been allowing them to top up
payments for years missed in the decade up to 2016 as part of the transition to
the new flat-rate state pension. But blocked phone lines to HMRC left some
worried they would miss a deadline of early April. That's now been extended to
the end of July. Pensions experts say that extra contributions may not suit
every individual in these circumstances, so it's important to check whether it's
worthwhile for their finances. The head of the US Federal Reserve, Jerome
Powell, has said it will likely need to raise interest rates more than expected
in response to what he called recent strong economic data. The dollar has surged
against other major currencies after Mr Powell's warning. The pound is trading
at $1.185. Against the euro, sterling is at 1.121. That makes the euro worth
89.2 pence. Shares on Wall Street dropped on the news from the US about interest
rates. A short time ago, the Dow Jones was down 311 points at 33,120. In the
city, the 100-share index ended the day down 10 points at 7,919. More than a
million people have taken part in another day of demonstrations in France
against government plans to raise the pension age from 62 to 64. Public
transport has been severely disrupted and many schools have been shut. In Paris,
police have used tear gas to disperse groups that threw projectiles and
vandalised shop fronts. Our Paris correspondent, Hugh Schofield, sent this
report. It's the sixth day of protests against the pension plan since mid-
January, and once again, the unions and the political left have been out in
force. They're opposed to the notion of raising the pension age for a variety of
reasons. Some say it's unnecessary. Some say it's bad for the environment, for
people to be working and producing more. Many want the age brought not up, but
down to 60. There's already a very big unemployment rate from 50 years old, so
they should work on this instead of trying to make us work longer. If they put
the law, we will come back in the streets because we can't now pay for gas oil,
pay for food and pay for the health. We will come back. For all the noise,
though, this campaign has so far made little dent on the government's plans.
Right now, the pension bill is before the upper house or senate. After that, it
comes back to the National Assembly for final approval, probably by the end of
the month. Opponents know that they're running out of time, which is why there
are calls now for an escalation of the pressure, less demonstrating, more
blockading of roads and fuel depots. A Twitter employee used the platform itself
to ask its owner, Elon Musk, if he still had a job at the company. He resorted
to openly messaging his boss after being unable to establish whether he was
still employed for nine days. Twitter has laid off thousands of employees since
Mr Musk bought it for $44 billion last October. Here's our technology reporter
Shona McCallum. A week and a half ago, Hallie Thorlofson, a senior director in
product design, was locked out of his work computer. After getting no answer
from the human resources department, he tweeted Elon Musk to ask if he was still
an employee. Mr Musk replied, asking what work he did. When Mr Thorlofson
explained his role, Mr Musk responded with two crying with laughter emojis.
Shortly afterwards, HR contacted Mr Thorlofson, confirming that yes, he'd been
fired. Mr Thorlofson, who has muscular dystrophy, sold his business to Twitter
in 2014 and is now concerned the terms of that deal won't be honoured. He told
the BBC the situation was extremely stressful because the deal was a way to take
care of himself and his family as his disease progressed. The deputy chair of
the Conservative Party, Lee Anderson, is to host a show on GB News. He's the
latest Tory MP to be hired by the channel, joining Jacob Rees-Mogg, Esther McVey
and Philip Davis. Mr Anderson has courted controversy in recent months, calling
for the return of the death penalty and claiming people on Universal Credit
aren't in poverty. Tickets for this year's Eurovision Song Contest final in
Liverpool sold out in 36 minutes when they went on sale at midday. They are
already being resold online for thousands of pounds each. Our Eurovision
reporter Daniel Rosny has more. A hundred and sixty million people may watch at
home, but only around 6,000 have been lucky enough to get a ticket for each of
the nine shows. Fans went online to try to bag tickets for the three live shows,
the two semi-finals and the grand final, as well as six previews doubling up as
rehearsals. Sasha was one of the lucky ones. We are so, so excited. My credit
card is crying right now. That was one of the most stressful experiences of my
life. It's the first time in 25 years the competition is being held in the UK,
which hasn't yet announced its act for Liverpool, who's hosting Eurovision on
behalf of Ukraine, which won last year's event. But there was disappointment for
many fans who didn't get through, Nicola among them. And I don't know which is
worse, the heartbreak or the anger. Outside the arena, there are planned events
during the first two weeks of May across Liverpool, including a simultaneous
rave between Liverpool and Kyiv. The UK government has set aside 3,000 tickets
for Ukrainians living in the UK displaced by Russia's invasion. And as Sam
Ryder, last year's UK entry, said... It's Ukraine's party. We're just inviting
them to throw it at our house. The headlines again. The government has said it
is confident about a new bill that would stop illegal migrants from claiming
asylum and remove them from the UK. A man has gone on trial for the murder of
Olivia Pratt-Corbell, the nine-year-old girl shot dead in her home in Liverpool
last August. The UN estimates the cost of rebuilding after last month's
earthquakes in Turkey will be more than $100 billion. Ukraine has launched a
criminal investigation into the apparent shooting of an unarmed prisoner of war
by Russia. The Scottish Prison Service could face prosecution for the death of a
man in custody. UEFA is to refund Liverpool fans who had tickets to the chaotic
Champions League final in Paris last year. BBC News. With Jane Steel. Later this
evening, we investigate what happened to the 200 vulnerable migrant children
under the care of the Home Office who went missing from hotels in the UK. We
find out what's being done to find them and why so many have disappeared. That's
in File on 4 at 8 o'clock. The comedian Mark Watson re-embarks on his doomed
quest to understand life in just a moment. Perhaps he should just listen to BBC
Sounds. Whatever you're looking for, we've got sounds for that. Join us for
topical conversation that informs, challenges, inspires and really gets you
thinking on Woman's Hour. Or relax and unwind with the rich musical textures of
the Mindful Mix. Or throw caution to the wind and enjoy Friday night comedy
whenever you darn well please, like on a Tuesday or even not at night with the
sensationally time-flexible Friday Night Comedy Podcast. Music Radio Podcasts.
Listen on BBC Sounds. Now on BBC Radio 4, Mark Watson talks a bit about life
with his house band Flo & Joan and this week's special guest, Thursday's Child,
Sakeesa. 1, 2, 3, 4. Mark Watson talks, he's still rattling on, talking about
some stuff, probably very right wing. Mark Watson talks a bit about life, mostly
his. Thank you very much, good evening. Did you say probably very right wing?
You hear what you want to hear. Yeah, but I don't think I did want to hear that.
Welcome to Mark Watson talks a bit about life. If you're a Radio 4 listener but
you've not listened to this before, basically it's a bit like In Our Time.
Except Malvin Bragg isn't in it and there's no point. That's not true, I do have
an agenda which is to examine our journey through life via the prism of Monday's
Child is full of Grace's poem and that in turn is an attempt to make sense of
the confusing human experience that we all go through. Soren Kierkegaard
famously said, life can only be understood backwards but must be lived forwards,
which really knocks me off actually. I love that quote. Kierkegaard was
Wednesday's Child, like me, full of woe and he was right to be full of woe. He
died at my age because of complications from falling out of a tree. Not that
clever were you, pal? Ever since I heard that I've been terrified of the same
thing happening to me but actually it turns out you can safeguard against it
pretty well by, yeah you've guessed it, not getting in trees. Tonight it is the
turn of Thursday and Thursday's Child, do we know? Yes, has far to go. Despite
being born on the woe day, I've always felt of all of them, this is the one I've
most have liked. I've always been ambitious to see the most of life I could and
put pressure on myself to go that bit further, be that bit better. I think it
maybe comes from my parents' expectations. My mum often used to say, oh you'll
go far, you've got a bright future, this sort of thing. I'm the oldest of four
and my siblings and I all get on very well, we're a gang, but there is a running
joke among them that I'm my mum's favourite. She's a bit biased towards me and
the funny thing about the joke is, it is true. Definitely. My mum's reputation
with the other siblings has never really recovered from, there was this
Christmas a few years ago where all four of us walked into a room together and
she pointed at me and went, there he is. Kind of a long way back from there
really. With that sort of hype comes pressure of course, so is having far to go
an exciting incentive in life or a burden? To discuss it a little bit, I'm
joined as ever by, first of all, Flo and Joan, the Ant and Dec of the South. And
as well as Flo and Joan we have the brilliant comedian, my friend, Sakisa.
Sakisa you're a Thursday child. Yes I am, Thursday's a new Friday. That's going
to be confusing. What happens on Friday then? You get a lot of that, like, 30's
the new 50, no, the other way round then. That would be really bad news
actually. I hear you're 40, 40's the new 95. When you were growing up did you
know about the whole Thursday child has far to go thing? No, I have West Indian
parents, they don't care about rhyming. No, no, no, no, no. I didn't know West
Indians didn't do rhyming. Not for me anyway, not in my household. Also, can I
just say that I did meet your brother the other day and he did say that you were
the favourite. Well I'm not the favourite child, even though I'm the only child.
That's a bit unlucky, you would have expected to have a chance. Yeah, I'm not,
so there was a lot of pressure on me to do well, to go far. My mum was basically
like, you've either got to do law, be a doctor or be dead. Which one did you go
for? Law. Shush, you are weirdly a lawyer as well as a comedian aren't you?
Yeah, yeah, anyone who wants a British passport come and find me. We'll probably
do it after the show. And Flo and Joan, now obviously, I mean, Sir Keesa can
talk about her West Indian heritage but you're no strangers to going far. We're
recording this in London and yet you were born in Hampshire, more than an hour
away. So I wondered if you have any songs about travel or Thursday, up any of
your four sleeves. We do, but how do you know that we're born in Hampshire? Just
like a very minor bit of Googling, because we've been working together for a bit
now I just sort of armed myself with some basic information. You could just ask
us Mark. No, I just in the end went for Google. We spent the whole of last year
touring the country and the world. And we say world because we played one city
in Australia and one night in rural Canada, so we will definitely say it's a
worldwide tour. And it was a very long tour. Yeah, we saw Gareth Malone on BBC
Breakfast talking about his Christmas choir tour and saying that he was really
tired by it and it was 14 dates. And I near on ripped the television out the
wall when we were on day 136 about to drive seven hours to Redruth. But it's all
right because I don't know if you know Mark, I don't know if you've ever done a
tour, but our tour is pretty rock and roll. I'm very similar. I think it's what
people know me for. Okay, so here's then a song. Let us tell you about life on
the road. It's freaky and it's crazy and it's all rock and roll. Spreading
people's ears with a shaker and piano. Yeah, it's the rock and roll musical
comedy life. Yeah, yeah, yeah, baby, baby, baby. We do lots of drugs, cause A, B
and C. And when we say drugs, we mean cod liver oil. We have every night neck
and camel milk tea. Yeah, musical comedy's never been so sexy. Rock and roll
musical comedy life. Marks and Spencer's mail deals every night. The tour band
we listen to, Stephen Sondheim. It's a rock and roll musical comedy life.
Everybody clap your hands and stamp your feet like you do on Songs of Grace. How
do we travel round the country in a people carrier? The kind you put your family
in. What do we eat to stay rock and roll? We eat wet eggs at a budget hotel. And
what do we do on our days off? What do we do on our days off? What do we do on
our days off? We go, ooh, good watching rock and roll musical comedy life.
Getting kicked out of venues every night. Cause art centres close at 11pm. Yeah,
it's a rock and roll musical comedy life. APPLAUSE Thank you very much Flo and
Joan. They've been singing along with that one down at St Paul's Primary School.
Available on the internet, all this information. And your top ten teachers in
descending order. Well I tried to work out when I started to be perhaps
unhealthily interested in going far and achieving. I have to go back at least to
my own school days. I don't think the pressure comes from my education itself.
The school I went to was quite posh looking but it was also very middle class
and cosy. So it didn't have the associations of brutality which some of those
schools have. The teachers did beat us but only at backgammon. To give a sense
of my mentality in those days, well over a century ago now, I have to call upon
a fun little anecdote. This one is tainted in my mind by the fact that I think I
come across as a bit of an arrogant young prick. So I'm going to ask Flo and
Joan if the fun little anecdote sting could reflect that in some way. Yes. Fun
little anecdote, anecdote said by a young little money, a bratty McBratt, bratta
squinny, a twiny brat, baby boy, money, young twiny brat, anecdote,
anacarellina. APPLAUSE Now that covers it. During my sixth form days I worked
for two years at a supermarket. I'd love that to give me a little bit of keeping
it real. I was a bit of a weight loss, like I was a coal face before I became a
comedian but it was Waitrose so... LAUGHTER..not that much of a coal face, a
wood burner maybe. LAUGHTER Chimney-er. That said, the job was not a picnic,
although we were a leading supplier to picnics, of course. For a start, this
supermarket was pretty near my school so you'd sometimes get your teachers as
customers, and it's hard to explain why but there's this weird kind of dread on
both sides of the idea of a teacher-pupil meet-up, like in the wild. No, you
can't be having chicken tonight, you're a history teacher. LAUGHTER A friend of
mine once saw his maths teacher with his private parts out in a swimming pool
changing room and he left school the next week. LAUGHTER There were also a lot
of indignities attached to being under 18 and having a supermarket job. You'll
remember, if you've done it, I wasn't allowed to sell alcohol. Every time
someone bought any booze I had to put my dunce light on. LAUGHTER I'm not
allowed to hold the gin, can an adult help? Which, when you look back, is
absolutely mad. Obviously you can't drink under 18, but why can't you hold...
Why can't you scan it? They'd think I was just going to open the bottle of
Prosecco and go, one for me, one for you. LAUGHTER But the worst thing about the
checkout job was because of the exclusivity of the place. It was higher than
usual quotient of unpleasant customers. And one time I served what I can only
describe as a bully. I can only describe him that way, at least, on Radio 4 at
6.30. But, er... DM me and I'll send you the real words. LAUGHTER At that time,
Waitrose stocked a range of fruit and vegetables which I'd previously only read
about in books of myths and legends. LAUGHTER This is a big, scary guy in a
trench coat. He had a bag which... Now, someone here will be able to identify
these just from the description. They were like plums, same sort of size and
shape and everything, but unripe plums. Anyone? Green Gage is very good,
although a couple of bizarre guesses... Green Gage sounds insane. Have you never
had one? Have you never had one? Green Gage uproar here behind me. LAUGHTER It
just doesn't sound like a fruit. It sounds like a... Right, right, this is my
point. It sounds like an old man hiding in a tree in folklore. LAUGHTER Exactly,
and this guy might have been that. Watch out, Green Gage is about... LAUGHTER I
think of Jeremy Boodle. LAUGHTER They're all things we had in the 90s. But this
is the thing. I was in, I don't know, Floor Wall Jones position. Of course I
know which one is which. It's all very well joking about, ooh, who's who, but we
now know I know, if anything, too much. LAUGHTER But, yeah, the country will be
split between that response and people at Sikisa go, what, don't you know
Green... And I'm sure at home there'll be people angrily shouting, Green Gages,
obviously, at their radios, but none of you will be as angry as this man. I had
to ask him to identify them, obviously, so that I could weigh them, and he
yelled, Green Gages, they're Green Gages. Like you said, it's one of the
weirdest words I've ever had yelled in my face. It's like having someone shout
patio or Toblerone. LAUGHTER I said, I'm sorry, sir, I've just not come across
these before, and he looked at me like I said, I've not seen a cow yet in my
life. LAUGHTER He said, did they not teach you anything at school? Are you even
at school? I blurted out, I'm going to Cambridge University. LAUGHTER You can
take a minute to guess whether that made me more or less popular with my
colleagues at the other checkout. LAUGHTER Yes, your guess is correct. LAUGHTER
And the worst thing about it was, I wasn't, I'd applied. LAUGHTER But this is
the thing about the far-to-go mentality. I didn't want to feel like this any
more. I wanted to have some sort of status myself, not to be someone you could
just yell Green Gages at. And in the end, I did get a provisional offer from the
university, and it became my obsession. I worked incredibly hard to get the
grades that I needed. My reputation as Bristol's biggest, maddest party animal
went overnight. In fact, people began to act as if I never had had that
reputation. LAUGHTER Results day came and I had to go into school to learn my
fate. As I say that, it sounds old-fashioned. But I imagine in the digital age,
they surely don't still make you physically show up in the court of the king.
They must just email. I wouldn't be surprised if these days they just text kids
a single emoji. LAUGHTER And it's the face crying a single tear. I think I'm
going to my second choice here. LAUGHTER But in those days, it was real
pageantry. My dad drove me in. He was the teacher at the school, as I've
mentioned before. Yeah, he had an excuse to go into the hall with me, ramping up
the drama even more. We walked up the stairs past a distraught, weeping girl,
who was the only other person who'd had the same offer. I could have done
without seeing that. It's fine, she went to Exeter, loved it. Into the hall,
given the envelope, ripped it open, hands are shaking, and I had the grades.
It's fine, made it. Much bigger stuff has happened to me since, of course, both
good and bad. But at the time, it felt like a defining moment in my life. And I
handed the sheet to my dad. He was ecstatic. I couldn't speak. He thought I was
overcome by emotion. Actually, all that was in my head in that moment was, suck
it, Green Gages guy. LAUGHTER APPLAUSE My whole A-level campaign was about him.
LAUGHTER He'll be 90 now, but I still recognise him outside now. I mean, he's
not...presumably not here now, are you? LAUGHTER Obviously, exam results at
university, these are high-stakes things. It's legitimate to be nervous about
them. It's a good thing to have such a results-driven mentality so young. So,
Kisa, I'm interested in your relationship with this. You've done a lot in your
life. For a start, you're an immigration lawyer, also a comedian. I mean, also,
you do burlesque. I do a bit of burlesque as well. You don't necessarily think
of burlesque... Yeah, you don't get to see it. You ain't paid enough. LAUGHTER A
couple of people sounded briefly hopeful there. LAUGHTER But, yeah, you've
obviously crammed a lot in. I've crammed a lot in, but also, like, when I say
lawyer, people assume that I'm made of money. I'm not. I'm a working-class
person. Someone actually asked me the other day, well, you're a lawyer, aren't
you? You're middle-class. And I was like, no, I still live on a council estate.
And I think that's an amazing thing for me to do. Growing up as the only child,
I always wanted to make my parents proud. And everything I have, I own. So I
think I'm probably proud of that. I basically worked a lot when I was at school.
At university, I had three part-time jobs. Probably none of them waitrose, I'm
guessing. No. Licenza, though. Lots of lingerie and bra. Oh, someone remembers!
Well done, yes. Licenza, the Athena of knickers. LAUGHTER If you will. And I
worked in a pub as well, and that's where I discovered stand-up comedy. So if I
didn't have the ambition to do something, I wouldn't be able to, like, do what I
do now, which is have no sleep. How do you imagine being a lawyer and also doing
the gigs and all of it? Currently, I work four days a week, then I gig five days
a week, sometimes six days a week. But that's already more days than there are
in the week. LAUGHTER Well, I decided in 2023 that I was going to change that,
because I've had to, like, sacrifice a lot of things in my life, like seeing
friends, seeing God children. Mind you, sometimes with God children, you can
sort of get away with it. Yeah. It's not a real one. LAUGHTER They see me the
same way they see God, like I don't exist. LAUGHTER That's where the phrase
comes from, yeah. APPLAUSE Some of you will like the incredible story of Flo and
Joan, have had had far to go to get here. I ask people to write on cards if
they've had a noteworthy journey here tonight, or in more abstract terms, a sort
of journey of the mind. Has anyone come from further than... Well, yeah, from
further than Hampshire, from further than Flo and Joan. Yeah, straight away, at
the front there. Trever and Cornwall? What, for this? Good heavens! But it's not
a good use of time, really. LAUGHTER You do know this is on the radio. LAUGHTER
Yeah. I'll be in Wiltshire tonight. I'll be in Wiltshire tonight, he says,
mysteriously. LAUGHTER Real James Bond stuff from this guy. LAUGHTER Thank you
very much for coming. Anyone beat that? Hi. Where have you come from? Texas.
LAUGHTER APPLAUSE And that is the end of that game, I think. LAUGHTER Wow, how
long have you been in this country? Ten days. Ten days, I think. You're
visiting? LAUGHTER It's not every day, so I'm wondering... OK. I'm trying to
move here. You're trying to move it? OK. Sikisa's on there slightly. LAUGHTER
Stop looking at me. Well, good luck moving here. Thank you. I won't lie to you,
most people are going in the opposite direction. LAUGHTER You've caught us in a
slightly awkward 50 years. LAUGHTER Well past the point where I was a bright
young schoolboy, or an undergraduate, my mum continued to be almost
embarrassingly upbeat about my prospects. Ever since this show began in 2007,
and she heard me on the radio for the first time and discovered I was a stand-up
comedian and not, as I've been claiming, an architect... LAUGHTER..it's actually
a very difficult one to bluff, you have to sort of keep drawing stuff. LAUGHTER
Her position has been ever since then that her boy is the best comedian in the
world and all the rest of them should go to hell. And as you can imagine, it
does make it quite tiring when the TV is on at my parents' house. Who's this
man? He's not funny at all. Well, this is Chris Witty. LAUGHTER Quite a specific
set of circumstances got him this gig. LAUGHTER You can see why I was passed
over for those gigs. You didn't see Witty do many of them with a Y. LAUGHTER
Well, who's this person? I don't know, Mum. If I knew, it would go against the
whole premise of The Masked Singer. LAUGHTER I tell you who'd be good at this
show. Me? Yes. Why don't they book you? Well, this is Poirot and... LAUGHTER And
I don't blame my mum for this at all. The world of TV commissioning is very
strange these days. The craze for masked shows bewilders me. I don't want to
sound like an old man again, but especially when you think how much for 2020 and
21 we spent looking at nothing but masks. LAUGHTER I don't understand who was
out there going, let's make it a permanent thing. I'd love to see no-one's
entire face again in my life. Masked Singer, then there's the Masked Dancer.
Where's it going to end? The Masked Pilot. LAUGHTER This is your captain
speaking. We're cruising at a speed of 40,000 feet, but am I a pilot or Jason
Manford? LAUGHTER When the pandemic shut everything down, suddenly far to go
became a distant memory in what literal and figurative senses we lived through a
bewildering period, all of us, in which the number of times you left the house
in a day was restricted by the Lord. Do you remember that bit where the
government literally encouraged you to rat on people if they were out and about
more than once in a 24-hour period? Has your neighbour been for a jog and been
to Asda? Let's lock him up. I'm not saying these measures were excessive. Most
of us did our best to follow them, for the good of everyone. But it was a huge
culture shock. If you are my sort of age and background, you grew up believing
you could basically go anywhere, do anything that you wanted, you know, earn the
money if you... And now suddenly there was no travel, no work, no adventure.
Well, not quite no work. I did a lot of online shows, more than a lot of
comedians, in fact, I embraced it. Some of them were really fun, but when they
went wrong, you really were powerless. The worst one I ever did was in Christmas
2020, the tail end of a year which had begun with so much optimism during the
last series of this. Now things were grim, no more radio work, you couldn't even
put the radio on without disinfecting it. And this gig was a... It's quite a
bleak phrase, socially distanced Christmas corporate get-together. So an office
party, but no-one was in the office, everyone in a separate Zoom window, alone,
with a Christmas jumper and a glass of Prosecco and a yearning for death. And it
wasn't even Zoom, that was the problem, they used something called Microsoft
Teams. AUDIENCE GROANS Say hi. The noise that goes through the room when you
mention it is... For those of you who don't know, Microsoft Teams is like Zoom,
like all these things, but it's USP, it's special trick, it doesn't work. And
so... It's like trying to get into a meeting using a Nokia or a Pager. But I got
in, I logged into the meeting, and the guy gave me a lovely introduction, he
said, you've seen him on Live at the Apollo, you've seen him on QI, as usual,
when this sort of phrasing is used, quite a lot of them looked back and went,
no, I have not. I have seen no such things. It doesn't matter, I was upbeat, I
was looking forward to doing something. He said, Marwattam! And I was now
spotlit on the screen, so half of it was now my face and half of the screen was
the guy's face who'd introduced me. And I assumed when I started talking it
would become just me, but, no, there he stayed, unfortunately. LAUGHTER Not on
purpose, he didn't know how to make himself disappear. I couldn't do it from my
end. After a few minutes of this, I realised the whole thing was just going to
be this. And I was desperate for the work, there wasn't any work, so I did the
only thing I could, the contractual obligation, which, I'm not exaggerating, 45
minutes of stand-up to this one man's head. LAUGHTER I was like doing a gig
stuck in a lift. LAUGHTER We both tried our best, I was as funny as I could, but
he obviously laughed till he sawed himself, basically. He had to, I was staring
in his eyes the whole time. LAUGHTER Anyone from Ireland? Yes, I am, Mark, yes,
if you like. If it's helpful, I can be. LAUGHTER We were both delighted when it
was over. I've never clicked on leave meeting as fast in my life, and then the
second time because it didn't work the first time. Did you do online gigs and
stuff? I did do online gigs, and they were horrible. I did one to a dog.
LAUGHTER That's worse. My one audience member was human. I did actually like the
online shows. You just, like, do your gig, shut your laptop and go to bed. Yeah,
whereas if we do that after this, it will look strange, I think. Yeah. LAUGHTER
Since we've been able to get together physically again, I've noticed my mum
asking a lot fewer questions about my career, although she will have questions
about this, because she will be listening to this. Everyone at home, say hello
to Margaret. Hello, Margaret. Hello, Margaret. That was Sakisa, Mum. I've also
tried myself to be a bit less frantic and neurotic about it, obviously partly
because it's just a relief to have it back. It's a relief to be able to, I was
going to say, reach out and touch the audience, but because of the conduct of
some people in the industry, we're sort of encouraged not to use that exact
phrase. LAUGHTER Just be aware I could. LAUGHTER But I'd like to think it's also
because we've learned a lesson deep down. For almost 20 years, I've been rushing
around everywhere. I've had far to go almost every week of my life, and I've had
my brain pushing me to go further, work harder, do more, do better, and
actually, most of what you need isn't out there at the end of a journey. It's
waiting for you here in reach. On your deathbed, your final thoughts won't be
about what you achieved, how far you went. It'll be about what you loved. I'm
talking about your final thoughts, by the way. Mine will obviously be, I'm
coming for you, Green Gages guy. LAUGHTER I'd like to ask you to thank Sakisa
very much for everything. CHEERING AND APPLAUSE And then I'm going to ask Flo
and Joan to play us out in the style you'd expect from people who've spent
extensive time in Toronto. LAUGHTER And I do have some coordinates here.
LAUGHTER Cool. Toronto's quite a big city. It's not like I would have been
able.....worn a T-shirt to this recording that says, -"Home is Toronto." That's
true, actually. LAUGHTER I just thought it might be a conversation starter.
LAUGHTER That was a long trip not to find you there, I must say. LAUGHTER
Anyway, thanks for being here. LAUGHTER Thank you again for having us. OK, so we
got this script 24 hours ago. We assume because you were spending a lot of your
time researching us on the dark web. LAUGHTER This song is called The Travelling
Song. MUSIC PLAYS I'm on the road again And, baby, there's no time for talking I
said I would walk 500 miles In these boots that were made for walking One day
I'll fly away, come fly with me Leave on a jet plane Or we could take a yellow
submarine Somewhere beyond the sea And I don't care how I get there I'll get
there if I can, yes I'll fly away on a Zephyr Or Ernie's fastest milk cart in
the West LAUGHTER Yes, there's some more. And I remember life is a highway So I
got in my fast car I was on the road to nowhere Blessing the rains down in
Africa I've been around the world and aye, aye, aye Through wind and rain Gone
river deep, mountain high I've even been on George's midnight train And yes,
I've climbed every mountain Down a bridge over Troubled Water But I just want
those country roads To take me home, to take me home To a place I've never known
And that place is Hampshire CHEERING AND APPLAUSE That's Flo and Joan. You've
also been listening to Sakeesa. And me, Mark Watson. This is Mark Watson talking
about life. Thank you very much. Have a good evening. CHEERING AND APPLAUSE Mark
Watson Talks A Bit About Life was written and performed by Mark Watson, Flo and
Joan and special guest Sakeesa. It was produced by The Ang Coop... And it was an
impatient production for BBC Radio 4. Bye. Lily has something to tell Elizabeth
and Helen has the bit between her teeth in a couple of minutes. It's all going
on in Ambridge after the news. There are over 1.5 million postcodes in the UK.
The patch. On BBC Radio 4. We randomly pick one out... So which one do I press?
Clear the random postcards?..and uncover a story there you probably wouldn't
have heard about. They can't get the stuff to put in here, let alone a new
prison with 700 more staff. He said, we know exactly what's up there. We're
looking for something that shouldn't be up there. The Patch, on Radio 4 and BBC
Sound.