TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-02H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 It's 1 o'clock GMT. Hello and Namaste. I'm Divina Gupta and this is Business
Matters on the BBC World Service. Today we are live in India and Canada with our
guests who will be talking about business stories that are shaping your world.
So on the show we will be looking at Pakistan's deepening economic crisis. Its
currency is at a record low against the dollar. Food and fuel prices are going
up and in this scenario it desperately needs funds from the international
monetary aid. But will it be enough? My disappointment with the IMF is that
while they are going to lend about a billion dollars to Pakistan as part of the
next tranche, they have told us to go out and talk to countries ourselves.
You've all heard of influencers on social media, but what about de-influencing?
All that on Business Matters, but here's the latest BBC News. BBC News, I'm John
Shay. The US Justice Department has told a federal appeals court that the former
President Donald Trump should not be immune from prosecution over civil lawsuits
relating to the attack on the US Capitol two years ago. David Willis reports.
The US Justice Department has determined that whilst an American President might
enjoy considerable latitude when it comes to making remarks that some might deem
controversial, such a loophole does not extend to the incitement of violence.
Two police officers and nearly a dozen Democratic lawmakers have been seeking to
make Mr Trump personally liable for injuries, physical and psychological,
suffered on the day of the insurrection. A spokesman for Mr Trump urged the
courts to rule in short order and dismiss what he called frivolous lawsuits.
Clashes between protesters and the security forces outside an oil field in
southern Colombia have led to the deaths of a policeman and a civilian. After
the incident, community leaders took more than 80 police officers and oil field
workers hostage. Here's our America's editor, Leonardo Rocha. The violence
happened after days of protests by residents who'd blocked access to the oil
field in Caquet√° province in Colombia's Amazon rainforest region. The protesters
have been demanding that a company exploring for oil there carry out work to
improve conditions on a local road. The situation remains tense in an area where
dissident members of the FARC rebel group are known to operate. President
Gustavo Petro has sent a team to negotiate with community leaders. He has also
ordered the deployment of the armed forces in the province. The US Secretary of
State has told Russia's foreign minister that Washington is prepared to support
Ukraine to defend itself for as long as necessary. Antony Blinken and Sergei
Lavrov met briefly on the sidelines of the G20 summit in India, which ended
without a final statement because of disagreements over Russia's invasion. Mr
Blinken's spokesman, Ned Price, told the BBC that he had let Russia know
Washington backed Ukraine's proposal for peace to end what he called Moscow's
brutal aggression. Countries around the world have stood up for the UN Charter.
Ukraine has put forward a proposal for a just and durable peace to this.
Secretary Blinken wanted to convey to Foreign Minister Lavrov very directly,
very clearly, that we're going to continue to support Ukraine. We are ready,
willing to support any diplomatic initiative that Ukraine sees fit to bring
about that just and durable conclusion. The number of people confirmed dead in
Tuesday's train crash in Greece has risen to 57. Coroners have been using DNA
samples to identify the victims. Rail workers across Greece held a one-day
strike, insisting they'd repeatedly warned about lax standards and
underinvestment. More than 2,000 people protested for a second day in Athens,
where the passenger train started its journey, and in Thessaloniki, its intended
destination. World News from the BBC. A prominent lawyer in the United States
has been found guilty of killing his wife and son at their mansion. Alex Murdoch
showed little emotion as he was convicted of shooting the pair at their family
property in South Carolina in June 2021. Prosecutors said he wanted to distract
attention from his theft of millions of dollars from clients, which he used to
fund an expensive drug habit. A court in Cambodia is expected to announce its
verdict shortly in the treason case of the opposition leader Kem Sokhar, once
considered the main challenger to the long-term Prime Minister Hun Sen. If
convicted, he faces up to 30 years in jail. Kem Sokhar was accused of colluding
with foreign governments and arrested in 2017. The head of Britain's domestic
intelligence service, Ken McCallum, has made an unprecedented public apology for
MI5's failure to prevent a terrorist attack in Manchester in 2017. Mr McCallum
expressed deep regret after an official report found that the suicide attack,
which killed 22 people, might have been avoided if intelligence officers had
acted more promptly on information they received. Having examined all the
evidence, the chair of the inquiry has found that there was a realistic
possibility that actionable intelligence could have been obtained which might
have led to actions preventing the attack. Gathering covert intelligence is
difficult, but had we managed to seize the slim chance we had, those impacted
might not have experienced such appalling loss and trauma. I am profoundly sorry
that MI5 did not prevent the attack. The Scottish government has become the
first in the world to ban an anaesthetic gas named Desflurane from hospitals
because of its contribution to global warming. Desflurane has been widely used
for more than a decade, but there's growing recognition that it can be harmful
to the environment. And that's the latest BBC World News. Hello and Namaste. I'm
Devina Gupta and you're with Business Matters on the BBC World Service. It's a
show where we connect with two guests from two different sides of the world to
talk about business stories that are shaping your world. So thank you for your
company at this hour. It's 0105 GMT and with me in the gallery are Peter, Matt,
Becky and Paul. So wherever you are in the world, do drop us a hi or tell us
what you would like us to talk about at world.business at bbc.co.uk. Meanwhile,
here's what's coming up. We are live with our guests joining us from India and
Canada and on the show. Excellencies, we must all acknowledge that
multilateralism is in crisis today. That's India's Prime Minister Narendra Modi,
who addressed a group of 20 nations or G20 foreign ministers in Delhi on
Thursday. And as India plays host to this group, we take a look at the divided
house of G20 and what it means for global trade and economy. Also, why is there
talk of fears for the future of the London stock market? We talk about that more
as well, but let's welcome our guests. First, we have Madhavan Narayanan. He is
a freelance writer and former senior editor at Hindustan Times. Joining us from
Delhi. Good morning, Madhavan. Good morning. The flowers are blooming. And I
hope you had your tea. Yeah, well, I'm just sipping my tea while going live on
business matters and small luxuries of being on radio and not on TV. Well,
welcome. And let me get to Takara Small, who's also a Toronto based technology
journalist joining us from Canada. Hi, Takara, how are you? I'm good. And
ironically, I also have a cup of tea with me, too. Can I just say I also have a
cup of tea with me in the studio. We're all connected with chatter over tea. And
that's what we're doing on this show. So let's get started. Then our first
story, Pakistani rupee hitting a historic low against the dollar and telling
people about this is about how they feel about fuel and food imports that will
be getting more expensive. This is also the time when inflation is already at a
50 year high in Pakistan. And this is how it's making lives of ordinary people
very difficult. In these times, the common man can't afford to buy milk, sugar
or pulses, you name any necessity. These are all beyond the common man's buying
power. It's been hugely difficult to live on our earnings. I am a daily
labourer. I have to queue up for two or three hours in line to purchase subsided
flour. The regular prices are not affordable. We have barely 25 days of stock
left. If the dollars are not released immediately, there will be an immense
shortage of grain in Ramadan, meaning further hardship. Now the country is still
waiting to hear from the International Monetary Fund on whether it's going to
get some much needed funds. On its part, the IMF wants strict austerity
measures. So Pakistan's central bank raised the lending rates by 3% to 20% on
Thursday. And that is highest for any country in Asia now. So how are people of
Pakistan viewing these conditions put out by the IMF? Dr. Murtaza Syed has
worked as a deputy governor at Pakistan's central bank, the State Bank of
Pakistan, and he says the country is running out of options. I think for us,
there is no alternative to the IMF right now. In terms of their conditions, they
are fairly harsh. And, you know, one could argue that they need to be right now
because Pakistan's buffers have basically been used up. Our foreign exchange
reserves are very low. Our public debt is very high. Inflation is running at a
50-year high. So the stabilization is going to be ugly. But there are three
things I think that the IMF is missing right now. While they are talking about
protecting the poor through the stabilization, if you look at the measures that
they have agreed with or are about to agree with the authorities, there's a lot
of emphasis on indirect taxes. And indirect taxes, of course, are very
regressive. And it's disappointing not to see things like real estate, the
retail sector, agriculture being taxed. These are direct taxes and tend to fall
more on the rich. At the same time, in terms of social protection, there's only
a small program that protects 9 million people, which the IMF is, of course,
fully behind. But on a broader definition of poverty in Pakistan, if you'd use
the $3 a day definition that the World Bank has, about 90 million people are
poor in Pakistan. So I'm very worried about what happens to those people. That's
my first disappointment with the IMF program. The second disappointment is that
they are not coming clean about Pakistan's debt sustainability. To me,
Pakistan's public debt is unsustainable. We need a debt relief. And in the
absence of debt relief, the adjustment that the IMF will ask for is going to be
very harsh. And I think it will be very difficult on a population that's already
reeling from inflation that's very high and growth that is tanking. And finally,
my disappointment with the IMF is that this catalytic role that I was talking
about before, they're not really playing it this time. While they are going to
lend about a billion dollars to Pakistan as part of the next tranche, they've
told us to go out and talk to countries ourselves. And in fact, their ability to
even bring the World Bank on board has severely diminished over time, which is
something very different from my experiences when I used to be at the fund a few
years ago. I wanted to ask you that, Murtaza, that you've been part of the
system, and you've been part of the Central Bank as well. So which are the
countries that could come to Pakistan's aid from your experience? And how
difficult were those negotiations? You know, I think, of course, China right now
owns about 30% of our external debt. 10% of our debt is owed to the Paris Club,
the traditional sort of old boys network on official debt. This includes the
European countries, includes the US. Then we have about 40% of our debt that's
owed to multilaterals, which is the World Bank, the ADB, the IMF. I think if we
can get the traditional Paris Club members together, we can get the Chinese
together, and we can get the multilaterals together. I don't think it's
impossible to think of a solution to the debt problems that Pakistan has. And as
I said, that could be used as a template for other countries as well. And I
would add one more thing, that perhaps any debt relief that is provided to
countries like Pakistan could be tied to efforts that those countries make on
climate change, the sort of a debt for climate kind of swap, in terms of the
debt relief that is provided. I think that would be an amazing public good for
the world. That was Dr. Murtaza Syed, former Deputy Governor at Pakistan's
Central Bank. And let me start with you this with this, Madhavan, because
there's often a comparison between how Pakistan and India both started their
journey together, nations born at 1947, after the British rule left the
countries. And both of them essentially had similar kind of economic scenarios,
social challenges as well at that time, and they have a shared history. What
happened along the way? And where is Pakistan? Why is it that it's in this
scenario now? Well, maybe when an Indian comments on the Pakistani economy, you
have to be a bit, you know, make a disclosure. You know, it's not the easiest of
things to be across the border of a difficult border. But, you know, the point
is that India has always emphasized on the economic aspects of, you know,
development, as we call it. And in fact, even the fight against British rule
that India had was largely focused on economic issues. You know, there was what
is called the Swadeshi movement, self-reliance movement in economy. And then
Nehru built an economic industrial base. Now, Pakistan doesn't have an
industrial base. Its leading exports are textiles and rice. And the amazing work
done by Pakistani workers in the Gulf area, the Arabian Gulf, is what keeps a
lot of the economic momentum going. And with oil prices falling, that has been
difficult. And therefore, there's been a big lack of emphasis on economy in
general in Pakistan. And in fact, Napoleon once said the war is too serious a
business to left to the generals and we might want to add economy to that. The
generals have been running even fertilizer and, you know, milk companies, if I'm
not mistaken, and landlords and feudal landlords have been dominating the
Pakistani political economy, which is preventing a certain kind of industrial
base from rising. These are structural issues. And the IMF naturally is only
going to give a broad advice in terms of foreign direct investment being good
for the country. But if you do not have political stability, if there are, you
know, issues of constitutional stability, if there is no rule of law, then
investment becomes that much less. And also investment in education has only now
picked up in Pakistan, and if I'm not mistaken, it's largely in the private
sector. But as India has always had a state-led efforts at higher education,
best example being the IITs, which have produced the finest of Silicon Valley
founders and millionaires. So the two countries have gone completely different
paths since independence economically. Although interestingly, in 1991, when
Nawaz Sharif was prime minister, Pakistan's economic reforms were supposed to be
ahead of India, even the rupees, Pakistani rupee was around 22 or 21, and so was
India's. Right now you have the Pakistani rupees trading to 80 to the dollar,
whereas the Indian rupee is at 82, and India has what, hundreds of billions of
dollars in foreign exchange reserves. So the structural issues in Pakistan have
to be addressed, which is ironic because I have had the privilege of meeting Dr.
Mehboob-ul-Haq, who is the architect of the UN development, the Human
Development Index, was an excellent economist who used to be finance minister
under General Zia-ul-Haq. But they haven't got their act together. But I have
great exceptions. I'm a great fan of Pakistani television dramas, which are
among the best in the world. Maybe they should try entertainment as an export
industry, finest musicians. Yeah, we've had musicians from Pakistan performing
in the Indian film industry. Yeah, absolutely. And I mean, that kind of exchange
has been there. In fact, Pakistan has been known for its cultural and
entertainment industry as well and culture as well. But here's the point,
Madhavan, that when you talk about current situation in Pakistan, Dr. Syed was
mentioning that now it is so dire that some people have to pull out their
children from school because they can't afford school fee anymore. The kind of
forex reserve depletion that has been there in Pakistan, it's also leading to a
possible debt default to the tune of seven billion dollars if it's not paid by
June. How likely is it that the IMF loans would come through? And do you think
there could be aid which Pakistan is seeking from other countries that could
come from India as well? Well, India might be happy to help, but you know, for
instance, India has helped Turkey in spite of having trusty relations over
Turkey's support for Pakistan on Kashmir when Turkey suffered an earthquake. So,
in principle, India might be inclined to help Pakistan, but whether Pakistan
wants to take it is a separate issue. More important, I think, IMF always, you
know, I personally have my career linked to the IMF because, funnily enough, I
got my first job with the help of an essay on IMF in India and I got a big
promotion once because of that. And I've seen India structurally adjust under an
IMF program in the early 1990s. IMF always a very tough doctor. It only tells
you to tighten its belt. It doesn't tell you how to deal with your poor people.
That's for Pakistan to figure out. And that is where the biggest crisis is. It's
not about what you tax. It's about who you tax. And Pakistan has been very much
pussyfooting on that issue. It doesn't call out the fact that Pakistan
inequalities are far higher than India. And there's been a rich elite, landlords
and, you know, people who, you know, have mansions in London. And nothing has
been done to actually have a social discourse on this. Democracy is taking a
step, but it's so painful because they also have the problem of Islamic
fundamentalism on the table. And fundamentalism on the other hand. So, we can
only hope that a certain middle class, which is robust, active and educated in
places like Karachi and Lahore, rises up and seizes the opportunity. And that's
where I think Imran Khan is playing a major role. And we should look forward to
some structural adjustment. But there are no silver bullets. Absolutely. But
Takara, how is this crisis being viewed in Canada? You know, you mentioned the
headlines of Pakistan's economic crisis. I know that there were headlines when
we saw in Sri Lanka how people are queuing for petrol pumps. And then there were
civilian protests as well. Those were the headlines that were followed closely
by Canadian media. Is it following Pakistan economic crisis in the similar way?
Yes, it's definitely being viewed through a humanitarian issue rather than an
economic lens. And I think that has a lot to do with the fact that there is very
little trade comparatively between other surrounding nations and Canada. So, the
amount of trade import-export between the two countries are quite low. So, in
Canada, what we're seeing is a lot of emphasis on what this means for the
surrounding nations, what this means when it comes to any potential violence or
security. And of course, there's a heavy focus on flood recovery and
infrastructure. So, just recently, Canada decided to assist by giving millions
of dollars. But again, the way that the Pakistan situation is being portrayed is
often through humanitarian and what can be done to help individuals less on the
economic front. And in fact, Canada was one of the supporters when Pakistan
raised the issue of climate reparation. The country faced devastating floods
last year and was one of the leading voices at the Conference of Parties, which
was organized in Sharm el Sheikh last year. COP 27, it was demanding that richer
nations should actually pay the low-income countries which have faced these
devastating impact of climate change. And Canada was actually a supporter that,
yes, rich nations should be paying compensation. It is. I mean, Canada,
alongside Germany, another country that's been quite vocal in this area, have
definitely discussed the role that richer countries play. And I think it's
really interesting. It's not just in the sense of money and cents and dollars,
but also in what they should be doing in their own country. So, Canada announced
that it was going to reduce methane emissions. I think that's really important
because when you're talking about climate change, what richer countries do can
kind of trickle down to what developing countries pursue as well. So, I think
the fact that Canada is taking a much stronger stance when it comes to climate
compensation, but also to what's happening in my own country, is optimistically
a sign that things may change for the better. Well, climate change, sustainable
development goals were also part of conversations among G20 leaders in India's
capital city, Delhi, where Madhavan is joining us from. India was playing host
to foreign ministers from the Group of 20 nations, or G20, which had foreign
ministers from China, the US and Russia. Although there were angry exchanges
over Russia's war in Ukraine-dominated talks, there was also a moment where the
US Secretary of State, Antony Blinken, met his Russian counterpart, Russian
Foreign Minister, Sergey Lavrov. They met for the first time since the Ukraine
war for about 10 minutes on the sideline of this conference, but there was no
concrete way forward, Madhavan. How did you view this meeting? Well, I think the
symbolic victory lies in the fact that Antony Blinken from the US actually met
Russian counterpart Lavrov. That itself can be considered symbolic, but having
said that, the trust deficit between the US and Russia on the one hand, and US
and China on the other hand, makes it a very strong gridlock kind of a
situation. Therefore, expect no miracles. But the point is that the recent
supply of arms to Ukraine by the US has only worsened the frostiness, the cold,
you know, it's a sort of a new age cold war in which Moscow is still very much,
you know, having this runoff with Washington DC. But the question is who's going
to bail the cat? Which is true. India, Europe and Japan have to get together and
unless something happens there, I don't expect anything to really come through.
There has to be a new peace formula of some kind because otherwise Ukraine is
becoming a football between the US and Russia. And it's impacting the global
trade and globalization concept as well because today‚Ä¶ Europe and UK.
Absolutely, it seems to be like a divided house. There wasn't any joint
statement after this G20 foreign ministers meeting ended and something that
India's Prime Minister Narendra Modi also noted. Excellency, we must all
acknowledge that multilateralism is in crisis today. Now, this statement is
important because when you say that there are world's 19 most wealthiest nations
plus the European Union, which are coming together, they account for 85% of
global economic output, two thirds of the global population. And when you say
it's a divided house, I mean, Madhavan, let's talk about the fact that how is
the global trade impacted because of the geopolitical dynamics that you
mentioned earlier. I think it's important, first of all, that it affects the
stability for any investment in general. So, everybody is watching over the
shoulders on what will happen to oil prices, what will happen to energy prices
in Europe and what will happen to the US economy, which is already going through
a peculiar inflation sort of situation. So, it upsets the mood so much in the
backdrop of the recovery from COVID, which hasn't taken off. It's only creating
both economic and political mistrust all around. That is a big thing. Apart from
the sort of subtle nuclear threats that Putin seems to have been holding up. So,
this is a bit of a tragic situation in which a fresh round of global trade
negotiations can't take place. And we also have climate change in the backdrop
on which something has to be done. So, unless the G20 sort of gets together and
says climate change should be an opportunity and not a threat or some kind of a
peace formula is found out, all sorts of investments will be on freeze or hold,
which is actually going to be a vicious cycle situation. And that is being
played out, Takara, in Canada, isn't it? Because the government earlier this
week had banned video app TikTok, which basically is owned by ByteDance, which
is a Chinese company. The Canadian government has banned it from all government
issued devices. Is this part of growing trade tensions that one sees between the
US and China over tech companies as well? I mean, it is. You mentioned the
recent ban of TikTok on government devices, just government devices, at least as
of right now. And it's definitely, you know, part of not just, you know, the US,
but I mean, if you look at Western countries in Europe, you're seeing that
there's a push for the same type of legislation in the UK and Germany and other
countries have also implemented the same thing. And what we're seeing is this
new, as you mentioned, tension between China and Western governments. And I must
say, you know, talking about Ukraine being the football in between, you saw the
same thing when it came to the climate change conference. You saw that there is
this divided house and individuals were on either one side of the Ukraine issue
or the other. And I don't see this resolving or ending at any point in time. And
this new, you know, rule about TikTok on Canadian devices is definitely part of
that. Yes. And in fact, we've already seen that how there have been restrictions
from US companies, from investing in Chinese companies when it comes to
semiconductors and the technology for semiconductors. And that seems to be
heating. But very quickly then, Madhavan, before we wrap up this edition, can
India play a larger role? Oh, well, I think India should because it somehow has
that credibility between Russia. You know, Russia listens to India and so does
the US. And that's a pinhole of a chance for something to come up. But I think
unless Europe buys in, Europe and India and India and Japan and the three of
them should be talking to each other much more intensely than they are doing
now. Well, Madhavan and Takara, be with us. We would just take a very short
break and we will be coming up on the other side to talk more about the tech
industry and an interesting trend in the influencer economy called de-
influencing. If you've been listening to us, thank you. Do stay with us. Tell us
your views about the show and what you would like us to talk about on
world.business at bbc.co.uk. See you on the other side shortly. This is the BBC
World Service, where we're hearing about the women who made waves in the US
surfing community. I'm Patty Paniccia and I was a pro surfer back in the 1970s.
I'm just very happy to see the sport of women's surfing progressing to a good
professional caliber. Ben Boyer and I were part of a surfing revolution at a
time when 1960s attitudes toward women were still powerful. You know, the male
dominance of the administration of the sport kept women's surfing from growing.
The men were angry. They thought it was a joke. But then Margo Obert placed
ahead of a couple men. Now I'm traveling from California to Hawaii to meet up
with some of the people who were part of that revolution, as well as some of
today's top surf stars. I think all the girls from nowadays have no idea what it
was like back then. Women pro surfers battling the waves at bbcworldservice.com
slash documentaries or wherever you get your podcasts. You're listening to
Business Matters from the BBC World Service with me, Devina Gupta. Coming up in
the next half hour, why are some investors worried for the future of the London
stock market? And we all know about influencers and their strategies for brand
promotion. But what about de-influencing? More on that in a bit with our guests
from India and Canada after the latest world news. BBC News, I'm John Shay. The
US Justice Department says the former president, Donald Trump, should not be
immune from prosecution over civil lawsuits relating to the attack on the US
Capitol two years ago. It argued that incitement to violence could not be
considered part of a president's duties. Clashes between protesters and the
security forces outside an oil field in southern Colombia have led to the deaths
of a policeman and a civilian. Residents in Kakhetar province want a company
that's exploring for oil in the area to build a new road. The US Secretary of
State has told Russia's foreign minister that Washington is prepared to support
Ukraine for as long as necessary. Antony Blinken and Sergei Lavrov met briefly
on the sidelines of the G20 summit in India. A prominent lawyer in the United
States has been found guilty of killing his wife and son. Prosecutors said Alex
Murdoch wanted to distract attention from his theft of millions of dollars from
clients. A court in Cambodia is expected to announce its verdict shortly in the
treason case of the opposition leader. Kem Sokha is accused of colluding with
foreign governments. 57 people are now known to have died in Tuesday's train
crash in Greece. Rail workers in the country held a strike on Thursday,
insisting that they'd repeatedly warned about lax standards. A court in
Jerusalem has ordered the release of all eight suspects detained over a riot by
Jewish settlers in the occupied West Bank town of Hawara. The court said there
was a lack of evidence of their involvement. And the Scottish government has
become the first in the world to ban an anaesthetic gas from hospitals because
of its contribution to global warming. Desflurane has been widely used for more
than a decade, but there's growing recognition that it can be harmful to the
environment. And that's the latest BBC World News. Welcome back to Business
Matters with me, Divina Gupta. Thank you for your company at this hour. And we
have lots lined up for you in this side of the show. We have our guests from two
opposite sides of the world with us. Madhavan Narayanan, he's a freelance writer
and former senior editor at Hindustan Times. Joining us from India's capital
city, Delhi. And Takara Small, a Toronto-based technology journalist joining us
from Canada. So Madhavan and Takara, before we get into the next story, hand on
your heart, please. And Takara, first to you. Have you bought anything, any
product that's been endorsed by an influencer online? Hand on my heart, I have
not. No, definitely not the case. Really? All right. What about you, Madhavan?
Well, full disclosure, officially I'm also listed as an influencer, but on
Twitter, which is sort of boring. It's not really consumer products. But having
said that, I have never really bought any influencer endorsed product because of
an influencer, although there might have been coincidences. But I love those
Instagram ads which that show me niche products that do not come in the usual
big ticket advertising sort of campaigns. But yeah, influencer, no, I'm sort of
a journalist who has been taught to have, you know, some sort of a disbelief.
You know how journalists are. We sort of mistrust everyone, particularly random
people. Well, I've given in to temptation, I must say. I bought furniture. I
bought clothes. I have even ordered a fancy cake online for my sister's birthday
just because somebody was endorsing it. And I was like, oh, really? She'd
probably like it because it's been endorsed by this influencer. But well, so
basically, we are all familiar with influencers, then people using their
following on social media to share brands and advertising things for us to buy.
But now there is a trend that's promoting the opposite. I'm here to de-influence
you and help you save money. I'm going to tell you what you don't need and
something that might be better instead. Things you do not need to buy. This de-
influencing trend is absolutely amazing. And I had to hop on it. I feel like
when it comes to social media right now, it's very hard to depict what is worth
the hype. Let me influence you. Beauty edition. Just don't buy everything you
see on TikTok because it's not worth it. Most most of the time, it's not worth
it. I love the de-influencing trend. So here are all the things that I will de-
influence you from buying as somebody that spends thousands of dollars a year on
health, beauty, hair products. Well, that's just some of the videos on TikTok
talking about de-influencing, which basically is telling users which promoted
products are not worth the hype or just saying what not to buy. And to know
about it more, I actually spoke with an influencer on TikTok. She's a self-
styled life and spending coach, Paige Pritchard. The way that I think about it
is kind of the rejection of influencer culture, the culture of just buying
something because an influencer told you to buy it. And so in my mind, de-
influencing is the opposite of that and really the rejection of that. How are
influencers like you looking at this trend? What I'm personally seeing on social
media is there's kind of two buckets of the de-influencing trend, which the
first bucket, what that looks like is there's a lot of, you know, I would say
more traditional influencers who are doing videos where they are taking products
that they feel are overhyped or not necessarily worth the money. And they're
telling their followers about that. They're just saying, I would not recommend
this product to you. But then kind of in the same breath or later on in the
video, they're also recommending products that they do recommend. And to me,
that's not really de-influencing because it's really influencing just with a
different spin on it. But then there are, I would say, more true de-influencing
videos talking about ideas and mindset practices and just overall kind of like
theories that you can adopt so that you're not so easily influenced on social
media telling you, like, listen, you really truly don't need anything that these
influencers are telling you that you need to buy. And within those videos,
there's no products. There's no products being recommended or not recommended.
It's more just kind of like best practices and principles, which to me, that's
truly a de-influencing video. But how does this impact the influencer economy as
well? Because aren't influencers dependent on brand collaboration? So even if
they're recommending products, which are not top end products, but are lower end
products or cheaper alternatives to say luxury goods, they would still be
getting into some sort of brand collaboration. So just because someone isn't on
there recommending a product doesn't mean that there's not a way for them to
essentially like make money. There's so many other ways now that influencers are
being paid off of that, namely just from affiliate marketing. It still doesn't
mean that they're not making money off of that, because even if it's just a
product that the influencer themselves bought off, let's say, Amazon, they can
put that in their Amazon storefront, direct you as the viewer to that. If you
buy that, they do get a commission from that. So even when you're not seeing
like, oh, this is a very obvious collaboration with a brand, there's still many,
many different ways that an influencer can make money. Paige, what does it mean
for brands where influencers are stepping away from, say, certain expensive
brands? Well, I think it's going to be an interesting challenge for the brands.
And what I've actually heard of some brands doing is it's kind of like flipping
their strategy with influencers. And the brands are saying, hey, we want to pay
you so that you will not talk poorly about our product. And so I think it's like
the brands dealing with this interesting challenge of like, okay, here's this
influencer and she's bashing our product on social media. And she has a very
large following and a lot of influence. Can we actually go and pay her to not
talk poorly about our product? So I think you're going to start to see a lot
more of that of just like, hey, we want to just pay you just to kind of like
stay silent and not give a bad review of our product. And I've also heard of
brands reaching out to influencers and specifically asking them to do a de-
influencing video. However, it's the same type of video I was talking about
before of, hey, we want you to talk about a bunch of products that you don't
like. But then at the end of the video, talk about our product that you do like,
because I think as a viewer, when you're watching an influencer do a video like
that, it does in the viewer's mind, it does build credibility. When you're
hearing someone say, I don't like this, I don't like this, I don't like this,
but I do love this. That's life and spending coach Paige Pritchard, who's also
an influencer on TikTok. So, Tagara, let me come to you first, because is this,
whether it's an influencing trend or de-influencing trend, the debate goes on.
But is it a signal of a viewer's fatigue, social media users fatigue as well
from the overload of brand promotion by influencers? I think there's many
factors that go into it. One of the important things to remember is we are in a
time of quite heightened inflation and a lot of people don't have the type of
money they used to to spend on goods. So, these de-influencer individuals, this
trend, it kind of aligns with the fact that most people just do not have the
money and they don't want to see videos of people spending a large amount of
cash on things that aren't essential to their life. The second thing, which I
think is important, is people are being hit with so many ads and so many
promotional campaigns that they're desensitized to it. So, this is a new way to
grab an individual's attention without having to follow the same path as
everyone else. What's really interesting to me about this is there have been
DIY, environmentally focused influencers who've been doing this for a very long
time. So, hey, you have this item in your house, you can reuse it, reimagine it
for another purpose. So, there have been people doing this for a very long time.
And the troubling thing with this de-influencer movement is the fact that there
isn't much transparency. So, as was just mentioned, some people will be paid not
to talk bad about a certain product. So, it's not necessarily that these people
are delivering the hard truth. They can still be paid in a way that for the
viewer or someone who's watching on their phone isn't getting the full truth.
Madhavan, where do you stand on this? Is this a shift towards a performing
authenticity event where people are trying to project themselves as authentic,
but at the end of the day, it's just the same market mechanism? Yes, but I think
the good news, Devina, is that the influencer honeymoon is over in terms of
simple paid endorsements without applying your mind. I think we should separate
the men from the boys or the girls from the women in this. There are people who
influence using their credibility and analyzing the products and do not take
paid endorsements or when they take paid endorsements, they make full
disclosure. That is the kind of location we are looking at and the shakeout,
thanks to inflation and conversations on sustainability, will actually convert
de-influencing to a word that I just made up right now called smart-fluencing.
You know, if you're trying to talk people out of consumption or a certain
product is out-fluencing, let me make up better words rather than simple de-
influencing. That sounds so cumbersome. I think we have to look at just as any
good gadget guide can, without taking money from the manufacturer, can tell you
which is a better smartphone to buy. You can actually have it for any product
and particularly not being awed by the glamour of people. So you have a world
where Greta Thunberg is as much an icon as say, Kim Kardashian. So therefore you
have a certain new culture where ethically and environmentally conscious people
become influencers. So it's just like a difference between journalism and
advertising. You know, if there are the journalistic equivalent of influencers,
we should welcome them, you know, because they are going to take a hopefully
objective‚Ä¶ But that's the point. I mean, who decides who's authentic in this
world? I think the good news is where the shakeout has begun. So people will
know for themselves thanks to what I call conversations that are involving pros
and cons. All right. Well, if it's the market correction, as somebody would say,
looking at this kind of influencer economy as a market, then let the audience
decide. Let the viewers decide. But what does it mean for social media
companies, Takara? Because audiences are huge on social media, but growth is
stalling. TikTok even has plateaued. The app reached about a billion users just
last in 2021, and then the growth has slowed. There are companies which have
invested in social media acquisition and also expansion. They are now seeing
that the digital ad revenues are falling, and that's been a point of concern. So
if this kind of de-influencing trend is taking place, what does it mean for
social media companies? I think social media companies will have to turn their
eye to other avenues for money. And I think one of the more popular things we're
seeing right now are subscription services on social media. So for a very long
time, in order to be verified online, you had to have a certain number of
viewers. You had to have, you know, maintain a certain place in society. So I'm
a journalist, so I'm verified. So people know when I'm talking, it's actually
me. And you're starting to see Facebook and Twitter and other platforms allow
individuals to pay to be verified, because there are so many people who want to
portray that authenticity. They want to be viewed as a leader in their space. So
I think social media companies are going to start to pivot towards that. You
know, as we just mentioned, there are a lot of people who are trying to stand
out and de-influencing is one way. I think, you know, portraying this, you know,
image of verification that you are special is another way to do that. And
Madhavan, India is one of the biggest markets for social media companies like
Instagram or you have Facebook. And YouTube. So all of them are competing for
that kind of consumer space to try and earn from digital advertising. But TikTok
has been banned in the country. But Instagram has integrated with marketplaces
that lets users buy things they see on the app directly. So companies are still
doing deals with popular creators. What does it mean for an economy like India
where you have billions of people and smartphones and it's growing? Well,
actually, there is, please understand that the decline of a certain kind of
influencer doesn't mean a decline of marketing or influencer marketing as such.
That remains a very rich ecosystem. But whatever we are going through in
influencers today is something that has been gone through in the space of
advertising in the old world. You know, you have the Advertising Standards
Council of India. So I don't, I also expect some kind of a regulatory or self-
regulatory body even in influencers. Let me give you an example. A Bollywood
actor, Arshad Warsi, has been fined and banned from the stock market. Certainly
banned, I don't know if he's been fined as well. He was penalized because he was
endorsing a stock on a paid share on a paid endorsement. And that is very
prominent. That means the stock market regulator has cracked down on a so-called
influencer on YouTube. I think the same thing will happen and people will also
become more aware. But the opportunities in this kind of marketing at low cost
is so huge that let's not confuse it with a decline in the overall trend. What
is happening is what you rightly described as a market correction, which will be
probably strengthened by some legal and ethical requirements and maybe
regulatory oversight. That's where I think things are excited worldwide. And
India is probably going to be one of the more awakened economies alongside the
US because the entire technology revolution has been spotted and nurtured first
in the US and India and maybe Canada. But at least in this context, let me also
add that TikTok is banned in India. Yes. And let me also add on this note that
at least in this conversation, there are two more aware consumers. The third
one, yours truly, is still sometimes gullible when it comes to influencer
economy and the creators and they're endorsing their products. But I'm getting
there. I'm getting better now. This is an interesting story that I spotted
earlier. It's on Financial Times in Bloomberg, where many investors are now
voicing fears for the future of the London stock market. Now, this after two big
companies have decided to opt for US stock exchange listing instead of London
listing. And I caught up with my colleague BBC's Mark Sirian to explain what's
going on. The first company that is potentially looking to change its listing.
So when we talk about listing, we're talking about a company that has floated on
a stock market. What does that mean? It means that individuals and investment
funds and anyone can buy a share in that company. And that means that the
company in question that's sold its shares is able to raise money to invest and
to kind of get bigger or change its business model accordingly. Now, the first
company that we've heard of this week is a company called CRH, and they are
basically a building supplier, massive business based in Ireland. They've listed
on the London Stock Exchange and they're looking to change that listing and
float on the New York Stock Exchange. There's another company called Arm
Holdings and Arm Holdings make semiconductors, which is really important because
we all know about semiconductors and how they kind of drive the 21st century
economy. If you've got a phone or you've got a car, anything electronic, you've
got a semiconductor in it of some description. Arm Holdings is a part of that.
It's seen really as a jewel in the English kind of tech industry. It was started
out in 1983. It was originally listed in London until 2016. Then it was bought
by the Japanese bank, Sofi Bank, and then it's looking, the Sofi Bank are
looking to sell it back on, put it back on the stock market. Now, they have a
choice really between London and New York, and this is a really interesting case
here because if they were to put it onto London, then the idea is that, here we
are, London, it's a big stock exchange, it's a big area where you can raise
capital to change your business. But if they were to put that in New York, then
it does question London because a lot of the London Stock Exchange is full of
oil majors and what you call quite traditional businesses, miners and things
like that. But Mark, what does it mean in terms of the perception about the
London Stock Exchange? It's one of the biggest in the world as well. The UK
government has reportedly been lobbying hard for Arms Holdings to choose the
London Stock Exchange market. So what does it mean really when these companies
move? Well, I mean, let's start with the first part of that. I've been speaking
to someone involved in this. It's a gentleman by the name of Mark Austin. He is
the chair of the UK Secondary Capital Raising Review. And basically for our
Prime Minister, Rishi Sunak, he did a review about how to improve London's
competitiveness. And this he said to me this evening, this he said, would make
no mistake, it would be a blow to the reputation. Now, he said to me earlier
that you can change some of the rules, but it's about the appetite for risk.
That is one of the kind of cultural risk is the issue. Now, in the UK, there are
many funds that have to provide pensions and life assurance and things like
that. And it's their attitude towards risk that might be different. Say, for
example, an American or a potential European, but certainly in America, the
appetite for risk is slightly different. As a result, for example, many pension
funds in the UK own large chunks of like Google and Tesla and things like that.
You can see when you kind of go through their sort of business, their reviews of
their yearly reviews, you can see where they put their holdings. And you can see
it's quite amazing. Like, for example, local authorities in the UK have big
holdings of tech companies across the world. But what is clear is that you
aren't seeing the same sort of companies coming onto the stock market. That
said, for example, the London Stock Exchange did have in 2022, you know, a very,
very successful year. I mean, the London Stock Exchange had 41 companies list on
that for a total of 1.8 billion euros, that's 1.2 billion dollars. And that is
an astonishing amount of money raised by those companies. But it's these big
star companies that are listing on the London Stock Exchange or potentially not
or questioning whether they can get the same value. What does that mean
globally? Well, it means that companies sort of start to coalesce. They start to
look at where they're going to raise the most money. And obviously, at the
moment in that race, it appears that New York has a slight edge. That was BBC's
Mark Syriad. Madhavan, from where you are in India, there have been many
companies that have seen London as a go-to financial hub. And they've been
attracted to the London Stock Exchange as well for listing. But is that changing
now? Absolutely. I would say it has changed, not counting companies like
Vedanta, which are sort of listed in London. It's been a trend. Now, let me go
back to the 90s when I was working for Reuters and I was personally interacting
with London and Luxembourg stock exchanges, because at that time, the fashion
was to have Indian companies list in London because of the old British relations
and the London Stock Exchange being a prominent one. So, now, London used to be
the bridge for Indian investors or companies. Now, it's perhaps time to sing
London Bridges falling down because it's no longer the bridge. And the reason is
also because of technology. There are two important factors that are driving the
rise of Wall Street in the US. One is technology, which makes everything
virtual. And to the point where even India now has a competitor called the Gift
City in Gujarat. The Gujarat International Finance, I-Tech City. So, you know,
financial centers can be anywhere now. The other point is that we no longer have
British investors or European investors. We all have global investors and they
look forward to the best place with the best technology and the best regulatory
environment. Therefore, London is still strong, but the Brexit and all that
confusion over the UK economy has also rubbed off probably on London not being
so glamorous. So, you have to reinvent yourself and become global in outlook as
well as technology for really things to work. Regulation is a more complicated
issue. Some companies prefer to list in a less rigorous regulation environment,
whereas others see opportunities. It all depends on levels of disclosures and
the cultural comfort they have with the specific stock market. Having said that,
let me say London is still a great brand and you need to build on that brand and
you can't be sitting on old laurels and that's probably where London's gone
wrong. Well, just a little fact here. The index was created in 1984, in January
1984, and beginning at about 1000 points. But as you said, Madhavan, that it
still continues to hold strength because FTSE 100 reached fresh record high just
last month, touching an important psychological milestone of 8000. Please
understand that UK has a rich history of financial transactions and regulation
and the fun fact is that even East India Company, which led to the British rule,
colonial rule of India, was actually a joint stock company from London. And
therefore, there's a lot of good history and bad history and that experience
should be leveraged. That's the only way out. Well, and the other link, Takara,
if I could come to you and draw from where I am in Salford, which has a very
popular club, Manchester United. You have the owners, Glazers, who are listed in
the US. But what's the attractiveness of the US stock market as well? Because
this is a similar dilemma that many Canadian companies also face. From Canadian
Stock Exchange, they always feel that it is the US Stock Exchange, which is
their go to destination. It is, yes. I must have to say that line about London
Bridge falling down. That has stuck with me. While London is still a global
financial hub, I have to say that perception plays a really critical part. And
Brexit and the political instability will definitely have an impact on that. But
yes, in Canada, we definitely look to our neighbours to the south. And I think
most people have heard of Shopify. It's our tech darling. And they chose New
York as well. And I think that's because in the US, there's a much stronger
appetite for risk. There's a higher threshold. And let's just be honest, if
you're looking to raise, that country definitely has more opportunities than,
say, Canada and many other countries. So I think that's why you see a lot of
companies start to pivot or shift or lean towards the US over the UK. And I just
say I would not be surprised in the near future if more companies decide to as
well lean more towards the US or pivot just for the opportunities that exist
there and some of the economic and political hot potatoes that exist in the UK.
But Madhu here is also the point that there's a competition from the European
Union as well, because in the late 2022, just last year, there was a news that
the French stock exchange, which has topped London as Europe's biggest stock
exchange. So and this all came towards the concept of market capitalization,
which can be defined as the total value of shares in a particular company listed
on a stock exchange and that the Paris stock exchange market capitalization had
overtaken London. Is that a point of worry then? It is certainly a point of,
it's a big surprise to me to start with, because I never thought that Paris
would overtake London in terms of finance, given the global reach of the UK
economy over the centuries. But it only is a wake up call for London, perhaps,
you know, maybe we need a new way of looking at it. But let me emphasize again
that technology is the new London. And whoever gets the technology facts right
and would be probably attracting the best investors, because everything now can
happen on your smartphone. There's a lot that can be done there. But as an
investor, I mean, if you look at from the investor's point of view, which one do
you think are, which of the stock exchanges are more lucrative in that sense, if
you were a global investor? I think I have a very interesting concept called
cognitive convenience, which is that in the old world, you would go to your
nearest shop to buy something. These days, you would look at the convenience of
a familiar website or a higher branded, better packaged, you know, website. And
today, a NASDAQ kind of a listing offers a lot of opportunity for new age
companies because of its technology focus, as well as a certain kind of a free
disclosure environment where there's a lot of risk appetite wedded into the way
the whole market is structured. Well, we leave it there. That is fair, I think.
We leave it there. Madhavan and Takara, thank you for joining us. It's been a
pleasure speaking about different topics, about business stories, shaping our
world and talking about markets. I can just say that DAX will be opening and
European markets will be opening. But we're also looking at Nikkei trading in
green and Hang Seng in green. Thank you for being with Business Matters. Thank
you.