TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-06-11H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Friday morning at 9.45 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at 10 o'clock.
Refugee groups have criticised government plans to ban migrants from re-entering
the UK if they cross the Channel in small boats. Ministers say the new
legislation would include some narrow exemptions. More than 40 migrants were
brought to shore by a lifeboat in Dover this morning, taking the total number of
people who have made the crossing so far this year to just under 3,000. The
Shadow Health Secretary, Wes Streeting, said the plans were a rehash of old
proposals. It doesn't seem like anything new to be honest. I mean even Priti
Patel, the former Home Secretary, has described this as window dressing and said
there's nothing new in these proposals. We're slightly pulling our hair out
because like everyone else we're watching these small boats come across. It's a
completely unacceptable way for people to arrive but it's partly because the
government goes after headline grabbing gimmicks rather than trying to solve the
actual problem. The BBC has learned the cost per seat of deporting illegal
immigrants from the UK on Home Office chartered flights last year was more than
a typical first class return to New York. The government spent Â£12.7 million on
the flights, removing 1,500 people. Charities have described this as a total
waste of public money but the Home Office insists the spending is justified.
Elected mayors in the north of England say rail passengers face losing more than
20,000 services this year if cancellations continue at their current rate. One
operator, TransPennine Express, has failed to run a quarter of scheduled trains
in recent months. Police looking for five missing people who'd last been seen in
the early hours of Saturday morning after a night out in Cardiff have found
three of the group dead. It's thought they were involved in a road accident. The
other two missing people have been taken to hospital with serious injuries. And
it's thought firefighters will accept an improved pay deal today, ending the
threat of strikes. Members of the fire brigade's union voted to take industrial
action in January but the walkout was suspended when the new offer was tabled.
BBC News. You've probably heard of ChatGPT by now, the artificial intelligence
tool that's been in the news. Well, is it up to making a radio programme? We'll
be putting that to the test in a documentary by ChatGPT at eight o'clock this
evening. But now on Radio 4, it's time for Women's Hour with Nuala McGovern.
Hello, good morning. I hope your Monday is going well. This morning on Women's
Hour we have Malala, activist, Nobel Peace Prize winner and now executive
producer. Malala Yousafzai is working to tell stories to promote understanding
and compassion. And one of those stories is a documentary called Stranger at the
Gate. It's about an ex-marine who planned to bomb a mosque but instead was
transformed when met with kindness. You will also hear Malala's advice on
deciphering disinformation on social media. We also have Jade Adams today, the
comedian, dancer, actor, singer. She's starting a new tour called Men, I Can
Save You. So we'll talk about her saviour complex, dressing in all white, and
also how she plans to shine a light on South Bristol with a new TV show. And we
will turn from comedy to music festivals as well. Why are so few women
headlining this year's events? Now Glastonbury, you might have seen, they
released their line up with no women at the top of the bill. Some say it's a
pipeline problem. Is that a valid reason or just an excuse for not trying
harder? We'll discuss all that. And I need your thoughts on this. Do you
remember having a specific conversation about having kids with your partner? Was
it something dropped in early on or more of a continuous discussion over the
years perhaps? Or maybe you're at that point right now, or maybe you're thinking
about raising it or hoping he or she doesn't? Well we want to hear your stories.
If you have found or find yourself in a different place to your partner about
having kids, we have a woman we're calling Sarah joining us who is in that spot
and also a relationship counsellor to help us pick our way through what can be
an emotional minefield. So to get in touch, get those stories in to me or
questions, the number is 84844, text CHARGE at your standard message rate. On
social media we're at BBC Women's Hour or you can email us through our website
or indeed with your voice, a WhatsApp message or voice note, that number is
03700 100444. Really looking forward to hearing your thoughts on that one on
this Monday morning. But let us begin with the world famous activist and
youngest ever Nobel Peace Prize winner. Of course I'm talking about Malala
Yousafzai. She's somebody that we've watched grow up, right? She was just 12
when she began speaking out against the Taliban's ban on girls' education in her
home country of Pakistan. At 15, on her way home from school, a member of the
Taliban boarded her bus, asked for her by name and shot her in the head. But
that was just the start of her extraordinary life story. In the decades since,
Malala has continued to fight for the educational rights of girls and also women
all across the globe and received that Nobel Peace Prize, as I mentioned, for
her activism at just 17. And now she's 25 and she's taking on Hollywood. Most
recently as the executive producer of the short documentary film, Stranger at
the Gate. It has been nominated for an Oscar for Best Documentary Short. And the
film tells the story of Richard Mack McKinney. He was a US Marine veteran. He
planned an Islamophobic terror attack on a mosque in Indiana, only to be won
over while visiting that mosque by its congregants. In particular, one, Bibi
Bahrami, who befriended him. Bibi was interviewed on Radio 4's Sunday programme
yesterday. You can catch up on that interview on the BBC Sounds app. But first,
here is Malala. And I started by asking her why she chose to turn her attention
to Hollywood. Malala Yousafzai, Actor, Actress, Actor Hollywood is a place for
storytelling. And I believe that everybody deserves a chance to make it there
and to tell stories from their point of view. I am really excited that I am a 25
year old Pakistani Muslim young woman who made it to this place because we know
that, you know, we need to make sure that it is open to people from all
backgrounds. And we are seeing more representation of South Asian people. But
there's a lot more work that needs to be done. When we look at television, when
we look at movies, we often realise that, you know, it's missing the perspective
of so many people. And when you look at the representation of Muslims,
especially, they make up 25% of the population, but only 1% of them make it to
the to the movies, to the screen. So we want to be given the opportunity where
we can show things from our point of view. I'm really excited to be working now
and to be part of some incredible documentaries and movies as well. Well, I want
let's get into one of these documentaries because you're joining us because of
Stranger at the Gate. This is a film that you're supporting, really been an
ambassador for as executive producer. This is an extraordinary story. I watched
it and was gobsmacked at times. What did you think when you first watched it? I
remember watching it for the first time. I was in my living room and I watched
it on my laptop together with my husband. I had never heard the story before, so
I did not know what to anticipate. And I was just completely shocked by the end
of it. What a powerful story it was, how the life of a person can change by
human sympathy and compassion and kindness. I personally believe in those values
and it is quite difficult to preach about them without being able to show it to
people how life changing these could be. But in this short film, we can see that
happening. We can see how this kind Muslim family open their hearts and their
doors to this stranger who is secretly planning to kill all of them. And it's
their kindness and compassion that really changes the life of this person, Mac,
who later on, you know, changes his mind and he wants to spread the message of
love to others. There are so many strands through it and so many strong
characters as well. I was struck, you know, you said about the film that the
stories can teach us about ourselves, that you experienced that when you were
watching the film. And I would have thought that this ex-Marine possibly
suffering with PTSD, but definitely that had murder on his mind, would seem so
different to your story. I think there is a lot in common between these stories.
It is the dehumanization of another individual or another group of people. The
person who wanted to attack me was told that I was not, you know, I was this
alien person who did not belong to the community, who did not belong to the
faith. And as you make somebody an outsider, then it's easier to convince
somebody to harm them. And this is something that needs to be challenged. And we
can challenge that through storytelling, because stories connect you with people
from different corners of the world. It shows you that they're humans too. They
have the same emotions, feelings, they have families, they have meals together,
they have sad moments, they have happy moments. And it is through the power of
stories that, you know, I personally was able to learn more about the world. I
come from the north of Pakistan and I had never traveled before. And it was, you
know, with the help of the documentaries or the TV shows or the movies that I
would watch that I was learning about the world out there, that there are people
who go through the similar, some similar things as us. You know, they are
having, you know, they're worried about families, they're trying to find a job,
they are trying to make friends and they have those ups and downs as well. And
that's the power of these stories that they connect to. I understand. I will ask
you, I know Titanic is 25 years old at this stage. I know it was a favorite of
yours when you were in the Swat Valley and now you're on your way to the Oscars
with this film, which we'll come back to in a moment. But I want to think a
little bit more about this particular story and also trying to understand those
views that are different, perhaps from our own. There is one character, she's
really striking. Her name is Bibi Bahrami, some calling her the Mother Teresa of
this mosque in Indiana that Mack was targeting. She's an Afghan refugee. And
when she finds out what his intentions were to bomb her place of worship, she
invites him to dinner. You've met her. What is she like in the flesh? She has
changed the lives of so many people. It's not just Mack, that one person, but
she told us stories about other people that she has welcomed, people who just
thought that, you know, she did not belong in the country or they disagreed with
her faith. She said, you know, let's let's have a meal and let's talk. And that
is really breaking bread with people. But it is astonishing her capacity for
forgiveness, I thought, looking at her and also for Mack's potential for
redemption. I did read previously that you said you would forgive the man who
shot you if you met him. Again, extraordinary. What gives you that ability to
forgive? I believe that, you know, like what would happen if if I don't forgive
that person, like literally nothing would happen. So I my my personal view is
that forgiveness and compassion is really important to break the cycle of
hatred. I believe that the best way to take revenge against extremism and
violence is to spread love and to help people who need help. And for me to to
fight against what happened to me was to work for other other girls to have
access to education. That was the best way in which I could fight back what
happened to me. They wanted to stop one girl from having access to education.
Today I want to advocate for 130 million girls to have access to education. And
you know, when I achieved that goal, I would feel like I have lived a fulfilled
life. But we live in a time where there's a lot of divisiveness, you know,
whether it's online or in person with politics and culture wars, as they say. Do
you think people need to be more open to not cutting people off? I can say about
my personal approach to this, because when I come across an opinion that I may
not agree with or even very subtle acts of aggressions or inappropriate
comments, I always give the person benefit of the doubt. And I try to explain
things to people that, you know, if you think about it from this point of view
or where I come from, I see it this way. I always think that maybe the person
has not thought about it or maybe they need somebody to tell them, maybe nobody
has told them yet. And there's something for me to learn as well. Why somebody
is thinking a certain way, is it because they're limited in their exposure to
different opinions? And it's really making an effort and connecting with them. I
think once somebody connects with you, it changes their perspective as well.
Because like, for example, like I'm a Muslim, I wear a headscarf. I am from
Pakistan, I'm a Pashtun. And then if whoever has certain stereotypes in their
mind about these sort of people, when they interact with me, in their mind, they
should also be picturing me as well as a person, as a representation of them.
And we know that if you look at a religion and ethnicity or specific community,
people are complex and yet simple as well at the same time. We have people
coming from all different backgrounds and paths and stories. So it's really
important that we do not just see it as black and white and label people and
believe in those stereotypes about people. I love what you're saying Malala, and
your composure is legendary. But don't you ever get frustrated, like feel like
you're banging your head against a wall sometimes trying to, I don't know,
reconcile or find those connections perhaps at times? When you become an
activist, you get used to it. So, okay. And you are an activist and also doing
that, of course, through film at the moment. I'd be curious also for your
thoughts, because with this documentary, we know that Mac had extremist views,
but social media is such an interesting one. I was thinking of you and for young
people, there can be downsides that we hear about, particularly in relation to
mental health or maybe radicalization. But it is also where young people
organize, you know, in their tens of thousands or millions, I should probably
say. Do you think about it as a force for good or bad? I think this is a topic
that can take us some time to go in depth, but I would say that social media is
a tool and of course, those who are running it need to be more responsible in
what they allow on social media and how they set algorithms. And just be mindful
that every decision they make would have consequences. And they need to act with
more responsibility, but also people who are using social media can be more
responsible and ensure that they are not spreading any misinformation,
disinformation, false news, just double checking everything. We live in such a
sense of urgency every day about everything that we want people to just say
everything that we want them to say. And it's really important that we do not
say things in a rush. When we get exposed to a piece of information, we have to
question its credibility. Where does it come from, when and who wrote it, but
also the plausibility. Is it saying something plausible? Is it just two
sentences? Is there more detail to it? So it can be a really tiring and
exhausting platform as well. But on the other hand, I know that of course
there's a fun side to it as well. Everybody loves memes. Everybody enjoys those
funny tweets. So I do use social media, Instagram, Twitter, all of that. So I
would say that just be a bit more patient when using it. I did read that you put
your phone away, however, when you do deep work, when you're preparing for
something. How do you do that? Where does that self-discipline come from? I
would not say that I'm a very self-disciplined person, but when I have to do
work, then the work is important. I have no choice. That's what I would say. But
I just love scrolling through reels and TikTok videos. So that could be fun. And
it really helps me in escaping from a lot of my work. But other than that, when
it's time to do my work, then phone is put aside. Where is it put? In the
drawer? Do you leave it at the door? Turn it off? It could be just on the table,
but I won't look at it. You have such discipline. That's wonderful. You know, I
was loving your Twitter. What should we call it? Spat is too strong. Banter with
your husband. You're not picking up his socks. This is what I've read. You were
tweeting that any dirty socks that were left on the floor, they go straight in
the bin. And then I was wondering, is that the secret to having a career in film
along with, of course, so much of your activism? Do not get caught up in your
husband's chores. The sock story is funny because I think it was sort of my
misunderstanding. He said the socks were dirty. I was like, sure, you know,
dirty. Where do dirty things go in the bin? So but no, I think I am just lucky
to have such an amazing husband, partner, friend in my life. And he's somebody
who is like, I'm always impressed by him. He amazes me with his kindness and
support that he gives me. And he's like he's like a really proud. I would say
like if somebody is trying to define what a feminist husband would look like, I
could see that in him. Yeah, he does a lot for me. I'm always so happy for that.
So that's some of the downtime looking on the phone, whether it's Reels or
Instagram or whatever. What do you watch now that you're in the world of film? I
mean, is there I mentioned Titanic. I know that was a big favorite 25 years ago.
And I love the thought of little Malala, you know, watching it on a computer in
the Swat Valley. But now. So now like I watched everything everywhere all at
once recently. I loved it. I enjoyed it so much. And I was so lucky that I had
the opportunity to meet the stars in person and also moderate a Q&A at one of
their screenings. All the nominees, Oscar nominees were on the stage, the
producer, the directors and Michelle Yeoh and Kee Hai Kwan and Stephanie and
Jamie Lee. So it was it was just amazing to see all of them. I'm sure they were
delighted they had you as the moderator as well. When you go to the Oscars, so
there's quite a few you bumped into moderating. Is there anybody else you're
hoping to bump into on that day? Well, I already bumped into Tom Cruise and
Austin Butler. And I heard his deep voice, his Elvis voice. He yeah, that is I
can I can confirm he has that Elvis voice in real life. So no acting there. And
I am excited to see everybody. I mean, Rihanna is going to be performing at the
Oscars. There's going to be so many other incredible people. If just to be in
that room surrounded by these creative, talented people would be a huge
opportunity. Did you watch the latest Top Gun and Elvis? Yes, yes. I have seen
all the movies. I am just up to date on everything. This is part of the the
work, you know, when you get into Hollywood. May I ask you also something else
about the Oscars? Have you decided what you're going to wear? Well, that is a
tough question because we have been working on it for weeks now. We have so many
sketches and I think I know which one I like the most. So I will show it to you
all on the day. So you know, we talked about Schoolgirl in the Swat Valley in
Pakistan to executive producer in Hollywood with the Nobel Peace Prize just in
between that picked up. What's going to be next? I mean, I would think maybe
running for office, political office. Is that something you think about? Oh, I
still have time for that. Oh, you do. Definitely. And I wonder, would it be if
you're thinking about it in Pakistan or in the UK? Definitely not the UK. I
think the UK is, you know, I I would say that, you know, I'm not actually
thinking about like political office, but if I do, then I would definitely want
to play a role in Pakistan. But right now, my focus is movies and just doing the
work for girls education. I believe that we need to empower other young women
and girls to have the opportunity to become activists and to become
storytellers. You know, oftentimes all of these people have the talent, they
have the skills, but all they need is a platform. All they need is an
opportunity to do that. So I want to play that role to to help everybody else.
You know, just as I was fortunate enough to have my story and to share it with
the world. There are so many other girls whose stories we need to hear. Malala
Yousafzai there. And you can watch that documentary film for free, which she
executive produced. It's called Stranger at the Gate. It's now on YouTube and
the Oscars are on March 12th. Now, let's turn to music. Are you going to a
festival this year? Who is headlining? Have a listen to this. This is the lineup
for this year's Glastonbury Festival. OK, Guns N' Roses, Arctic Monkeys, Sir
Alton John, you're here. They're the headliners. What a lineup. But for the
astute among you, you might notice all those acts are male. The festival has
come under scrutiny for their announced lineup so far, which is 52 percent male.
And just 13 percent of festival headliners at the top 50 festivals in the UK
were female. Full lineups for this year. They're not out yet, so we can't see
whether it is better or worse. But the organiser of Glastonbury, Emily Eves, she
has said that they tried to book a female artist, but they pulled out. Well, we
try our best with them, with gender equality. And we obviously aim for 50-50.
Some years it's more, some years it's less. I mean, next year it's looking like
we've got two female headliners. This year we did have one and she unfortunately
had to pull out. So, you know, that changes, it changes all the time, you know.
And it's not just Glastonbury, the Wireless Festival as well as End of the Road,
All Points East. This year has all male headliners, as does Latitude, Reading
and Leeds. They have one female artist out of the three headliners. That's for
Leeds. This morning, we're hearing about plans, you might have seen this, Leviv
Aid. So this is like a Leviv Aid inspired concert, but it's happening in June
this year in Wembley to raise money for those impacted by the war in Ukraine.
And so far, the acts officially involved are U2, Pink and the Rolling Stones.
Let's talk about this. Fiona Stewart is CEO and owner of the annual Green Man
Festival. Vic Bain, founder of the F-List directory of female musicians and also
a PhD researcher at Queen Mary University. So I'm looking at women's careers in
the music industry. Let me start with you, Fiona. What's your reaction to the
lineup in Glastonbury? I mean, I do see Emily's challenges. It is very difficult
to book female headliners at the moment. And I agree with her. It is a pipeline
problem. We all seek to book female headliners, but it is challenging. You know,
it's changing. And I think all of the lineups need to be seen as a whole and
seen how many are being brought in lower down the bill. And I think that's very
positive with Glastonbury. So I think, you know, you need to look at it like
that. It's not always available. The same issues are at boardroom level or other
levels of senior people throughout the UK. You know, it's anything that's up to
that level is very much established. It's very male dominated. So there's a
couple of things there I just want to pick up on. What do you mean for our
listener or perhaps even how you understand what Emily means by a pipeline
problem? I think that there are less established headliners of a certain level,
just from a historical point of view, who have come into the sort of the legacy
of music over the last 20, 30 years. And that's been an issue. We're seeing
that. So for anyone, there's a certain stage of an artist that you need at a
headline level who's going to attract the tickets or the publicity or the impact
of that kind of act. And it's not someone, it's not anyone you can put in that
position. And it's going to take time for artists to reach that point. And it
is, you know, it is an issue. Let me throw it over to Vic, because I was also
struck Fiona that you talked about taking the event as a whole, that there may
be women lower down the bill. But is that good enough, Vic? Well, not really. I
mean, there's definitely a talent pool issue. I did research in 2019 that proved
that only 20% of signed artists to record labels are women. So the pool of
talent for those bigger festivals is definitely smaller, smaller than the male
talent that's being invested in by the music industry. But I do think festivals
such as Glastonbury almost have a moral responsibility to book more women at
that level. Well what about that? I'll throw back to you, Fiona, a moral
responsibility for a place like Glastonbury. Sure, you know, Emily's done an
awful lot to support diversity, and I'm sure she'll have tried her best. But the
reality is that it's not possible to always book who you want or who's
available, who's touring in any year. It's not up to us. It's who's available
and what the competition is. If people are able to come to the UK, obviously
since Brexit, touring is much more of an issue now. I think the big thing about
this, there is an eagerness within the music industry to book female artists.
That's not an issue. If you look at the wider issues to do with any multi-arts
event such as Glastonbury, there'll be many women represented in the arts across
that event. There has to be a situation where, you know, I mean Glastonbury is a
commercial organisation. It isn't public funded. It has to pursue something to
do with tickets and the other pressures it's got. But I do feel that the feeling
within Glastonbury and what Emily has said in the past is the fact that there's
a real concern within not just Emily, within the music industry to try and
address this and try and turn it around. So for example, with Glastonbury, we
see Lizzo is on the bill, but lower down. And you mentioned taking it the event
as a whole, but you know, why couldn't she have headlined? Emily has said she
could well have headlined, but the spot was promised to somebody else. And
obviously we don't know the machinations that go on politically behind the
scenes, but would that not have been an obvious choice for a headliner? Yes, I
take that. But you don't know what the commercial situation is as well. So
explain that to me, because it sounds like the commercial situation might get in
the way. What are they looking at? Well, when you book an artist, you're booking
at for a certain level on the bill. You know, you're paying a certain fee,
you're doing things for a certain fee. If you book people higher up on the bill,
it's not the same amount. I mean, I have no idea what the deal that's going on
there. So I can't say why this happened or not. But it is once something, it
sounds like there was a withdrawal very, very late in the day. People are booked
at certain levels on the bill for a certain situation. There's other issues to
do with commercial pressures, which are on there. There's lots of issues to do
with booking, which is something that only Glastonbury would know about. But I
think from what their explanation is that someone has left right at the end,
everything set up and these things happen. You know, these things do happen.
They, you know, think people can't, sometimes they can't tour. There's various
issues that happen and it's out of your control. I mean, ultimately, as I said,
you know, we do need to look at these festivals as the whole of the bill. You
know, looking down the line, seeing what's going on. I could understand if lower
on the bill it was all men as well, but I'm not seeing that. Yeah, but I suppose
that would have caused more upset if it were that way. But let me turn back to
you, Vic. Do you feel that the eagerness is there, as Fiona described, to have
women in those positions higher up, but other things can get in the way, the
pipeline problem being one, as we hear? Should there be an obligatory quota, for
example, when it comes to headliners, Vic? Well, no, I don't think it should be
obligatory, but it should definitely be voluntary and it should, you know, there
should definitely be more of an effort made. You gave a long list at the start
there of all of the festivals who've got total male headliners for, you know,
for every night that the festivals are on. And quite frankly, it's just not good
enough. I mean, if there was a female headliner already booked for this year's
Glastonbury and she had to pull out, I mean, why is Lizzo not doing that spot?
She has 13.3 million followers on Instagram. I mean, she's top of her game. She
really deserves a chance to headline. You know, I think it gets to a point
where, well, it reminds me of in 2015 when the Foo Fighters couldn't headline
one of the nights at Glastonbury because Dave Grohl, I think the week before he
broke his leg. So Florence and the Machine was elevated to headline that year.
And she was incredible. Even Dave Grohl said he was crying watching her
performance. She wouldn't have had that opportunity if the Foo Fighters had had
to pull out. So, you know, we need to give the women more of a chance, take more
creative risks. Glastonbury sells out before it announces its lineup. So it's
not so bound to commercial decisions like that. That is an interesting point,
actually. And I'm remembering BeyoncÃ© was Glastonbury in 2011. There was so much
hoo-ha about that because she was more a pop act than a rock act, for example,
which traditionally had been headlining. You mentioned Florence and the Machine
in 2015. So people might be wondering, are we going, for example, more maybe a
couple of steps back when it comes to having women in those particular roles? I
mean, do you think, Vic, that our promoters are prepared to take a chance on a
woman? Or is it different, for example, what they have to have done previously
before they can get on the main stage? Is it different to a man, a male
performer in that way? Well, it definitely seems to be. And in my PhD research,
I'm talking to dozens of women in music and both business and creative roles.
And I'm often told by women that they are told they can't get booked to play a
particular festival or a particular event because they've already got a woman on
the lineup. So that sort of... That slot is taken. The woman's slot is taken.
The woman's slot, you know, is if women are a genre of music. So, you know, I
mean, it's not to say that... I think Emily Evers has done a fantastic job over
the past six or seven years in equalising her stages. But that headline slot is
just so important to act as a, you know, a leader in the music industry and to
act as a role model for other female musicians. And before I let either of you
go, is there anywhere that you're looking at that you feel is doing a great job
when it comes to that parity? I'll begin with you, Vic, and then go to Fiona.
Well, through the F list, we're working with many smaller size festivals. I
really want to give a shout out to a festival in Yorkshire called Under the
Stars. Last summer, they had three female headliners. They've got one female
headliner this year and a male-female duo on their headline slots. So yeah, big
shout out to festivals like Under the Stars. OK, and what about you, Fiona? I
think generally, I think all of the festivals are trying to have a real go at
it. And I think that spirit of, I mean, I don't know where this thing is
tokenism, having a female act thing. I mean, I've never heard that before ever.
But you know, I think that certainly from the Green Man's point of view, we had
50-50 nearly last year, and we're still going for it. And I think that I see it
in other festivals as well. There's a massive positivity of trying to bring
women into music. And I think as well, there are other issues to do with this.
There is, I mean, we run the Green Man Rising competition last 15 years, and
only 23% of people who enter that competition are women. So you know, there is
other issues apart from this that need to be addressed. So I think what I'm
hearing is even before we get close to a festival stage, there are other issues
that need to be addressed. I think you both agree on that. Thank you both so
much for joining us. And that was Vic Bain, founder of the Effless Directory of
Female Musicians, also a PhD researcher at Queen Mary University, and Fiona
Stewart, the CEO and owner of the annual Green Man Festival. Thanks to you both.
You're listening to Woman's Hour. Later this week, we want to discuss teen
speak. That is the language and words that your teenage children use, which
leaves you baffled and scrambling to keep up. Now, whether it's those terms that
you've never heard before and that you just don't understand, or maybe those
words and phrases that you think you understand until you realise actually you
don't. They're being used in a completely different way. Cheddar, Gucci,
thirsty. How do you keep up? We want some examples of what teen speak baffles
you. We'd like you to send us some voice notes of what your teenager says. You
may want to decode it along the way, but do please ask their permission first.
OK, WhatsApp message or voice note, that number is 03700 100444 or text, that's
Woman's Hour 84844 or on social media, it's at BBC Woman's Hour or email us
through our website. And don't forget, you can listen to our programmes any time
of the day. It's the BBC Sounds app where you can get that. Just some messages
coming in on women in music. It would help Women's Cause if more were aimed to
be musicians, not just singers. It takes effort. In my 50 years at the lower
levels of pop music, too few women want to put that effort in, says John in
Nottingham. Does anybody want to respond to John? 84844. Now, we like to discuss
on this programme subjects that can be difficult, right? That people might
struggle to chat about with friends, family or even their partners. Situations
that many people will be trying to deal with, but as a society, we don't openly
talk about. And I think this next discussion is one of those. Lots of people
question whether or not they want to have children. And a listener we're calling
Sarah is here to talk about what it's like to be in a marriage when you and your
partner have different opinions on having kids. I'm also joined by Val Sampson.
She is a relationship counsellor. You're both very welcome to Woman's Hour. I
might just start with you, Val. When should the conversation of whether or not
to have kids be brought up in a relationship? Good morning, Nuala. I don't think
it's just one conversation. I think it's a lot of conversations, actually, as
your relationship evolves, your views on having children evolve. And I don't
think a sort of quick, shall we have them? Yes, and that's it, is enough,
really. And I think as we'll probably hear from my fellow guest, it can be
problematic, but it's really important to have the conversation and to continue
to have the conversation and to do it pretty early on. Early on what? Are we
talking about, I don't know, fifth date? Are we talking about six months in? Are
we talking about when there's serious commitment being talked about? I think
probably, certainly when there's serious commitment being talked about, because
you're thinking about what your life is going to look like if you meet somebody
and you think I'd like to be with them for a long time. So certainly by then, I
think probably first date's a bit early, but you can certainly bring the
conversation up. And as I say, it's a series of conversations as the
relationship develops. Well, let's meet Sarah, not her real name, as I'll
mention. Sarah, you met your husband just after university, I understand, and
married five years ago in your 20s. Were you having that conversation about
having kids throughout that process? And welcome. Hi, thanks. Yeah, we
absolutely were. We were talking about kids early, but we were young and it
seemed like a long way off. And while I think I'd always grown up with the idea
that I would have kids and I had these pictures of, I guess, you know, rosy
cheeked kids running in and out of a kitchen and me with a flammy apron. That
was probably the picture I had in my head when we were thinking about having
kids early. And as time's gone on, I'm now in my early 30s. The reality that I'm
seeing of parenting seems a lot less appealing. So I think although we had those
conversations early, we perhaps didn't know exactly what it might be like. And
we're finding that out more and more as time goes on. And that's changing the
conversations that we continue to have. Are you in different places? Yeah. And I
think maybe this is a little unusual in that I am increasingly feeling that I
don't want kids. And my husband had always assumed he would. And I think
although he's open to the possibility of not having them, the big question is
whether he will get to a point where he decides that actually he needs to have
kids in his life. We have an extremely happy marriage. We are deeply in love. We
want to be together forever. I think the only thing that would ensure that
didn't happen would be if he decides he can't live without kids and I decide I
can't have them. Oh, gosh. And there's Val, there can't be any compromise in
this decision either, right? Well, I think there are a lot of different ways to
be a parent. And there's a lot of different ways to have a good relationship
with the generation coming up behind you without being a parent. So when you're
in a situation like this, where there's a conflict, and by conflict, I don't
mean people, you know, scream at each other or throwing china, just one person
thinks one thing and someone thinks something else. The way that I normally work
with clients is we look at the feelings first. So we acknowledge and explore the
feelings or the beliefs that you have, which kind of prevent you getting to a
problem solving situation. So it may be, for example, sometimes I work with
people, and they've had a very unhappy childhood. And one of the things they
might say is, the last thing I'd want to do is to inflict that on someone else,
I need to have my own family. So you know, a we have to acknowledge that, and
then we think about, well, if you were to have a family, what would you do
differently? You know, sometimes someone might, a client might say, I don't want
to turn out like my mother, she was so resentful. And then we'd say, well, what
was going on in your mother's life, that meant that she felt unsupported, that
might have felt, you know, made her resentful. So it's not a process of trying
to persuade a client one way or the other. But what we're looking to do is get
as much information as we can, so that when you do make a decision, you feel
that you've made the best choice you can with all the information available. And
then you feel ready to embrace the path that you choose. Sarah, is it a fraught
decision making? I mean, is this, does it put you in turmoil? Or is it more
straightforward, this is clear, we'll work it out as a couple? No, I think it is
fraught. Although we, I think we argue well, I do think it's fraught, because
it's such a big decision. It's such a decision, it's such an irreversible
decision. And although I think you can apply cool logic to many decisions in
life, and you can put a pros and cons list, it seems to me that large parts of
the advantages of having kids that the parents talk about are intangible. So
it's really hard to picture life with kids and life without kids and to weigh
those things up in any logical way. So I think you can't help but have your
emotions be involved in that. And that can make it fraught. However, however
much we're trying to make the decision together, it's still tricky. Yes. And of
course, this is planning to be able to have kids and have them or not have them
because there will be Val, you know, couples, of course, that might want to have
kids, can't have them. And that's a whole different dynamic within the
relationship trying to work through that life without kids. Well, I think, you
know, what we're talking about is loss. And actually, whether it's a choice, you
know, you're able to have children, but you choose to have a life without them,
or you're not able to have children, and you would like them in your life. It's
actually coming to terms with that loss, and how that impacts on you and how
that impacts on the relationship. And then working out what you might be able to
do going forward to compensate in some way for that for that loss. But you do
have to acknowledge it first. And perhaps a loss for some, and maybe not for
others. So many people getting in touch with this 84844. Let me see. I went out
with a woman, this is a guy getting in touch, Anthony. Hi, Anthony. I went out
with a woman with an agenda. First thing she said on the first date was, I'm
wanting kids more or less immediately. And if you're not there, there is no
point in further dates. There was only one date. Pauline got in touch, says, I
didn't think about having a baby until married for nearly 10 years. And then
only after my husband told me he was feeling broody. What a gift our son is. I'm
glad that worked out for you, Pauline. Let me see another. I discussed wanting
children early on in any relationship. I didn't want them. It finished some, but
I can't understand why people don't broach it early on. It's fundamental and not
open to compromise. I'm now 70, married and happily child free. I'm wondering,
Sarah, what do you think when you hear some of those stories? Yeah, it's really
interesting. And I think I'm very aware that my viewpoint and my situation is a
little unusual. Firstly, just assuming that we do have the choice. We don't
know, but if we're assuming that we're able to have kids, I appreciate we're in
a very privileged position. But also I'm aware I have many female friends whose
relationships have ended because they wanted kids and their partners didn't. So
I know it's a little unusual, our situation. And lots of people will be probably
feeling a bit, maybe even jealous. I don't know. So I do appreciate that. I
think those conversations, having them early, that makes perfect sense to me.
And as I say, my husband and I did. But I do think it's very difficult to
imagine your life, especially, I mean, we met when we were 21, my husband and I.
It's really hard to imagine what it will actually be like in, let's say, 10
years time and how you'll both feel. So with the best one in the world, it's a
tricky thing to talk about early in a relationship. Here's one that came in. I'm
a 22 year old recent graduate and I see among my cohort, the men are much more
broody and open to having children than the women. I see them having a more
idealised, relaxed view of having children, talking about how fun and cute it
will be. I think women have a more realistic view of the impact that having
children will have on their lives. Let me turn back to you Val. And of course,
that's talking about male and female, but there'll be lots of same sex couples
that are having this exact same conversation, just depending on what that view
of the reality of raising children is actually like. What advice would you give
to couples, Val, that have a completely different opinion on what the reality
will be like? Well, I think, first of all, it's not a disaster because it means
you're both bringing something different to the conversation. So you're going to
cover a lot of bases. As you can probably imagine, I would say if it's something
you feel you can't resolve happily yourself, talk to a counsellor, get some
support with the conversation. And one of the things that I talk to my clients
about is what they think the purpose of having children is. And for some, it is
that rosy picture. For other people, it's someone to look after you when you're
old. Those two things aren't mutually exclusive. But I think if you're with a
third party in a counselling area, you get a chance to really kind of properly
talk it through. And as I was saying earlier, to acknowledge and explore the
feelings or sometimes the beliefs that you carry that you're not even that aware
of. So example, sometimes I might work with someone from a big family where all
of the siblings have had children. And there's a sense of, well, if I don't have
children, am I somehow letting my siblings down? Am I not really a member of
this family? Or am I going to disappoint my parents if I don't have
grandparents, grandchildren rather? So there's a lot to take on board and it's
worth putting time and investing time and energy in really thinking it through.
That the downside of not thinking it through is when I see couples down the line
who haven't had these conversations and whose relationships have really suffered
as a result. Yes. And I think it's probably a taboo about talking about whether
you've regretted having children. I know people open up to me about an awful lot
of things, but that one, not as much. And with same-sex couples, Eval, for
example, is the same issues that arise? Is it? It can be. Sometimes when I work
with same-sex couples, it's sometimes around timing, but then actually, I mean,
that's also the same with other couples as well. I think what we underestimate
actually is the impact of our own family experience on how we feel about
children and how we feel about being a parent. Sometimes we think, I'd love to
reproduce a family like mine. Sometimes we think, gosh, the last thing I'd want
to do is to make that mistake. So actually being able to explore our own
experience of being a child, because having a child does remind you very much of
your own childhood. If that's positive, it's great. If it wasn't so positive,
that's not such a good experience and you can get help to manage that. But
understanding what the kind of beliefs and experiences you're bringing with you
into the discussion really helps get you some clarity. Val Sampson, Relationship
Counsellor, thanks so much. Sarah, we wish you the best on whatever path your
future holds. Thanks so much for speaking to us so candidly this morning. Right,
I want to move on to the Bristolian comic, actor, singer, writer, star of last
year's Strictly Come Dancing. It's Jade Adams with us. She has written a brand
new show, Men I Can Save You, and it's exploring previous relationships with
men, what she has learnt. Her new tour, that's kicking off on Saturday in
London. Jade, good to have you with us. Thank you. I'm so pleased to be here.
Well, it's good to have you back. It was you that got Jane Garvey into hot water
last time when she referred to the Arctic Roll as a low level pudding. We're not
going to rehash that one. What was the inspiration for Men I Can Save You? Well,
when I'm creating a show, I sort of think about the things I'm thinking about
the most. I just split up with someone and I was thinking about what my role in
that breakup was and my role in all of the relationships that I've had in my
life that haven't worked out. And I was looking at that and thinking about, you
know, because as a comedian, I don't often want to say to an audience, you're
the ones that are making the mistakes. I like to figure out what my mistakes
are, because a lot of the time the audience will agree with me and make jokes
about that sort of thing. And I noticed in my life and also had a friend of mine
called Sophie Willan. You might have heard of her. She's a star and writer and
creator of Almost Not Normal, which I'm in as well. We were at her house and she
said to me, she was like, I'm talking to her about various things. We've been
friends for years. And I was at her house and I was like, well, you know, this
happens, this happens. She said, I don't want you to be offended, but I'm going
to say so much here. I need you to read a book. It's called Breaking Free of the
Drama Triangles and Victim Consciousness. Now I know you don't read, but it's
dead thin. And I have a bit of saviour complex and have brought people into my
life that need a little bit of geeing up and I put all of my effort into them.
And then what ends up happening and has happened in the past, I've, you know,
I've been clean two years of this behaviour, I'm pleased to say. But what has
happened in my past is that I've taken on little broken birds and I've fixed
them up and then they've flown away. And I just thought, you know, a lot of
people will respond quite well to this sort of topic of discussion, because I
think especially women go through that. And also, the reason why I did it is I
did another show, which is on Amazon Prime called Serious Black Jumper, and it
was a show for the women. And I thought, you know what, it's time to even that
up and do a show for the blokes as well. I, you know, I was watching that show,
chuckling away. I wanted to wear a black turtleneck today just in honour of you.
And I'm afraid I couldn't find a clean one in my house. But now instead, you are
performing wearing all white. How does that different clothing change mean or
what are you trying to manifest there? Well, what was really interesting about
Serious Black Jumper is it just started off as a bit of a joke. I'm a working
class woman who didn't grow up with conversations about feminism. And I just saw
on the internet and various media outlets that if you want to be taken seriously
as a woman, you put a black turtleneck on and you talk about feminism. I sort of
picked apart that in the show. And then I was thinking about this new show,
because what ended up happening is even though I was, you know, taking the mick
out of that situation, what ended up happening is I changed comedy's perspective
of me because they, you know, like I started off in drag. I was an Adele drag
act for a long time, been very part of the East London drag scene. And then I
entered a funny women, the funny women competition and won it in 2014. But I
haven't had like a normal route through it. And I was told by an ex-agent of
mine that people weren't taking me seriously as a stand-up comedian. So I just
was like, all right, I'll get rid of all the feathers and all the songs and all
the gays and I'll just put a black turtleneck on. And then for this show, I was
like, well, if that turtleneck is that powerful, then what would happen if I
just wore white for an entire, if I dress like Jesus for an entire year? And
basically people really think I've got, I've just got all my stuff together, you
know? And there's always a point in a celebrity's life, I hope you'll agree,
where you think at some point, well, I've smashed all of this and now it's time
for me to help other people. So I'm sort of, you know, it's a bit of a bit of
satire about the sort of the cult of celebrity and the self-help book. So this
is my self-help show for the men. So, well, I'm just thinking wearing white, I
mean, that takes a lot of effort. In London, you wouldn't last an hour. No, I'm
really, do you know what it's actually done? And I do this a lot. I don't know
how other people make their work, but I always start with an outfit, a color
palette, a thought I've had, and then a beginning and a middle and an end,
whatever that may be, and then I just get out on a stage somewhere. I normally
start at the Pleasants in Islington, and then I just get out on a stage and just
work it out with them. And what happened with the white outfit is after I went
through my breakup, I just started wearing white all the time because I watched
First Wives Club and I was, you know, you don't own me walking down the street
because I was just feeling, I was just feeling it, you know? And then I, and
then what happened is actually really slowed my life down because you can't
shovel food in your mouth. You have to be really, you can't, you have to think
about where you're sitting. And I went for a curry actually at the end of, I've
just finished filming Ruby Speaking for ITVX. And on the last day, we all, all
the cast, we went for a curry and I wore it all white and they were all
commenting on how I didn't get anything down me. What they didn't see is that I
did get a tiny bit on my trousers, but I just got it off with soda water. Look,
there's some tip. It comes off. It's a whole new look, but let's talk about Ruby
Speaking. So this is the character, the new series, as you mentioned, ITVX, and
you visited a call centre in Cardiff for research, but this is really about
South Bristol. Why does it need a shout out? Bristol in itself is an incredible
city that I have, I had the privilege of moving back to because I had to move to
London because back in 2011, there wasn't as many opportunities in Bristol for
me to sort of attach myself to. But I've come back, I came back two years ago.
I'm now living here. You're talking to me live from Bristol and it is a
spectacular city and is everything that I am and coming back to it and just
immersing myself in the culture here. It's just one of those cities that has, it
links, you know, the working class history here, like the people that live here
are really normal, like salt of the earth, really clever, intelligent people,
but also there's this creative side of it, which, you know, Banksy is really
forced into the city as well. He's one of our most famous exports, Iman
Darfader. And it just needs to be celebrated. And I grew up in South Bristol and
it's everything always focuses on the Bristol suspension, the Clifton Suspension
Bridge, which is a great area. And I love Clifton. I love going for dinner
there, but it's very affluent. South Bristol is a bit more real and I think it's
really vibrant. And there's lots of people that live here. We were walking
around. We wrapped our series in Totterdown, near where I grew up. And what was
really interesting is you're walking around, not a single person's got a normal,
like, you know, like what would be described as a normal haircut. They've all
got like bits shaven off. It's like, you know, they're all really colourful
people. So I just thought, what a perfect city to set this show in. And also
it's where I'm from. It's where you're from. I loved from your Amazon special
talking about feminism and working class women. It says, yeah, they're just in
charge. Matriarchal societies, you know, that's that's working class life for
me. You know, my mum, my mum's a very confident woman with her opinions. I'm
going to leave it there, Jade, but I do want to let everybody know, Jade Adams
has a new tour. It is starting on Saturday. It's Men I Can Save You. Thanks so
much for spending some time with us here on Woman's Hour. And she does
everything, right? Dance, sing, actor, comedian. And you can catch her from this
weekend touring the UK. Tomorrow, I do hope you'll join me again. We'll be
joined by the writer Heidi Thomas, who will be talking about the film
Hallelujah, the story of a geriatric ward in a small Yorkshire hospital
threatened with closure. It's fabulous. I started watching that. We'll talk
about it tomorrow. See you then. Woman's Hour was presented by Nuala McGovern
and produced by Louise Corley. The studio engineer was Gail Gordon. And just
worth noting, too, that Malala Yousafzai, who we heard from at the start of the
programme today, shared her musical inspirations with Lauren Laverne a couple of
years ago. Just go to BBC Sounds where you can find that and many more editions
of Desert Island Discs.