TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-19H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at 6 o'clock. This is Jane Steele. Good evening. A rapist whose
decision to transition from man to woman while awaiting trial caused a political
row in the Holyrood and Westminster parliaments has been jailed for eight years.
You see yourself as the victim in this situation. You are not. A woman and her
boyfriend who have been arrested after going missing with their newborn baby at
the beginning of January are being held on suspicion of gross negligence
manslaughter. The baby was not with them and we have not found the baby yet. Our
key priority has been finding the baby. The Prime Minister has been meeting
political parties in Northern Ireland at his own back benches to try to bolster
support for a new post-Brexit trade deal with the EU. There's been a big rise in
the number of people sleeping rough in England. A woman who used a fake medical
degree to work as a psychiatrist for more than 20 years has been jailed. The
High Court in Edinburgh has handed an eight-year sentence to a transgender woman
for raping two women when still a man. Isla Bryson, who's 31 and from Clydebank,
committed the crimes in 2016 and 2019. The judge said Bryson had not yet
accepted responsibility and posed a high risk of re-offending. The case prompted
political controversy, a constitutional stand-off with Westminster and heated
debate about where transgender inmates should be held. Our Scotland
correspondent Lorna Gordon reports from Edinburgh. Isla Bryson attacked the two
women in Clydebank and Glasgow in 2016 and 2019 while known as a man called Adam
Graham. After being arrested and charged, Bryson then started transitioning
while awaiting trial. After being found guilty, the double rapist was initially
sent to a woman's prison but days later moved to a jail for men after details
became public and attracted political controversy. Bryson's lawyers said private
and personal decisions on gender should have no bearing on the court proceedings
and that since being found guilty of double rape, his client had been subjected
to ill-judged, ill-informed and ignorant comments. The judge, Lord Scott, said
he had taken no account of anything said outside court. He said that Bryson,
while in some ways a vulnerable adult, had preyed on the two women who were also
vulnerable, raping them in their own homes where they had been entitled to feel
safe. Without any foundation, you claim to believe that the two victims may know
each other and have colluded in their claims. You have constructed an
alternative account of events which was rejected by the jury. I will therefore
ignore it. You see yourself as the victim in this situation. You are not. Lord
Scott said Bryson had continued to vehemently deny the offences and that the
seriousness of the crimes outweighed any mitigatory circumstances. I am
concerned to ensure that the public is adequately protected against serious harm
from you when you are released from prison. It is plain that you present a
particularly significant risk to any woman with whom you form a relationship.
Bryson's estranged wife, Shona Graham, said Bryson, who she said had tried to
stab and rape her, was claiming to be a woman to get, in her words, an easy
ride. You cannae do a crime as a man and then you want to transition once you've
been charged with it. I don't see that. That's how you know it's all a big joke
to him. He's a joke. Isla Bryson is believed to be the first transgender person
identifying as a woman who has been convicted of rape in Scotland. Their eight-
year prison sentence will be followed by three years of supervision by the
authorities. The Bryson case had significant ramifications outside the
courtroom. The guilty verdict came after the Holyrood Parliament passed a
controversial law allowing people to change their legally recognised gender
through self-identification without a medical diagnosis. Opponents of the
legislation saw this case as justifying their concerns. The UK government then
stepped in and blocked the Gender Recognition Reform Act. Our Scotland editor
James Cook considers the wider issues highlighted by Bryson's crimes. Is Isla
Bryson a woman and who decides? The logic of gender self-identification implies
that only an individual can make such a judgement and the state should have no
role. But opponents of the principle say a rapist decision, taken after being
charged to renounce male identity, should not be taken at face value. The Bryson
case doesn't just pose abstract philosophical questions but vivid practical
ones. It prompted a change in Scottish prison service policy which now requires
all inmates to be placed, initially, in jails which accord with their sex at
birth. Yesterday, England and Wales moved in a similar direction, banning trans
women convicted of violent offences from female prisons. The case may also cast
a shadow over the outgoing First Minister Nicola Sturgeon's legacy of social
liberalisation, with her potential successors now debating whether to embrace or
reject the progressive cultural agenda which she espoused. The parents of a
missing two-month-old baby have been arrested on suspicion of gross negligence
manslaughter. Constance Martin and her boyfriend Mark Gordon, a convicted sex
offender, were detained by police last night in Brighton. They had been in
hiding since the child was born early last month. The baby has still not been
found. From Brighton, our Home Affairs correspondent Daniel Sanford reports. All
day, police officers have been working their way slowly through allotments in
North Brighton, searching for a missing baby. Every shed and greenhouse was
being checked, with temperatures close to zero, in the hunt for the child who
was born less than three months ago. The baby's parents, Constance Martin and
Mark Gordon, were arrested last night after a police hunt that began in January.
They were re-arrested today on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. The
Metropolitan Police's Detective Superintendent Lewis Baceford, who's leading the
investigation, said the couple were found on a road leading to the allotments
and a golf course and the south downs beyond, but the child was nowhere to be
seen. The baby was not with them and we have not found the baby yet. The police
helicopter, sniffer dogs, thermal imaging cameras and drones are being used to
assist officers on the ground. We currently have over 200 officers from multiple
units across the Metropolitan Police and Sussex Police involved in the search.
Constance Martin comes from a hugely wealthy family. Her father was a page to
the late Queen, but she dropped out of drama school in 2016 when she met Mark
Gordon. He was convicted of rape in the United States, aged just 14, and served
20 years in prison. He's still on the sex offenders register, which may explain
why the couple started hiding from the authorities in September when Constance
Martin got pregnant. Police believe the baby was born in the back of a car in
early January. On January 5th, the vehicle caught fire on the M61 near Bolton.
The couple took a series of taxis over the next few days and were last seen in
Newhaven on January 8th, carrying a blue tent from Argos. Detectives say they
still hope the baby is alive, perhaps being looked after by someone else, but
they say they are extremely concerned. The Prime Minister says new post-Brexit
trading arrangements agreed with the European Union could help make Northern
Ireland the most exciting economic zone in the world. Rishi Sunak has spent the
day promoting the Windsor Framework and holding talks with some of the main
parties at Stormont. The Democratic Unionists, who are crucial to restoring
power sharing, are still examining the details of the agreement. Our Ireland
correspondent Chris Page reports. Rishi Sunak came to Northern Ireland to try to
sell his deal to politicians, businesses and the public. He chose a Coca-Cola
factory to make his pitch that a restoration of the Stormont executive could
lead to a global economic powerhouse. Northern Ireland is in the unbelievably
special position in having privileged access, not just to the UK home market but
also the European Union single market and that is the prize. The Democratic
Unionist Party has in effect vetoed the operation of the power sharing devolved
government for more than a year in protest against the trade border with Great
Britain. London and Brussels hope the Windsor Framework will pave the way for
devolution at Stormont to return. The DUP leader Sir Geoffrey Donaldson said his
party wouldn't rush its assessment of whether the deal would remove barriers
with the rest of the UK. Progress has been made, we continue to have some
concerns, we will examine the legal text and come to a decision. We're
reasonable people but we want to ensure that what the Prime Minister has said is
matched by what is actually in the agreement itself. If Stormont does come back
Sinn FÃ©in will hold the position of First Minister for the first time. In the
Irish Parliament in Dublin, the party president Mary Lou MacDonald said the DUP
should allow power sharing in Belfast to resume immediately. Even by their own
logic there exists now no justification for the DUP to continue this reckless
and damaging boycott of democracy. Businesses have broadly welcomed the new
agreement. Sarah Hards is Managing Director of AM Logistics in Lorne. The amount
of paperwork required to bring goods in from GB to Northern Ireland has
dramatically reduced and we're almost at pre-Brexit stages which is really good
news. Practicalities are being worked out and political strategies are being
considered. But it may be a number of weeks before people see if the Windsor
Framework is a firm stepping stone towards stability in Northern Ireland. A key
part of the Framework is what's called the Stormont Break which is a veto for
Northern Ireland over future EU law. The Prime Minister has described the break
as incredibly powerful. Our Northern Ireland political editor Enda McLafferty
considers how it will work. The government in Westminster says MLAs will be able
to use this tool to flag concerns about new EU laws with London. 30 is the magic
number of MLAs from two or more parties needed to raise an objection. Unionists
alone could do this as they have the numbers. The government has confirmed that
in a shift away from the normal petition of concern, which is the Stormont tool
used to protect minority parties, a cross-community vote is not required before
the break is triggered. The veto ultimately lies with London and it is for the
UK government to decide whether to suspend the law and pursue further
arbitration with Brussels. Crucially, both the UK and EU say the break is meant
to be a last resort and cannot be used for trivial reasons. It also hinges on
the DUP returning to the Stormont Executive and on more legislation passing
through Westminster before it could come into play. The owners and managers of
12,500 high-rise buildings in England have been given six months to register
with a new safety regulator or risk prosecution. The rule has been introduced as
a result of the Grenfell Tower fire in 2017. It will make a named person
responsible for the safety of each building. The aim is to remove confusion over
who is liable for maintenance. Our Home Affairs correspondent Tom Symons
reports. The public inquiry into the Grenfell disaster is likely to criticise
the management of the West London Tower block when its final report is published
later this year. The fire was followed by a building safety crisis. Thousands of
residents were told their flats might be at risk due to the use of dangerous
materials during construction. A new regulator was set up to enforce stricter
rules for buildings higher than 18 metres or around seven floors. The
requirement for a named person to register as legally responsible for each high-
rise block will allow the regulator to take action if the rules aren't followed.
The aim is to remove confusion and buck-passing from the management of safety in
both the construction and maintenance of buildings. Owners or managers of more
than 12,000 high-rises will have to register by October or face investigation
and possible prosecution. The number of people estimated to be sleeping rough in
England has risen for the first time since 2017. Government statistics show
there were more than 3,000 people sleeping outside on a single night last
autumn. The figure is 26% higher than in 2021. Our social affairs correspondent
Michael Buchanan has the details. This increase comes after four years of the
numbers falling, but they included exceptional measures introduced by the
government to take people off the streets during the pandemic. Most of those
rough sleeping are from the UK, male and aged over 26. Although all areas of
England saw a rise, almost half of rough sleepers were found in London and the
south-east. The numbers in the capital, for instance, increased by a third.
Charities say they're seeing people having to sleep rough due to cost of living
pressures, including rising rent levels and stretched support services,
particularly in mental health. David Ingerslecht from the homeless charity St
Mungo's says that as these figures are a snapshot, the real number of rough
sleepers is almost certainly higher. What our team is seeing in terms of the
number of people who are approaching us for help when they're rough sleeping is
a sustained increase and an increased risk for rough sleeping. And it's slightly
harder to get people into accommodation because the supported housing system
that we can refer people into hasn't got the move on rates that it needs. So it
hasn't got the spaces coming up for us to get people in. This rough sleeping
count was started in 2010. Today's figures are three quarters higher than then,
though still markedly lower than the peak of 2017. The government says it's
spending around Â£500 million tackling the problem, but a chronic lack of
affordable housing means its promise to end rough sleeping by next year looks
forlorn. You're listening to The Six O'Clock News on BBC Radio 4. The main news
so far. A rapist whose decision to transition from man to woman while awaiting
trial caused a political row in the Holyrood and Westminster parliaments has
been jailed for eight years. The parents of a missing baby have been arrested on
suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter after spending nearly two months in
hiding. Still to come... I feel like it's very comfortable and I hope it will
help me in fulfilling my dream to one day play at Glastonbury with my band. A
special technology suit, a young disabled musician's dream and the mother of
invention. A woman has been jailed for seven years for pretending to be a
qualified psychiatrist. Zolia Elami, who's from Burnley, used a fake degree
certificate to get jobs in the NHS across the UK and in the private sector.
Manchester Crown Court was told she'd earned more than a million pounds during
her fraudulent career. Passing sentence, the judge said Elami had moved around
the country to avoid detection and criticised the General Medical Council for
its lack of scrutiny. Our correspondent Nick Garnett reports. Elami started a
medical degree in New Zealand but never bothered finishing it. However, that
didn't stop her coming to Britain and pretending to be a psychiatrist, treating
a large number of vulnerable patients during her career. She was able to
register with the General Medical Council using a fake degree certificate and a
reference from an employer in Pakistan. Manchester Crown Court heard Elami had
been convicted five years ago of forging the will of an elderly woman in her
care. At the time, her employers still thought she was medically certified, but
a newspaper reporter rang the university in New Zealand to carry out a
background check, which revealed she'd never qualified. The police were called
in. Detective Superintendent Matt Scott of Cumbria Police thinks Elami was able
to carry on practising for so many years that she began to believe her own
deception. I think it casts a shadow over all of the decent, qualified, good
doctors and medics throughout the UK. I just think that this woman has sold a
lie and has lived that lie and I think potentially, in my opinion, has believed
that lie herself at some point. The case raises questions over the monitoring of
qualifications by the General Medical Council. The judge, Hilary Manley,
described Elami's GMC registration as an abject failure of scrutiny and called
on the medical registration body to carry out a thorough, open and transparent
inquiry. The GMC says since the case came to light, it has checked the
qualifications of more than 3,000 doctors who registered using the same method
as Elami and found everyone else was properly qualified. A doctor has told a
court that he felt extremely uncomfortable at the thought of the nurse Lucy
Letby being alone with a baby girl. Ms Letby is accused of murdering seven
babies and attempting to murder ten others at the Countess of Chester Hospital
between 2015 and 2016. Dr Ravi Jayaram also told the jury that concerns had been
raised with management months before she was taken off duty. Our North of
England correspondent Judith Moritz reports from Manchester Crown Court. The
intensive care room at the neonatal unit at the Countess of Chester Hospital is
where the sickest babies are looked after. A tiny girl known as Baby K was taken
there after being born 15 weeks prematurely in February 2016. When she was less
than two hours old, she was temporarily left in the sole care of Lucy Letby.
Doctors on the unit had become concerned about the number of babies who were
falling ill or dying and the nurse's presence on each occasion. The consultant
that night, Dr Ravi Jayaram, told the jury that he felt extremely uncomfortable
at the thought of Nurse Letby being left alone with a child and went to check on
her. He said, you can call me hysterical, you can call me irrational, but that's
how I felt. I got up to check on Baby K to prove to myself that I needed to stop
being ridiculous. But he said he found the baby's oxygen levels had dropped and
Lucy Letby was standing by the incubator doing nothing. The consultant saw the
baby's breathing tube had been dislodged. Lucy Letby's defence team argued the
tube may have become dislodged on its own because of the baby's movements. Ravi
Jayaram told the court doctors had raised concerns with hospital management
eight months before Nurse Letby was removed from duty. Baby K was later moved to
another hospital, where she died three days later. However, the prosecution is
not alleging that Miss Letby caused her death. Lucy Letby denies all the charges
against her. Three locations off the English coast will be subject to the
strictest possible environmental safeguards after the government designated them
as highly protected marine areas. This means activities such as fishing,
construction and dredging will be banned when the rules come into force later
this year. Some environmental groups say they're disappointed that two other
areas have not been given the same status. More details from our science
correspondent, Helen Briggs. The waters off the British Isles have spectacular
wildlife, from reefs built entirely by worms to starfish, lobsters, eels and
seabirds such as gannets and kittywakes. To protect these natural wonders and
the environment in which they live, the government's setting up highly protected
marine areas, or HPMAs, at three locations off the English coast from July, at
Allenby Bay in Cumbria, Farnes Deep in the North Sea and Dolphin Head off the
coast of West Sussex. Fishing will be banned, along with activities that damage
the seabed, such as mining and laying cables. But two other pilot sites have
been dropped, including off Northumberland's Holy Island, following concerns a
ban on fishing could damage the local economy. Dr Lisa Beatty from the Wildlife
Trust says the government must designate more fully protected marine areas as
soon as possible. I'm totally dismayed that the government have today decided to
only designate three of the five proposed highly protected marine areas. They
were a good first step, but we really need to do more if we're to turn the tide
on nature's recovery and bring wildlife back. Scientists say 30% of seas
worldwide must be protected for nature by the end of the decade. But campaigners
point out that the three pilot sites cover less than 0.5% of England's seas. In
Scotland, meanwhile, ministers have committed to designating at least 10% of
Scotland's seas as HPMAs by 2026. The RMT union has announced its members on the
London Underground will strike on the 15th of March in a dispute over pensions,
jobs and conditions. They will join tube drivers belonging to the Aslef union,
who have already announced a walkout for the same day. Members of the National
Union of Journalists, who work for the BBC's regional services in England, have
voted in favour of strike action. They were balloted in response to plans to
merge some local radio shows. The BBC said it would modernise local services by
having radio stations share more programmes and focus on online content.
Sainsbury's is planning to close two Argos depots over the next three years as
part of an overhaul which will affect around 1,400 jobs. The retailer's chief
executive, Simon Roberts, said the business needed to become simpler, more
efficient and more effective for customers. Here's our business correspondent
Emma Simpson. Sainsbury's bought Argos five years ago and since then it's been
closing most of its standalone shops and replacing them with Argos outlets
inside its supermarkets. Now it's tackling the logistics infrastructure as well.
Five existing Sainsbury's and Argos depots will be consolidated into three,
meaning the closure of two warehouses in Basildon in Essex and Haywood in
Greater Manchester. The move will affect both Sainsbury's staff and third party
workers. Sainsbury's said it's also planning to invest Â£90 million in
modernising its logistics operations as well as expanding its local hubs where
orders are fulfilled across the UK. In the city, the 100 share index ended the
day down 59 points at 7,876. On Wall Street a short time ago, the Dow Jones was
down 86 points at 32,803. On the currency markets, the pound is trading at
$1.208. Against the euro, sterling is at 1.14 euro, that makes a euro worth 87.7
pence. Drink manufacturers selling their products in Scotland have until
midnight tonight to register for a new recycling scheme for cans and bottles.
The Scottish Government has insisted it must go ahead in the summer, even though
all three contenders to replace Nicola Sturgeon as First Minister have raised
concerns about the scheme in its current form. Here's our Scotland political
correspondent Phil Simm. Scotland is aiming to become the first part of the UK
to introduce a deposit return scheme. This would see 20 pence added to the price
of single use cans or bottles which can be recouped when they're returned for
recycling. Index producers have until midnight to sign up to the scheme or they
could be barred from selling goods on the Scottish market. Some complain that
they need more time to adjust and could be driven out of business by the plans
which are set to take effect from August. All three candidates to replace the
departing Nicola Sturgeon as Scotland's First Minister have called for changes
to help smaller firms, but the Minister in charge of the system, the Green MSP
Lorna Slater, says the plans are already very advanced. The situation where we
are today is that hundreds of millions of pounds have been invested by Scottish
businesses toward the launch of this programme. Over 500 jobs have either been
recruited or are in the process of being recruited. The sorting centres sites
have been set up and the trucks to do the reverse logistics have been ordered.
This is all in place moving towards that August 16th deadline. A bigger barrier
to the scheme could be the UK's internal market rules which aim to ensure a
level playing field for firms north and south of the border. Nicola Sturgeon is
today written to Rishi Sunak pressing for an exemption which is needed for the
scheme to take effect. But there have been hints that Westminster's approval
will not be forthcoming which leaves the scheme hanging in the balance. A woman
who represented herself in court using research from a trip to her local library
has won her case against British Airways for a refund. Jenny Barber was due to
travel to Japan in May 2020 but the trip was cancelled because of the pandemic.
She initially requested BA vouchers but eventually felt that she was due her
money back. Our correspondent Jenny Kumar takes up the story. This David and
Goliath court battle has thrilled consumer rights champions. Ms Barber wanted
her money back because the airline couldn't give her the service she paid for.
Restrictions on travel to Japan remained in place until November last year. She
says she spent most of 2021 trying to get BA to give her a refund. When repeated
approaches failed, Ms Barber went to a library in Redditch to research case law
to support a legal challenge. She found legislation from 1943 that stated she
was entitled to a refund. The case was heard by magistrates last month and she
was awarded more than two and a half thousand pounds. Ms Barber said she found
the process nerve-wracking. If you're kind of an ordinary person who's not a
legal professional going up against someone like British Airways, it's scary and
it's intimidating. I think honestly they're kind of relying on that when they're
not giving people their refunds. In a statement, BA said they were the first UK
airline to offer customers flexibility during the pandemic by providing vouchers
for future travel. Passengers on board a flight heading to Manchester were given
the rare opportunity to see the Northern Lights at 37,000 feet high when the
pilot performed an unusual manoeuvre to give everyone a glimpse. The phenomenon
has been visible to people across the UK over the past few days because of the
strength of a solar flare from the sun. Our transport correspondent Katie Austin
reports. The pilot at the helm of an easy-jet flight from the Icelandic capital
Reykjavik to Manchester last night performed a 360 degree turn so that all
passengers could catch a glimpse of the Aurora Borealis. A map on the
Flightradar24 website shows the small circle in the plane's otherwise
straightforward route as the move was completed to the west of the Faroe
Islands. Passengers took photographs of the bright green and pink streaks of
light vivid in the night sky. Those on board included a couple who had become
engaged while on holiday in Iceland where they had hoped to see the Northern
Lights but not been successful. EasyJet said it was pleased the captain had been
able to perform the controlled manoeuvre and share the special view. The pilot
of a Finnair flight over Finland also made a 360 degree turn on Sunday night so
all passengers could see. The BBC says it will suspend the licence fee for the
King's coronation weekend in May. The move will allow some community and
commercial venues such as churches, town halls and cinemas to screen the
ceremony for free. The BBC says the exemption is granted only in exceptional
circumstances. The mother of a disabled teenager has helped him develop a so-
called smart suit to assist him and other people with similar conditions. The
technology allows those with muscular or spinal health issues to accomplish
everyday tasks with their arms. Our correspondent Frances Reid reports. Eli
Crossley loves music, whether it's writing it or performing on his ukulele. He
also has Duchenne muscular dystrophy, which means his limbs will eventually
weaken. Last year he stopped walking, but his mother has helped develop a suit
that she hopes will allow him to continue his passion. The technology involved
assists Eli by providing support for his arms. Eli says the prototype has worked
well. I feel like it's very comfortable and I hope it will help me in fulfilling
my dream to hopefully one day play at Glastonbury with my band. Together with a
company in the US, the family have been developing the suit for the last four
years. They secured more than a million pounds of funding to make it work and
are hoping to make ten more prototypes to test its development. Eli's mother
Emily Rubin says she designed the technology so that teenagers would want to use
it. What we want to do is develop a suit that's going to be attractive and
desirable for disabled people because too often the products that they get sold
are just not designed with desirability in mind. So we want this to be a really
functional suit that will help with being able to brush your teeth or give your
mum a hug, all the little things that are actually the really big things. She's
aiming to make the prototype more sophisticated and the family's hope is that it
won't just help people with muscular dystrophy. Obviously I think it's the first
step towards something amazing and I think it won't just stop here. I feel like
this could lead to many more designs, not just helping people with my condition
but people with spinal injuries, war veterans and all these people who deserve
to be helped. They're planning to get their design on the market in the next
three years, giving the organisers of Glastonbury plenty of notice to reserve
the pyramid stage for Eli's band. The headlines again. A transgender woman from
Clydebank whose convictions for rape caused political ructions in Holyrood and
Westminster has been sentenced to eight years in prison. Police questioning a
woman and her boyfriend who went missing early last month with their newborn
baby say they're now holding them on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter.
Their baby is still missing. Rishi Sunak has been meeting business leaders and
politicians in Northern Ireland to promote his new deal with the EU on post-
Brexit rules for trade across the Irish Sea. Official statistics suggest the
number of people sleeping rough in England rose by more than a quarter last
year, the first increase since 2017. A woman who faked a medical degree
certificate so she could work as a psychiatrist across the UK for more than 20
years has been jailed for seven years. BBC News. Jane Steele was tonight's
newsreader. This is BBC Radio 4. Mark Watson provides our comedy coming up next.
Later the actors Tracey Ann Oberman and Michael B. Jordan talk to tonight's
Front Row. That's just after 7.15. And if you've ever suffered from back pain,
well, an expert panel will provide some relief. That's on Inside Health later
this evening at 9 o'clock. On BBC iPlayer. Step right in. Perfect timing. The
East End is ever-changing. What is this? Scooter? The order has entered the
1960s, barely eight years late. But the midwives of Nunatta's house are forever
constant. You've a home here now, and purpose, and people who love you. Call the
midwife. She will be with you every step of the way. Watch on BBC iPlayer. Now
on BBC Radio 4, Mark Watson, his house band Flo and Joan, and this week's
special guest Esther Minito fight their natural Wednesday child leanings towards
woe, and instead deliver pure joy as they talk a bit about life. A one, two,
three, ah. Mark Watson talks. What a surprise. Mark Watson talks. Will he ever
stop? Mark Watson talks a bit about life. Better be good. Good evening. I found
that a bit passive-aggressive in my opinion. I think it's the better be good
thing. It just puts a little bit of pressure on before we've really got the
audience on. If you're confident, you wouldn't feel that pressure, I don't
think. Have you met me? Welcome to the show that has already been called Mark
Watson Talks a Bit About Life. We have to register it in advance for the
listings. I'm Mark Watson, a Wednesday's child full of woe, ordained by fate to
be a total miserable bastard. Obviously, that's not really the vibe that works
for a comedy show, so I thought I would try and overcompensate with some high-
energy audience warm-up stuff. This is based on a format which I've seen
Americans do successfully. Ready? Are you ready? Yes! That's right, but you had
very little option there. I'm Mark Watson, and I've come here to... Oh, yeah,
why not? Yeah? Yeah. Shouldn't it be something rousing? Is this or nothing? Oh,
sorry. Fine. So we're going to do high-energy audience warm-up, but with gentle
lounge. I'm Mark Watson, and I've come here to do stand-up comedy and kick ass,
but I already kicked several asses on the way here, so what's left? Stand-up
comedy. Stand-up comedy, very good. Some people just went for comedy, that also
does... It's only if you yell opera or something, we're in trouble here. I came
here to make jokes and fire my tax return, but the 14-digit payment reference is
not being accepted by the website, so we'd better do some... Stand-up comedy.
Yes, this is working. I came here to offer up some royal observations and make
fresh lemonade, but I've forgotten to bring 140 grams of caster sugar, and
without that, the lemonade will be unpalatably bitter. We're just going to have
to... Stand-up comedy. The answer was offer up some royal observations, but it's
not easy. No. I'm worried, if anything, the music whipped them into too much of
a frenzy, but it's fine. If you found that difficult, well, me too. High-energy
hectoring doesn't come that easy to any of us in this country, but especially
not to Wednesday births, the saddest, grimmest people out there. Make no
mistake, we're the pits. If you've got people come around to your house for a
party, ask for birthdates on the door. Anyone says Wednesday, send them straight
back home. Give them a goodie bag if you want, don't let them over the
threshold. They'll put on Love Will Tear Us Apart by Joy Division. During Truth
or Dare, they'll ask questions like, what is your greatest unresolved trauma?
Even as they leave, they'll say something like, you've got a lovely house, wish
I had luer pack in my fridge, but hey, some people are just born to be own
brand, I guess. But why are we like this? Are we all like this, Wednesday
people? Or is it more just a me problem, as people half my age say? Well, for
balance, I'm joined this evening by a fellow Wednesday's child, Esther Minito.
Say hello to Esther. Hello. APPLAUSE And as ever, the singing sisters are our
answer to the Jackson 5, without most of the members, but also without most of
the scandals, it's Chloe and Joan. APPLAUSE We have had our fair share of
plastic surgery and scandals and stuff. My boob once fell out at the Super Bowl.
LAUGHTER She means the kitchenware department at Ikea. But otherwise, we're not
like them at all. BOTH SING LAUGHTER Whoa! I want you back. APPLAUSE For this
episode, can you call us Whoa and Joan? Whoa and Joan. Yes, please. We thought
because this is a whoaful episode, it'll be quite full of whoa, so we wanted to
start with a good vibe to get people in the community. It's called the Happy
Happy Song. Here we go. WHISTLE BLOWS Happy, happy, happy, nice and rainbow
smiles. Candy floss and singing birds, the smell of baby child. All these things
are happy and never, never sad. Oh, what a lovely day, depression is a myth.
Handing out sweeties to children who are sad. Nothing here to worry about, it's
a happy, happy song. Helping an old woman who's fallen on the floor. Oh, no,
she's dead. Everyone's looking at me. I think I pushed the woman, the police are
on their way. I need to camouflage myself, I'll dress up like this bush. Oh, no,
the birds are pecking me and also it's my birthday. I'm screaming, no-one's
helping, I've got to run away. I'll stay in my house forever and this is how
I'll die. It's a happy, happy, someone help me, happy, happy song. APPLAUSE
That's happy stuff. That was well-worn drone. Over to the other side of me,
Esther. Let's get it out there, we're both Wednesday's children, I'm going to
come on and talk about how I'm quite downbeat. Have you ever felt that there's
some sort of curse over you, that you're full of woe, or is it just you defy the
stereotype? I mean, I wouldn't say I was full of woe, I'd say I was full of
being annoyed and fed up and angry. I don't cry, but I'm annoyed. Righteous woe.
And I do feel like I am quite cursed, actually. Basically... The mood is not
lifting any time soon, by the way. I want to tell you a little story about what
happened to me. I was doing a gig and there was a stag do in the front row.
Lads, legends. And they were very, very drunk and the stag was wearing a veil
and I walked on stage, I was the first actor of the night, all I said was,
hello, and the stag lent forward and threw up everywhere. All across the front
of the stage, across the tops of my shoes, bits of vomit in his veil, and I just
thought... That's the worst detail. You should never have vomit in the veil. You
know it. And I just thought, isn't it ironic that right now, out there,
somewhere is a woman on her hen do, sat with all her girlfriends, just going,
oh, my God, I'm so lucky to have found the man of my dreams. My dad lives with
me and my dad is a 78-year-old Arab Muslim man and I went home covered in specks
of vomit and he opened the door to me and he just took one look at me and he was
like, I wanted you to be a lawyer or a doctor. He gets his English idioms mixed
up quite a lot, right, which is fair play because they are quite nonsensical,
and I was telling him about what happened with the stag do and he was like, you
know, you know, these people, they really bugger my beliefs. Now, I know the
idiom is, it beggars belief, but doesn't it buggers my beliefs just make so much
more sense to you? I've seen some people out and about in town that buggered my
beliefs. It buggers my beliefs. So I stand by that. So, yeah, I'm not a lucky
person getting puked on. Woe is me. Unlucky that you can be born on the third
day of the week and then 40 years later someone chucks up on you, but this is
the thing. 39. I love the way you said that and there's just some women over
there that are like, oh, that'll piss her off. I took a big gamble on 40, I have
to say. I'm 43. One thing I've mentioned a few times in this series is, well,
yes, I'm a middle-aged man, I've got two children, and I think quite a lot about
what I'm passing on to them, personality-wise, that is, obviously not material
possessions, I'm a comedian, I'm already paying for the bloody heating, and I
let them share a bag of Quavers recently, and it wasn't even the weekend. To
deal with the question of whether my Wednesday woe has gone down to my kids, I'd
like Flo and Joan to tee up what we traditionally call a fun little anecdote.
And this one actually contains a joke, it's going to be an actual gag, so maybe
this thing could incorporate that. Take it away. Fun little anecdote, anecdote,
anecdote, fun little anecdote, and there's an actual joke, fun little joke,
little actual anecdote, fun little anecdote, and a provider Richardson. LAUGHTER
AND APPLAUSE Pretty much bang on. Thank you to the Flo and Joan too. So when my
son was about three or four, he used to hang out with the son of another
comedian, a man called Alex Horne. Well, he was a comedian, he's sort of a game
show host or something now. Alex is a great friend of mine for 20 years, but he
sets a slightly intimidating example because he's one of these people who just
do life really well. Three kids, still got a wife, how do you do that? LAUGHTER
And now all this Taskmaster stuff, it just makes us look bad. It was much
tougher for him when he had to do it freelance. He'd go up to people and just
say, ring this bell as many times as you can in a minute, most dongs wins. And
they'd say, bus drivers don't really want you to do that, also. Also, who are
you? In this period, our respective young children spent some time together, and
one time Alex's son told mine a joke. What flies in the sky and wobbles about?
Anyone? GELLYCOPTER Very good, a Gellycopter. Yeah, I wouldn't open with it. So
that was the answer. What flies in the sky and wobbles about? A Gellycopter. And
my son, who was also four, said, or a doomed plane. Bad, right? So there's the
difference between me and Alex Horne played out through our children at an
alarmingly early stage. That was the first time I can remember thinking, hmm, is
my kid all right there? But, of course, at that stage of life, the stakes feel
pretty low. Around that same time, I remember the boy finding a huge branch in a
park and walking around with it, the way that kids love to do, but he couldn't
do his consonants properly at that point, so he was wandering around the park
shouting, like, dick, big dick, at strangers. That was a golden day for me on
social media. That same summer, I took him to a city farm and he held a guinea
pig and the animal handler said, OK, the main thing to do is not touch its eyes
and the boy immediately went, eyes, eyes, eyes, and jabbed the animal in the
eye. And the guinea pig made a noise, which I think will probably be the last
thing I hear before I die. Last summer, I tried to book tickets for the same
place and although the card details were right, my payment was rejected. But
then in a heartbeat, the boy has got a smartphone, as I mentioned earlier in
this series, and it's as if that small version of him, you know, never existed.
Not long ago, I handed him his phone and the background was this mad, like,
swirling animation, far beyond anything I've got on my own phone. I said, how do
you even make your phone do that? My son, patiently, the way you speak to
someone who's relevant to the world is diminishing, he says, Dad, this is the
modern world where all things are possible. So now that my son is at that level
of awareness, I've got every reason to worry about whether I'm passing on my woe
to my kids. I know that the doomed plane thing is something that my son picked
up from me because I was exactly that sort of kid, prone to grim statements.
There was one day at school we were doing tests of the d'Urbervilles, Thomas
Hardy, your classic woe writer, some really miserable stuff. He was a Tuesday's
child, but he would have fitted in with us. The teacher read this typically
deterministic passage about, everyone has a birthday, everyone knows the date of
birth, but we also have a death day, which is already out there, written in the
stars, and none of us can know that. And there was this impressive hush among
the Year 11s, and I put my hand up and said, well, unless you kill yourself. And
I'm pretty sure if you did that in school nowadays, there'd be parents in.
There'd be a welfare officer. But this was the 90s, the teacher just looked at
me and thought, he'll get a straight A's. I did, by the way. Academic success
was my consolation prize for all the woe, but we'll come on to that. I don't
know how fun an anecdote that was, anyway. Grim little anecdote, anecdote,
Sprinkle of death in this sinister anecdote, anecdote. Muha-ha-ha-ha, little
anecdote, anecdote, anecdote, anecdote. Are you all right? Are you happy that
we're here? Am I happy that you're here? Yeah. Oh, yeah, I'm definitely happy
you're here. Whether anyone is happy is a bigger question, though. What I like
is sometimes you both sing different words, and then it sort of still is fine.
Did you criticise Tim Minchin like this when he was your musical? Yeah, and
that's why he only did the one series. Obviously, Esther, you've got kids as
well, so what's your relationship like with just the whole idea of being upbeat
and stuff? What, kids? Yeah. What, my kids? Yeah. Nah. That makes me feel
better. Nah. They keep you humble, though, don't they, kids? They keep you
grounded. If you ever feel like you're getting a little bit too confident, they
will very much bring you back down to earth. I mean, my daughter is very into
history. She loves history at school. I remember walking her home from school
and she turned round to me and she was like, Mum, what did you used to wear in
the Anglo-Saxon times? Yeah, wow. My worst one of those is my kids asked if I
was alive in the war, but Anglo-Saxons put that into perspective, I think. I was
doing a gig and there was a young girl in the front row, she was like 21 or
something. I am 40, and when I said I turned 40, her genuine reaction was to
lean forward and go, Oh! I know, like I was some kind of rescue dog in a
champion. Well, good luck with it. You can see why, of all my potential genetic
legacies, woe is the one that I'm most worried about passing to my children.
Neither of them was born on a Wednesday, that's a good start. But there's
definitely other things that I have already transmitted to them. They are, and
this is statistically unlikely, both my kids are left-handed, when they could
have just had their mum's much more useful right-hand gene. So even if they're
not predisposed to be full of woe, they soon will be, because they'll live out
their lives without having opened a jar. Or used a corkscrew, or got the lid off
the milk. You probably haven't thought about this, but the 90% of you in the
room that are not like me, where are the lefties? Where are the lefties? That's
your right hand though, scab. That's what they want. But there you are, you
heard at home how few that was, and that's because most of us die of packet-
opening-related starvation, if we live alone for more than three days. You don't
know how we suffer as left-handed. Really, we should go on a protest march, but
our placards will be all smudgy. What do we want? I can't read that now. I
shouldn't have written in fountain pen. When do we want it? I'm going to be ten
minutes late, I actually couldn't get out of my front door. What a combination.
Wednesday child and left-hander. I've got the natural depressive tendencies of
Vincent van Gogh, but I can't get the scissors round my ear. The thing is, you
can't entirely change or escape the circumstances of your birth. You can't go
back in time and alter those things. As Hardy himself wrote, I'm in the right
mood, I've got to say. I'll paraphrase that. In a way, maybe it would be better
if I lent into it, just allowed myself to be an agent of misery. God knows,
plenty of comedians just adopt the most objectionable angles possible, and the
audience bloody lap it up. How was the comedy show? Oh, the MC said my shirt was
shit, and my wife didn't love me. Amazing night. I don't normally do this style
of comedy, but I'm thinking about just being sort of mean and grim and gloomy
for a bit. Let's try a little bit of mean-spirited banter. You, where do you
live? Woolwich. Woolwich? That's quite nice these days. LAUGHTER It's not easy,
it's not easy. You, sir, what do you do for a living? Library assistant. Library
assistant. Again, valuable. LAUGHTER It's not easy! So to try and get the sort
of appropriate levels of woe and negative energy into the room, as the audience
were coming in, I asked a Wednesday child question. What is the gloomiest thing
someone said to you, a parent or a respected friend or anyone, and did it turn
out to be right? There's some fairly downbeat stuff on these cards. Someone's
written, when studying at university in America, age 21, my best friend said,
this is the best time of our lives. I took it to mean life would be entirely
downhill from that moment. He was right. LAUGHTER That's gloom, isn't it? Where
is that person? Hello. Hi there. How old are you now? 30. 30, so nine years of
disappointment since then, basically. Don't tell my girlfriend. LAUGHTER Yeah,
when did you meet the girlfriend? Three years ago. You met your girlfriend three
years ago, but you would still say your life has gone downhill since 21? I'd say
we've plateaued in the last three. LAUGHTER The downhill has stopped and we're
on our way up soon. Can I just say, darling, he's a keeper. LAUGHTER Plateaued
is as romantic a word as I can think of, really. Save something for the wedding
vows. You can imagine the argument, like, I didn't say going down, I said
plateaued. What's not to love about the phrase even-keel? LAUGHTER You're fine.
LAUGHTER This is interesting, this is a counterpoint. This person's written
almost identical sentiment. Life only gets worse as you get older, so you may as
well enjoy it. But then they've written brackets, yes and no. Some things are so
much better now, others not so much. LAUGHTER So there you are, sir, you're only
partly right to be depressed about your future. This guy's written, or it might
not be guys, but it suggests... No man on your dad's side of the family has made
it past 70. I'm 48, fingers crossed. LAUGHTER Potentially a long 22 years
counting that back. I'm slightly concerned that our last song this evening is
actually called Everything Dies. LAUGHTER Look, we advertise well and we've
delivered hard on that. LAUGHTER I did some Googling of the whole Wednesday's
Child phenomenon to see if I could find a positive spin on the woe thing, and
this came up on one website. Wednesday's children question everything. This
leads to them carrying the weight of the world on their shoulders, hence the
woe. But it can also be a sort of superpower that enables them to do great
things for others. Now, that is a bit more encouraging. I've never had a
superpower before. Oh, Jeannie did make me invisible for a bit in 2006.
Possibilities are overwhelming, I just wandered around Aldi for a bit. LAUGHTER
Because I definitely have been somebody to question everything all my life, as
we've heard a little bit already. Like many of you, if you're around my sort of
age, I've witnessed enough in a lifetime already to feel pretty spun out by it
all. In just a couple of decades, we've seen the rise of unimaginable digital
technology, the fall of government, the emergence of best of both, a type of
bread which magically combines... LAUGHTER..the rubby appeal of white with the
kudos of brown. LAUGHTER My brain is endlessly full of questions, and I think
that can be very tiring, obviously, but if I pass that on to my children, maybe
I'm pleased about that. One day it could be a superpower of sorts for them, at
least a good trait, a nice quality. And there's no doubt I have passed it on,
even by the standards of kids. And even now, one of them has the ability to
Google things. Mine are unbelievably inquisitive. Being with the two of them is
like being in a press conference with drunk people forever. LAUGHTER I was in
the bathroom not long ago, and they were there prowling like paparazzi. Dad,
Dad, Dad! You know, if you've got children, you know. The way children frame
questions, the tone is like, no matter how urgent it actually is, their vibe is
always, if I don't get an answer in the next five seconds, you've ruined my
future. LAUGHTER I said, um, how can I help? And at the exact same time, my... I
normally go with, how can I help, with my children. It means when I do have to
give this up and get a job in the service industry, I'm already on the way. And
at the exact same time as each other, my daughter asked, do you know what colour
beetroot is when it's still in the ground? And my son said, what do you think
Sadiq Khan should do about London's knife crime problem? LAUGHTER I was like,
I'll take these one at a time, if that's OK. But you can't. They both plough by.
It's brown. Beetroot isn't even purple. It's brown. Dad, there's been 42 blade-
related incidents in London in the past month alone. Carrots weren't even orange
at one time. It's a lie. Dad, we could arm the police, but that comes with its
own problems. LAUGHTER It's quite hard to think straight in the face of all
this. Right, I'll put my trousers on and we'll see what we can do, I suppose.
LAUGHTER As I say, though, all this gives me the hope that they're growing up
with healthy curiosity, and after all, perhaps it is a good thing to have, if
not woe, at least a certain amount of circumspection. Life, after all, is full
of setbacks and disappointments, whether we like it or not. Love goes wrong.
People fall out with you. You lose your job at the deli counter after going mad
and eating an entire ham in front of waiting customers. LAUGHTER Little Mix's
hiatus shows possible signs of being a permanent breakup. The phrase, your call
is important to us, normally turns out not to be true. The dark chocolate
version of the Mars bar is only available seasonally and at the whim of the
manufacturers. I could go on. So maybe the responsible thing to do is bring your
kids up with the awareness that there might be tough moments ahead sometimes. As
with most aspects of parenting, I try to take inspiration from my own parents,
but also from what I see people doing around me. And if you get in the habit of
eavesdropping on conversations, which I have been for years now, you hear some
pretty contrasting approaches to being a parent. When my son came to start
secondary school, after the controversial open day, which I mentioned a couple
of weeks ago, it was my job to drop him off at the gates. It's a pretty
momentous occasion in a parent's life. The usual stuff, I guess. The much older
kids, the noise, the mum whom I told she needed to change her entire world view.
LAUGHTER I kept it fairly minimal, just told him to have a good day and that his
best would always be good enough, this sort of stuff. But as I walked away, I
wondered, have I done enough, really, to have a major dad-kid moment? And that
was what led me to listen to one of the other fathers doing his first-day pep
talk. And as a result, I overheard something which I still think about this most
days, it's a year and a half on. He got down at eye level with his son and said,
hope for the best, prepare for the worst. LAUGHTER What? What sort of thing is
that to say on day one of big school? That kid's sitting there at half past ten
in the morning in geography thinking, what is the worst? Snakes coming out of
the wall any time soon. LAUGHTER But preparing for the worst, at least a bit, is
a sensible approach to an unpredictable and sometimes cruel world. I'm not
saying you should carry around as much woe as you can in a sort of sad backpack,
but ageing, death, all the things that we ultimately face, they may be just a
little bit easier to confront if you can at least mutter, see, I bloody told
you. And so, I mean, we've really mixed the positive and the negative in this
episode, but I'd say it went more one way than another. Esther, are you feeling
any better? No. LAUGHTER Thanks for having me. LAUGHTER Pretty deflated tone.
And so it falls to Flo and Joan to play us out on a note which I suppose is a
choice, either dispels the remaining woe altogether or just alternatively
celebrates it. Well, firstly, can we say an enormous thank you to Esther Minito?
CHEERING Thank you! APPLAUSE Yes, as promised, this last song is called
Everything Dies. Let's take it away. Yeah. In a bag. PIANO PLAYS All the things
you love and cherish every day Ba-doom, ba-doom, ba-doom All the smiles they
bring, well, I'm afraid They're not always here to stay So come over here, sit
on my lap And look me straight in the eye When I tell you everything,
everything, everything, everything dies I tell you plants die, friendships die,
dreams die Bruce Forsyth, dead! LAUGHTER When everything, everything, everything
dies Some people die in their sleep Oh, wouldn't that be nice? And some fall off
a ladder, get their head caught in a bucket Then fall in the road and get hit by
a unicycle Some people choke, some just get poorly I'd do it to myself if I
lived in Crawley When everything, everything, everything dies I'll tell you
again Bats die, cats die nine times Blockbuster, dead! The Royal Family's
reputation... LAUGHTER APPLAUSE Is dangerously close When everything,
everything, everything dies And just because it happens all of the time Doesn't
make it any less sad Boo-hoo! Sometimes people die and you're glad they're dead
And that's a very happy day indeed When your hamster pops it and everyone in
your nan's knitting circle have gone Bye-bye! It was nice to know you, Peggy,
nice cross-stitch Now I've got to sing myself this sweet little song Yeah,
heroes die, paint dries The comedy industry, dead! Our careers after the show,
dead! Yeah, everything, everything, everything Newspapers, dead! Pandas, close!
When that guy gets to 70! LAUGHTER Jeffrey Epstein, who knows? Everyone who's
ever loved you, everyone you've ever loved Will all end in the same place, six
feet in the mud Yeah, everything, everything, everything, everything dies See
you in hell! LAUGHTER AND APPLAUSE Well done, everyone! We've all certainly been
listening to Esther Minito. I'm Mark Watson. Thank you very much for listening.
This is Mark Watson Talks, a bit about life. Sweet dreams. APPLAUSE Mark Watson
Talks, a bit about life, was written and performed by Mark Watson, Flo and Joan,
and special guest Esther Minito. It was produced by Leancou, and it was an
Impatient Production for the BBC. Legends. And we've conversations from A Long
Marriage for Wednesday evening's 6.30 Comedy. Welcome to the Spark. I feel like
the monkeys are juggling chainsaws. We are making changes to the way BBC live
streams are distributed via third-party services and platforms, and the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds. Small acts of interrupting those thoughts
could be life-saving. The Spark starts next Tuesday.