TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-09H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 this weekend. You're listening to Today with Justin Webb and Nick Robinson.
Good morning. It's eight o'clock on Tuesday the 7th of March. The headlines this
morning. Ministers admit they're pushing the boundaries of international law as
they introduce legislation today to stop migrants crossing the Channel in small
boats. The government is due to begin talks with several health unions to try to
end an ongoing NHS pay dispute in England. There are calls to give everyone with
pre-payment energy meters the right to have them removed without charge. And
tickets for May's Eurovision Song Contest in Liverpool go on sale at lunchtime.
The BBC News was read this morning by Tom Sanders. The Home Secretary, Suella
Braverman, has accepted the government is pushing the boundaries of
international law with new legislation it's introducing today to stop asylum
seekers crossing the English Channel in small boats. It's thought the measures,
putting a legal duty on ministers to remove anyone who enters the UK illegally,
will take precedence in law over the right to claim asylum here. Here's our
political correspondent Ian Watson. Just five years ago, fewer than 300 migrants
crossed the Channel in small boats. Last year, more than 45,000 undertook the
hazardous crossing. Introducing a new law to stop small boats was announced as
one of the Prime Minister's priorities in January. Writing in Today's Sun
newspaper, he says a new law will send a signal that anyone entering the country
illegally will be swiftly removed. This new duty to remove would be given
precedence over existing legislation on asylum and human rights, though there'd
be exemptions for under-18s and those with serious medical conditions. The Home
Secretary, Suella Braverman, has said the government's pushing the boundaries of
international law to solve the small boats crisis and ministers are expected to
acknowledge that there's a risk of a clash with some aspects of the Human Rights
Act. Critics have questioned whether there is the capacity to detain a high
number of people prior to removal. Labour says the government's approach is
unworkable because there are too few agreements with other countries for the
return of refugees. Jean-Paul Mouleau is a councillor for the Hauts-de-France
region, which includes Calais. He told us that the new legislation had been
received more positively there than previous proposals, but insisted the two
countries needed to work more closely together. The mood of the channel is
better, but we've seen over the last 20 years so many new ideas, and since David
Glungard and Nicolas Rouget met back 20 years ago, we've seen lots of words and
not enough action. Talks begin this morning aimed at averting further NHS
strikes in England. The Health Secretary, Steve Barkley, will meet unions
representing nurses, ambulance workers, physiotherapists and midwives, which
have all put industrial action on hold while negotiations are underway. More
from our health reporter, Jim Reid. What are described as intense negotiations
are expected to start around 11 this morning and run through until Thursday
evening. Discussions will focus on pay, with a one-off bonus likely for the
current financial year and the possibility of a pay rise above the current offer
of 3.5% for next financial year, which starts in April. Government sources said
the Health Secretary believed both sides were committed to reaching a fair and
reasonable settlement. Unions, though, have warned that industrial action could
resume if there's no progress by the end of the week. WhatsApp messages leaked
by the Daily Telegraph suggest the former Health Secretary, Matt Hancock, was in
favour of threats to block funding for a disability centre unless the
Conservative MP lobbying for it voted to extend Covid restrictions in England. A
spokesperson for Mr Hancock said the newspaper had given an entirely partial
account of events, driven by an anti-lockdown agenda, and insisted what it was
accusing him of doing never happened. Howard Johnson reports. These latest
messages leaked by the Telegraph concern a vote to bring in a tougher tier
system of Covid restrictions in England at the beginning of December 2020. The
measures faced a potential rebellion from some Conservative MPs. In one
exchange, Mr Hancock's political aide, Alan Nixon, suggested to the then Health
Secretary that pressure could be put on backbenchers whose re-election hinged on
central government funding. During the discussion, the Bury North MP, James
Daly's campaign for a disability hub in his constituency was mentioned. Mr Dixon
proposed that funding for it should be off the table if he rebelled. Mr Hancock
replied, yes, 100%. The idea wasn't taken forward, and Mr Daly tells the
Telegraph he was never threatened. But the former Tory party chairman, Sir Jake
Berry, has called the exchange absolutely disgusting, and urged Mr Hancock to
come to Parliament today to explain the messages. Ukraine's President, Volodymyr
Zelensky, says he's instructed his military commanders to send more troops to
defend the besieged eastern city of Bakhmut. After months of bombardment,
Russian forces now surround it on three sides. Last night, Mr Zelensky said no
part of the country would be abandoned. But the Ukrainian politician and
journalist, Ivana Klimpush-Tinsada, told us there could come a time when it
would be better for Ukrainian troops to withdraw. We care about every single
life, and we do not want to just let our people die. I think that it will be
done on the basis of the wise analysis and deep analysis by the military, and if
it's necessary to withdraw to preserve our troops, they will do so. Age UK is
calling for anyone with a prepayment energy meter to be given the opportunity to
have it removed for free. The charity says half a million older households have
these meters, which are more expensive than paying for gas and electricity via
direct debit, and can leave people cut off if they run out of credit. Our Cost
of Living correspondent Coletta Smith has the story. Age UK has joined
organisations calling for the current pause in forced installations of meters to
be made permanent in law. But it also wants anyone who currently has a meter to
be given the chance to get it removed for free. A significant proportion of
those households include someone over the age of 60. The charity says it's not
fair that these customers pay more for their energy, are at risk of running out
of credit, or being unable to get to a shop to top up. Energy companies say
prepayment meters help ensure customers don't fall into too much debt, but have
agreed to pause forced installations until the end of the month. Researchers are
warning that the annual damage caused by flooding in England, Scotland and Wales
could increase by more than a fifth over the next century unless international
pledges to limit global warming are fulfilled. Flooding already cost the UK 700
million pounds a year, and scientists at Bristol University have produced a
detailed map simulating how things might change if temperatures keep rising. Our
science correspondent Victoria Gill reports. To make these future flood risk
maps, scientists used layers of information about Britain's terrain, river flow,
rainfall patterns and sea level, all the causes of flooding. They combined that
with the Met Office climate predictions over the next century. This built a
detailed picture of the risk to people's homes and businesses from flooding as
climate warms. It shows that even if all the international promises are met and
temperatures are kept to an increase of about 1.8 degrees Celsius, places
including the south-east and north-west of England and south Wales are likely to
experience more flooding and more damage. But there are swathes of north-east
and central England, as well as eastern and northern Scotland, that will see
very little change. This new detail, assessing the risk to every community,
could help inform decisions about flood defences and where to build new homes.
There's disruption to ferry services and Eurostar trains between the UK and
France, as French unions strike for the sixth time since mid-January in protest
at plans to raise the state pension age from 62 to 64. More than a million
people are expected to join demonstrations in Paris and other cities, while fuel
depots across the country have already been blocked. More details have been
released about plans to overhaul the student finance system in England. People
up to the age of 60 will in future be able to borrow money to improve their
skills or retrain during their working lives. There are restrictions on what the
loans can be used for and remote learners won't qualify, as our education
reporter Vanessa Clark explains. From 2025, students will be given access to a
total of four years of tuition fee loans worth up to Â£37,000. These can be used
towards full and part-time courses or for individual modules. The lifelong loan
entitlement will be open to anyone between the ages of 18 to 60 and can be used
at different times during their life. However, there are concerns that the loans
can't be used for further education courses and apprenticeships. There are no
details yet about how the scheme will be funded or what courses will be
eligible. Tickets for the Eurovision Song Contest go on sale this lunchtime,
with fans able to attend nine shows during the week of the competition in
Liverpool in May. The UK is hosting the event on behalf of Ukraine, which won
last year's event. Here's our Eurovision reporter Daniel Rosny. At midday, large
numbers of fans across Europe will be waiting online for one of the most in-
demand tickets in the world. 160 million people may watch the show at home, but
in Liverpool's MNS Arena, the capacity will be limited to more than 6,000. Of
the nine shows, the two semi-finals and final will be shown on TV globally. The
rest are previews doubling up as production rehearsals. Prices start at Â£30 for
those and go up to Â£380 for the live final on Saturday 13 May. Fans will need to
be registered on Ticketmaster.co.uk to access the sale. The UK government has
set aside 3,000 tickets across the week for displaced Ukrainians living in the
UK as a result of Russia's invasion. Daniel Rosny reporting. Thank you. Ten past
eight is the time. A cyclist in woods, someone serving food in a McDonald's, two
women victims of indecent exposure by Wayne Cousins, the policeman who abducted,
raped and murdered Sarah Everard, two women who say that if crimes against them
had been taken seriously, Cousins could have been arrested and Sarah Everard
might still be alive. Mrs Justice May sentencing Cousins yesterday for the
exposure offences said the police could easily have traced him through his car
number plate after the two incidents at a McDonald's. The server at the
McDonald's who reported it said no one had contacted her or asked for a
statement. The police said incidents like this are now being taken more
seriously. But are they? Not just by the police, but by everyone, by society
more generally. Are women under constant pressure to simply accept these forms
of aggression? I've been speaking to Manon Simmons, Yasmin Welsh and Connie
Gillis, all three of them in their early 20s living in London. Manon started by
telling me about what happened to her. So I was walking home. This was probably
a year and a half ago. Now I lived in Camden in London and I was walking home
not too late, probably about 9pm. And I just remember turning down off of Camden
High Street to one of the back roads and this man just pulled down his trousers
in front of me and completely flashed me. Yasmin, what happened to you? So I was
getting the late night tube back from central London back to Camden last winter.
And once I got on the tube, I realised, well I sat quite close to someone for
overall safety reasons because it was a night tube as well. And I realised they
had a hole in their trousers quite near their crotch. And after a few moments
and the tube door shut, their hand went through the hole and they started
masturbating in front of me whilst not breaking eye contact. And Connie, what
happened to you? So I was walking through Hampstead Heath Park, just in the
middle of the day during the week. And a man came out onto the path in front of
me and pulled out his genitals and started playing with himself and shouting at
me. And I just walked straight past him. And I was, yeah, by myself. And Connie,
when you walked past him, apart from obvious shock and potentially, I suppose,
fear, what else went through your mind? I think what goes through anyone's mind
in that situation, which is just get out of the situation and don't antagonise.
Don't look them in the eye, don't react to it. You just immediately want out and
you want to get to other people, I suppose. And when you got to other people, I
mean, did you immediately tell people? Did you tell the police? No, I didn't
tell anyone apart from my close friends and my family. And they, I'm lucky
enough that I have educated, sympathetic friends who all told me to report it.
But there was kind of no doubt in my mind that that wouldn't really do anything
or achieve anything. I just wanted to get home, get back to my friends. Yasmin,
did you report it? All my friends said to report it, however, in that moment,
because all you're thinking about is getting out of the situation as safely as
you can. Even if I wanted to report it, because I was so panicked during that
moment, I couldn't recall his face or I knew that had I gone to the police, I'd
have not nothing to report, but not sufficient evidence to provide them with.
Manon, did you feel the same? Yeah, I felt the exact same, I think, as well,
because this kind of behaviour is quite normalised and it happens to so many of
your friends and peers. So when it does happen to you, your first instinct
isn't, oh, how am I going to report this? It's more like, actually, if I did
report it, realistically, is anything going to come of it? Or am I just going to
have to relive this trauma again? When you say it's been normalised, had you
already had friends to whom it had happened? Yeah, I think definitely. As women,
you're kind of used to catcalling and those kind of forms of sexual harassment.
And I'd had friends as well that had been exposed to indecent activity as well.
So it was definitely not that I'm not, you know, we're not in the minority of
people that this has happened to. When that phrase catcalling and the phrase
that is used about what has happened to all three of you, which is flashing, it
doesn't really capture it, Yasmin, does it? I don't think so, because catcalling
is something that can happen in front of other people and you kind of walk past
and you can ignore it and continue about your day. But with what happened to me,
me leaving the tube station, I felt so violated in a sense that I didn't know
really what to do with myself other than to get home and to safety. But with
catcalling, because I personally think catcalling is a bit more normalised than
flashing. So you just brush off the previous one while the latter is a bit more
unspoken about. And it's one thing, Connie, for the police to be involved or not
to be involved, and occasionally people will understand that they're not for
various reasons. But there's a kind of wider issue too, isn't there, about
whether society generally is involved in the sense of taking this seriously and
regarding it as a serious thing to have happened? Yeah, absolutely. I think that
there's such a feeling of stigma or blame attached to victims and even though I
felt that I could turn to my close friends and my family that knew me, I
definitely didn't feel safe turning to strangers, turning to other people to
help me, turning to people who worked at Hampstead Heath. There was no kind of
mechanism in place at all where I felt like I could go report it, be taken
seriously and be seen as a victim rather than just, oh, this thing happened,
kind of get over it, get on with your day. Do you think, Connie, anything has
changed in public attitudes to all of this since the murder of Sarah Everard?
No, because people's general reaction, I think there's this idea of the perfect
victim, where people think that there are ways that women can get around this by
not kind of going out after dark by yourself. I think people, like women
especially, have a tendency to blame themselves when this kind of thing happens
to them. And that just really perpetuates things. The response that I got from
my friends and family wasn't one of like outrage. It was just kind of, this is
what happens to women, this is what happens to victims, this is what has always
happened and will continue to happen. So there's a real sense of complacency. I
don't think that there's enough outrage. I don't think that there's a sense that
anything will change or that there's a way that we could educate people. Yasmin,
do you agree? I completely agree with Connie. I think since the murder, even
though it's spoken about a little bit more, the reality is the way the majority
of society views victims isn't beneficial and it's kind of, it plays into the
notion of victim blaming. And there is the idea of, had you not gone out that
late, this wouldn't have happened. Had you been with people, that wouldn't have
happened. And so on and so forth, which is a stigma that we really need to break
down to address the issue completely and fully. Yasmin and Connie and Manon,
thank you so much for talking to us. Thank you so much. Thank you. And let us
turn to Dame Diana Johnson, who was listening to that. She is the Labour MP
chair of the Home Affairs Select Committee and that committee currently
examining violence against women and girls. Dame Diana, good morning to you.
Good morning. And you have an appalling constituency link, don't you, with this
issue of what are regarded as minor sexual crimes becoming major ones.
Absolutely. We have the terrible case of Libby Squire, who was a student at Hull
University, who was raped and murdered in 2019. And what came out in the court
case was that the person who did that, the man who did that to her, had been
prowling the streets of Hull for 16 months prior to raping and kidnapping Libby.
And he'd been exposing himself. There'd been acts of voyeurism. He'd been
looking through windows. He'd also stolen some items from properties. But these
things hadn't been reported and the indecent exposure in particular had not been
reported. So the police didn't have that information. And it only came to light
when Libby disappeared. And then people did come forward and said, well,
actually, yes, there was this man and he was doing this. So what that showed was
people didn't feel confident to tell the police. They thought they'd be laughed
at. They thought nothing would happen. This is what happens to women, I think,
up and down the country day in, day out. And I was just actually sending some
messages to some women MPs saying to them, have you had this happen to you? And
the ones who responded to me said, yes, they have had it happen to them. And
I've certainly had it happen to me when I was a younger woman. So yes, the Libby
case, I think Humberside Police, to give them their due, have started a
campaign, the Libby campaign, to encourage people to come forward and report
when these acts happen. Because what we know is they're a pre-court cursor in
some cases to much more serious criminal behaviour. Is that the key? Is that
where this starts, actually? Is saying to people, do report and saying to the
police, when you get those reports, take them seriously, that that actually
would be a step change? That's very important. And Libby's mum, Lisa Squire, has
absolutely supported me on pushing this with government ministers. We've also
said, and Lisa again agrees with me on this, that we need to do more in the
court. So if a man is brought before the court for indecent exposure, that that
is a trigger then for him to receive treatment or for the courts to take action
at that point to try and head off behaviour getting much worse and offences
being committed, which are far more serious. So on that, Anna Soubry, former MP
of course, criminal barrister, was tweeting this morning and saying that
actually as well, the sentence should be, the maximum sentence should be
increased. At the moment it seems to be two years, should go up to five. Would
that make a difference do you think? Yes, again I think that sends a very clear
message that society takes this seriously and I think in the past it's been
laughed about or joked about. It's not been seen for the serious sexual
offending that it is to do this. So I think an increase in sentencing, I mean I
tried to bring amendments forward in various Home Office bills in the past and
the government haven't accepted those amendments but I'm hoping perhaps in the
Victims' Bill, which is coming before Parliament in the future, we might be able
to get this actually recognised for what it is, is serious offending and it
affects the lives of women and girls up and down the country. I'm interested in
what you say about laughing at and joking about because in very different
circumstances but still something that a lot of women found offensive. There was
a comedian, Jordan Grey, who stripped off on Channel 4 last year and there were
many complaints, people saying it was disgraceful, people saying that it was
misogynistic but actually Ofcom said no it wasn't and Channel 4 were rather
proud of it. I just wonder more broadly in society whether the idea that people
who don't want to see the male body should be allowed not to is something that
we've slightly lost. Well I think that's probably indicative of a view around
society about this kind of sense of it being a bit jokey and funny and actually
the male body can be used to intimidate, as an act of violence against women and
girls and I think we just need to rethink actually some of these attitudes that
we have because if you're a young woman who is, you know, is in decent exposure,
it's frightening, it makes you feel absolutely dreadful and awful and I just
think we do need to go back on this and think again. Things that have been
accepted for a long time, whether actually that's correct and whether we're
supporting women and girls in a society where we want everyone to feel safe
because at the moment this type of behaviour doesn't make women and girls feel
safe. Dame Diana Johnson, Chair of the Home Affairs Select Committee in the
House of Commons. Thank you. We are 22 minutes past eight. There's no need to
worry about what to do this Sunday evening. Attenborough is back and for the
first time Sir David is focused on Britain. Here off the coast of Pembrokeshire,
puffin numbers have been steadily increasing. Today nearly 40,000 return to this
tiny island every summer. But Skoma is an exception. Most of our puffin colonies
are in decline. That is a clip from The Wild Isles, the new Attenborough series
in which 96-year-old Sir David visits a series of locations, including Skoma
Island off the coast of Wales, to see those puffins and manks shear waters.
We're joined by the man who runs the official boat trips to Skoma Island, Gareth
Reynolds is on the line and also by the series producer Hilary Jeffkins who
joins us here in the studio. Morning to you both. Good morning. Good morning.
Hilary, will audiences used to the landscapes, to the wonderful creatures of
Africa or Antarctica, really engage in the same way with our own wildlife?
Definitely. Yes. I mean, in his opening piece, David says that he has travelled
the world and what he's seeing in Britain is every bit as spectacular as what
he's seen abroad. This is a big blue chip series, so it has the same sort of
quality of footage that you might see in the big international series. And the
behaviour will be surprising and exciting. British wildlife has got a lot to
offer. Not least, Gareth, those puffins and those shear waters, for those who've
not seen them, not had the privilege that you obviously have each and every week
of your life, tell us why they're exciting. Well, I think, as Hilary said, the
island itself is almost a lot of people come to villages every year, but it is a
fairly well kept secret. Around the UK, every time people come down, they say
they couldn't believe that they've never heard about it before. And you've got
these kind of, like I say, world class wildlife spectacles just on our doorstep.
These are the puffins, shear waters, there's hundreds of other species on the
island as well. But they're, yeah, they're significant world important colonies.
And there's just the habitat itself is only a mile from shore, but it is like a
world in itself. I always compare it to Jurassic Park. And Hilary, there were
risks in taking Sir David to what we've just heard called Jurassic Pass. Nervous
times for the producers? Nervous times, yes, there was bird flu about, but we
checked with the wardens, we checked with Gareth and all was well. So we didn't
take too many risks. And David was not touching any birds. That was the key,
wasn't it? Because he'd rather hope, I read, to be able to handle a chick. It
was even taught that a chick might fly off his head at one point. Yes, when
mank's shear waters fledge from their burrows, they need to get a bit of height.
So we were told that they climb up onto rocks, as you will see, but we were told
if someone's sitting near them, they may climb up onto them to get that height
to lift off. So there was a chance that they would climb onto David. Which would
have been the glorious shot, but one that you couldn't afford to risk. It would
have been, but we were cautious. Yes, but we still see them in full. Are you a
bit worried, Gareth? You've just said, Skoma is a well-kept secret. Not anymore.
No, not at all. I think it is important. It's very well controlled in terms of
visitor numbers. We have a limit every day just so that the island is kept under
strict conservation rules. And there's an online booking system that's well
monitored. And yes, we control the numbers from start to finish of the season.
So you can't get your own boat and head to the island. No, not at all. But yes,
it's very well controlled. And the island comes first. And then we just really
enjoy taking people out there to see it. It's like I said, we think it's one of
the wonders of the world. You said, Hilary, that it's got the same values as a
blue chip international series. Does that hint at the fact that obviously it's a
lot easier to get international money, to get vast budgets that you need for the
huge numbers of days that people have to spend filming, if you're filming around
the world? For this, not so easy, I imagine. No, it was more difficult.
Investment for British programmes that don't sell internationally is difficult.
So it's been years in the making. So we got investment from RSPB and WWF and
Open University as co-producers, which built us a budget that would enable us to
have those days in the field, to use the kit that we needed to use to deliver
that quality. So yes, we did need a good level of budget to do this. Now, Sir
David, 96, as I say, you won't thank me for reminding people of that because
there's no evidence of his age when he's making these programmes. He goes not
just to Skoma, but to five other locations. Let us into a secret. Do you think
Sir David may visit other locations? Some people have rather sort of said with
sadness, could this be the last time he's roaming around our shores? I can say
he was very, very happy on location and as fit as ever. You'd have to ask him
that question. But I do know that he has lots of other projects in the pipeline.
He's got plans for... Well, the plan that we can all enjoy for the moment is the
one that goes out this Sunday, the first episode of Wild Isles on BBC One, on
iPlayer, of course, this Sunday at seven o'clock. Hilary Jeffkins here, is
producer, and Gareth Reynolds, who's been keeping that well-kept secret of
Skoma. Thanks for joining us. Thank you. We're only eight minutes past eight. To
the sport and Rob. Two questions, Justin. It's all right. You don't have to
answer. They're rhetorical. Can Chelsea get past Borussia Dortmund? And Chelsea
get where? It's football. You wouldn't have the faintest idea. Can Chelsea get
past Borussia Dortmund this evening and make it into the Champions League
quarter-finals with a winning margin of two goals? It's the second leg at
Stamford Bridge. Chelsea 1-0 down from the first leg. And can Brentford qualify
for European football next season? That question more meaningful after beating
Fulham 3-2. Brentford three points off the top six. Meanwhile, the continuing
story of head injuries in sport is in the news once again. Following the
weekend's meeting of the International Football Association board, it continues
to reject the setting up of a trial in the Premier League, amongst others, of
temporary concussion substitutes when on-field players are suspected of having
sustained head injuries. The Premier League itself has expressed its
disappointment at a decision which it says it simply can't understand and so has
the campaigning charity Headway, whose chief executive Luke Griggs is on the
line now from our York studio. Good morning to you. What's wrong with the
present system of dealing with head injuries? Well, currently FIFA has
introduced this trial for permanent concussion substitutes, but ultimately this
has actually led to absolutely no difference in the risk being footballers being
placed under because it puts huge pressure on club and team medics to make a
binary decision in just two or three minutes while on the pitch, by watched by
60,000 people in the stadium, millions more watching on television to make this
immediate decision about whether a player is concussed or not. And the symptoms
of concussion can be delayed in their presentation. So ultimately nothing has
happened and people are still being allowed to be on the pitch and it's given
them 10, 15 minutes to see how they get on, to see if they show any signs and
that's dangerous. So your plan for reform is what? Well first of all, what we're
simply asking them to do is to introduce these temporary concussion substitutes
which are already used in other sports such as rugby. So rather than that 15
minutes of the player running around and seeing if he gets another knock to the
head which could exacerbate that brain injury, that 15 minutes should be spent
in the confines of a changing room where they can be assessed and they can be
monitored and they see if the signs of concussion present themselves in that
time. Yes, now you mentioned rugby and it's in the process, isn't it, of
modifying its tackle laws for players below elite level. Do you think football
might eventually do something also in an attempt to mitigate head injuries,
maybe even come to the view that heading the ball should be banned? Well if you
just look at the evidence we now know about the cumulative effect of repeated
blows to the head which we know now can lead to people suffering from early
onset dementia, from Parkinson's, from other degenerative neurological
conditions. Our information, our medical science on this is evolving all the
time and football has to be willing to evolve with it. It's not about
necessarily banning heading straight away but what we know at the moment is
enough to say that we should be limiting exposure to these repeated head
injuries and I think by reducing the number of heading in training and reducing
exposure to those sort of things in the training set up I think is a sensible
precaution to take at this point while we continue to learn more. The argument
in favour of retaining the heading of the ball is that balls these days are
lighter. Does that stand up in your view to scientific and medical scrutiny?
Well I think that was the first impression we had, that the old heavy leather
footballs were the cause of these issues for the players of previous generations
such as the World Cup winning team of 66. But the reality is that the light
modern footballs travel at a much greater speed and it's the velocity of the
ball striking the head and making the brain move within the skull that can be
causing the twisting and turning of the brain. So the truth is we don't yet
know. What we can't do is wait another 20, 30 years for longitudinal studies to
actually ascertain what's going on. We need some more work to be done now using
different methodologies and different kinds of scientific techniques but as I
say in the meantime we have to be doing what we can to limit the amount of
exposure to head injuries. Broadway Chief Executive Luke Riggs, thank you very
much. So to the tips, Sandown 150 number 2 Magistrato and also for the meeting
at Sandown in the 335 we select number 3 West to the Bridge. Rob thank you.
Here's Jim Al-Khalili to tell us what's happening in half an hour. Hello. This
morning I'll be finding out what dress patterns and composite metal structures
used to make wind turbines have in common when I talk to Dame Julia King about
metal alloys and how to make them resistant to fractures. Julia is a crossbench
peer and chairs the House of Lords Select Committee on Science and Technology.
We talk about the urgent need for the UK to train more scientists and engineers
if we're to remain a science superpower and how doing this could improve social
mobility too. Do join me if you can for The Life Scientific after the news at 9.
To the weather, it's something of an emergency because some of this rain, sleet
and snow is actually going to be in the south Nick, in the south. But anyway it
will gradually clear away in the south. There will be quite long lasting snow
there in Northern Scotland, Northern Ireland and North Eastern England. There in
the real parts of the country it will be troublesome in the next few days. On
Thursday there are weather warnings so do listen out, read in as well and you
know if it gets really bad, you know BBC Local Radio will bring you the details
of what you can do to cope in that circumstance. It is now 27 minutes tonight.
You're listening to Today with him and me and Tom Sanders has got a summary of
the news. The Home Secretary, Suella Braverman. Suella Braverman, the Home
Secretary, has admitted the government is pushing the boundaries of
international law as it introduces new legislation today to stop asylum seekers
crossing the English Channel in small boats. It's thought the measures would
take precedence in law over the right to claim asylum here. Labour says the
proposals are a gimmick. Further NHS strikes in England could be averted if
talks beginning this morning end a long running dispute about pay. The Health
Secretary, Steve Barkley, will meet unions representing nurses, ambulance
workers, physiotherapists and midwives which have all put industrial action on
hold for the time being. Meanwhile widespread strikes in France are disrupting
ferry services and Eurostar trains to and from the UK. Unions have walked out en
masse in protest at President Macron's plan to raise the state pension age to
64. And tickets for the Eurovision Song Contest go on sale this lunchtime with
fans able to attend nine shows during the week of the competition in Liverpool
in May. The UK is hosting the event on behalf of Ukraine which won last year's
contest. Thanks very much indeed Tom. It's now 26 minutes to nine. Matt Hancock
should be dragged to the bar of the House of Commons to be questioned about
this. That was the response of the former chairman of the Conservative Party,
Sir Jake Berry, to the latest revelation of the contents of the former Health
Secretary's pandemic WhatsApps. The front page of the Daily Telegraph reveals
this morning that Mr Hancock discussed a plan to block funding for a new
disabled children's centre as a way of forcing a rebel Tory MP, as it happens
Sir Jake's neighbour in Lancashire, to back new lockdown restrictions. At issue
was the funding for what's called a Learning Disability Hub in Bury in
Lancashire. Well, I've been talking to Sir Jake about why so cross. What your
listeners will see when they look at these messages is the Secretary of State
for Health of the United Kingdom during the Covid pandemic agreeing with members
of staff who were plotting to weaponise the provision of care to young disabled
children in the north of England as a way of forcing and conjoling members of
Parliament in the region to vote for the tiered system of lockdown. Now, I'll
just say this as the adjoining MP to that constituency and as the father of a
child with disabilities, I know just how much that new disabled child health
centre is required and the fact or the idea that that would be used as a weapon
or a bargaining chip by the Secretary of State for Health, I just think crosses
a line in terms of what's acceptable in public life. But the threat was never
actually deployed, was it? They talked about the possibility. They never
actually said to this MP, you won't get that disability hub that you want. Well,
Matt Hancock, in his response to the messages, says 100% agreed in terms of
using this threat. I just think it shows, it sort of gives a bit of an insight
into government at the time. I think almost it appears that he was sort of drunk
on power. I hesitate to say this, but aren't you in danger of being a little bit
of precious here? I joked earlier during the newspaper review that this was a
bit like the Frenchman in the Casablanca film saying, gambling in my casino.
This is what politicians in Westmont do every day. They think, what does someone
want? Can we threaten to withhold it in order to get their vote? I've been
knocking around the Palace of Westminster for 13 years now. I'm all too aware,
having been in the cabinet twice and being a minister, I'm all too aware that
there is an element of cajoling and arm twisting and persuasion. I just think if
you look at the issue that they were proposing to use here, it's beyond
contempt. Look, this won't be the worst thing that happened in the whole of the
Covid pandemic. We had an appalling loss of life and tragedy. But I think for
parents who have children, the idea that this would be used as a weapon, I think
it just crosses the line. It's not something I would ever think acceptable. If
in fact this had been put to me as an adjoining MP at the time, I would have
publicised it at the time. Isn't this partly about the support of you and others
for your old mate Boris Johnson? And he took the decisions in the pandemic. He
was the Prime Minister, but it suits you to blame Matt Hancock instead. Matt
Hancock isn't even a Conservative MP anymore. But if you... my tweet last night
that has led to us chatting this morning is saying that there needs to be a
mechanism to bring Matt Hancock to the House of Commons to answer questions on
these messages. The truth is I'm sure there'll be an urgent question or a
statement by the government today, but that's about what the government's
response to these messages is. It's not about what his response is. Well, and I
suspect his response, having talked to... And that's why I'm calling for an
opportunity to cross-question him. Having talked to... It's too long to wait for
an inquiry. Sure, sure. Let me just put to him what I think he might say if he
appeared in the House of Commons. I think he'd say, look, at stake was saving
thousands, potentially hundreds of thousands of lives. So yes, behind the scenes
people were absolutely passionate about persuading Conservative MPs to back
greater restrictions. Now, you can argue whether that was right and wrong, but
that's what was at stake, they argue. Number one, I don't accept that was at
stake because these tierings would have gone through anyway because they had the
support of the Labour Party. It was a sort of anti-embarrassment for Matt
Hancock that he didn't want to have to rely on Labour's vote. And if that truly
was at stake, because I've got no way of saying that it wasn't, if that truly
was at stake, then surely he should have spoken to colleagues and made the
argument rather than resorting to threats to withdraw care for disabled children
or thinking about resorting to threats. Maybe we just have a differing view on
this, or maybe I have a differing view from many people. I just think in public
life you have to maintain certain standards. I like to think that people still
get into politics because they're thoroughly decent and good people, whatever
party they are from, who want to improve people's lives. And I hope that we get
the opportunity to question Matt Hancock on this and other messages before the
House of Commons. Given your stress on maintaining certain standards, you said
some things are acceptable in public life and some are not, I presume you are
not in favour of retiring prime ministers giving a knighthood to their dad?
Well, who is on Boris Johnson's Honours list is a matter for Boris Johnson. I
haven't seen the list. I've seen that widely reported. Well, the principle is
what matters. The king and Boris Johnson. Well, you've just told us that there
are certain standards in life and certain things are acceptable or not. Is it
acceptable to give a knighthood to your dad after many of your own ministers
have quit because you're not considered fit to be prime minister? Nick, I simply
don't know who is on Boris Johnson's list. I'm not asking who's on the list, I'm
asking whether it's acceptable or not. You're asking me about his father. I
don't know whether his father is on the list. Just one last try. Why is this a
difficult question? It's not particularly a difficult question, but I think
there's a good, you know, sort of rule in politics that you don't get into
commenting on honours of any kind because it is ultimately a matter for the
king. And as I say, I'm more than happy to come back on and answer whatever
questions you may have once that list is public. We look forward to that and
we're grateful for you coming on this morning. I look forward to it too, Nick.
Thank you very much. Jake Berry there. Speaking from the north, just in where
the snow is coming, but I have a photograph, thanks to WhatsApp, of snow not
only in the south, not just in the great county of Suffolk, but on the coast as
well. Told you, it's an emergency. 19 minutes to nine is the time. At what stage
is it right for scientists to intervene to treat serious hereditary disease? A
citizens' jury of people living with genetic conditions has considered these
matters and their thoughts are being considered in turn by the third
International Summit on Human Genome Editing as it gets underway. The jury
voted, by the way, in favour of asking the government to consider changing
existing law to allow genome editing of embryos. Professor Anna Middleton is on
the line, professor and director of the Cavley Centre for Ethics, Science and
the Public at the University of Cambridge and Professor Tom Shakespeare as well,
professor of disability research at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine. Good morning to you both. Good morning. What are we talking about,
Professor Middleton, when it comes to what is possible at the moment? So we know
that the science of genome editing is now at a stage where it is possible to
accurately change the DNA of us. And there's some incredible clinical trials
that are happening at the moment to cure and treat very specific genetic
conditions. So, for example, sickle cell disease. And when we think about
treatment, we often think about treating an adult who is affected by disease.
And so the ethical question that we were debating in our citizens jury was,
well, what happens if we think about preventing genetic disease? And so what
about preventing a condition before it happens in childhood? And then what about
treating a baby when it's in the womb, before it's born? And then the next step
before that would be treating an embryo, so a fertilised egg. And what's the
difference between all of those? Where did they draw the line? What is the
difference, ethically? Well, often what happens is it's scientists and
clinicians and policy makers and the law that makes a very clear division
between treatment of adults versus treatment of an embryo. Whereas public and
patient voices are not often part of that debate and discussion. And so for our
citizens jury, we posed that specific question to them. And what they
overwhelmingly said was, we want to be part of debate. We've been missing from
the discussion in this space. And some of those people that were part of the
jury, all of them were genetics patients. Some of them felt the genetic
condition in my family is so severe, I couldn't bear the thought of it carrying
on for future generations. And so I would want to embrace embryo editing. And
then others in the jury were very, very anti and felt this is a step too far.
This has really crossed the line. And what really came out from the jury was
that we have to debate this now. The technology is here. We have to discuss it.
Do you think, Tom Shakespeare, Professor Shakespeare, that the jury was right,
that that is an important line at least to think about, whatever side of it you
come on? I don't think this was a citizens jury. I think it was a deliberative
focus group with a group of people affected. The principle of a jury is that you
are tried by people who do not have a vested interest in what you decide. This
would be like going to court for burglary and finding out that the jury was all
people who'd experienced burglary. I do think that citizens jury is important. I
do think it's very important to hear the views of people affected. And Anna has
done loads of really, really good work in that. But I don't agree with this. And
I don't agree with Anna when she says that gene editing is safe. The group led
by Cathy Neerkam at the France Greek Institute used CRISPR, this technology, to
delete a gene in embryos. And they found 50% had unintended edits around the
site of the change. So there are loads of off-target effects. And I think it's
way too early to be thinking of research with embryos. But in a sense, Professor
Shakespeare, isn't that a separate issue? There are practical issues for sure,
but the ethical one is still the point at which it is reasonable to treat
disease and to treat disease in this way, and whether a line should always be
drawn at the stage of an embryo or not. Well I think safety is ethical. And I
don't think you should have heritable changes to the human genome. And that's
the problem, that's the risk. Well that's the point, isn't it? Because that is
what potentially we would be creating. I don't think we're ready for that,
because it's not safe, and because we're not sure we want to change human
beings. Professor Middleton, is that a fair point to make? And that's the kind
of key, the nub of all of this. If you are making changes at such an early
stage, that those changes are then heritable, you are doing something that is
unstoppable in future generations. And the very fact that you can't know what
long-term effect it has should stop us even thinking about doing it. Yes,
absolutely. And that should be part of the debate. We don't know the longer-term
impact. And the worrying thing is that the science is pushing ahead so
incredibly fast. So I'm actually currently at the third international summit of
human genome editing now. It started yesterday. And the science is incredible.
It's not going to be too far away until it is completely accurate. I mean, you
can hear the scientists talking now. It's going to be a matter of years away
before it's going to be completely accurate. So we can't wait for that point to
be starting to debate this. We have to be discussing it now. What kind of
society do we want? This is what we have to be thinking about. And the reason
that we asked specifically genetics patients was because we're very aware of the
existing genomic medicine services. I used to work in the genomic medicine
service in the NHS and they are going to be the people that this is going to
apply to. And so we've been derailing the discussion about this by talking about
designer babies and playing God and enhancements. Put all of that to one side,
there are serious genetic conditions that are being talked about, families
worked with in the NHS right now, and they want to be part of the debate about
where this technology is going. Well, look, it's a debate we will continue in
the years to come. Anna Middleton, Professor Anna Middleton and Professor Tom
Shakespeare as well. Thank you both very much. 13 minutes to nine. One in two
Ukrainians needed some form of rehabilitation even before last year's invasion.
That's according to the World Health Organization. And it was because the
country had already lived through eight years of fighting in the east. Now, of
course, since the invasion, the need is all the greater. The BBC has been given
access to one hospital in Lviv in the west of Ukraine where they do provide
specialist rehabilitation. Since the beginning of the war, they've treated more
than 11,000 patients. From there, our Ukraine correspondent James Wathouse now
reports. The moment Ilya Polypenko's war ended in September. Two soldiers pull
him away from his burning tank in the southern Kherson region. I'm a mechanic
and a tank driver. I was out on a combat mission when our tank drove on a mine
and caught fire. I lost consciousness. When I came around, fire was raging
inside. I had to get out quickly. I crawled to the edge of the road and my
comrades evacuated me. Ilya suffered 30% burns to his body. His right leg was
amputated from below the knee. He's now receiving specialist care at the
National Rehabilitation Centre in Lviv, western Ukraine. In this war of old,
injuries from explosions or shells are the most common. Every patient here is
missing a limb. Most of them are young. They're Ukraine's fighting generation.
Roksylyana Shmilo is a physical therapist here. Her patients are going through a
pretty challenging set of core exercises on soft mats. We start doing physical
therapy from the very first moments after an operation. We work on the muscles
and every part of the body. It is extremely important for a patient to be active
and prepare for prosthetics. Thousands of injured soldiers end up in hospitals
like this across Ukraine and you can see they've got some pretty traumatic
physical injuries. There's a steady flow of them which wander down these
corridors. The brutality of the fighting which they've come from is
unimaginable. But a return to a fuller life is possible. It's now officially
spring in Ukraine and there is a pink sunrise emerging across the vast Dnipro
River in the centre of the capital. And we're here to meet someone called Klim.
He's a Ukrainian Marine and we last saw him bed-bound with a collapsed pelvis in
May last year. This morning he's going for a jog. My last ten months have been
an incredible adventure about love, care and my recovery. During this time I was
taught to sit and walk from scratch and I also learned how to run. It is simply
a miracle. Klim was injured when he and his unit came under attack while
defending Mariupol. He was taken prisoner by Russian forces before returning in
a prisoner exchange. When I saw him he was pinned together by a system of metal
rods. To see him run like this is moving. He now spends his days helping other
veterans with advice.