TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-22H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and BBC Sounds. Begins this Wednesday evening at 8.45. BBC News at nine
o'clock. MPs have been debating the new deal between the UK and the European
Union on post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland. Its announcement
followed a meeting between Rishi Sunak and the President of the EU Commission,
Ursula von der Leyen in Windsor. MPs will get a vote on the plan which replaces
the Northern Ireland protocol. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, told the Commons
his party would support it. It is good that the deal before us will see fewer
unnecessary checks on goods moving between Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The Red and Green Lane proposal is a good one. It will make life easier for
business. It will enable the people of Northern Ireland to participate more
freely in the economic life of the UK. It has our full support. Members of the
Stormont Assembly will get a veto on any changes to EU rules that affect them.
But the Democratic Unionist Party, which pulled out of a power-sharing at
Stormont in protest of the current arrangements, said it still had key areas of
concern. A reward of Â£20,000 has been offered for information which helps track
down those behind the shooting of an off-duty police officer in County Tyrone
last week. The dissident Republican group the New IRA says it attacked Detective
Chief Inspector John Caldwell in Oma. He remains seriously ill in hospital. A
minute's silence has been held in Parliament in memory of the first woman to be
elected Commons Speaker, Lady Boothroyd. She was 93. Betty Boothroyd was elected
as Labour MP for West Bromwich West in 1973. Nigeria's two main opposition
parties have alleged fraud in Saturday's presidential election following
technical problems in the counting process. The governing party's candidate,
Bola Tinebu, currently leads the race with counting still underway. Novak
Djokovic has paid tribute to Steffi Graf after surpassing her record for the
most weeks spent as tennis' world number one. The Serbian has reached 378 weeks
as the highest-ranked male player. Graf retired in 1999. BBC News. Bernie
Sanders talks capitalism in half an hour when he joins Tom Sutcliffe on Start
the Week. Before that on Radio 4, is psychiatry working? Welcome to a strange
country, a land known to all of us in some degree, but which is still little
understood. A land where some of us travel very hard roads. Welcome to the
country of the troubled mind. Four years ago, I had a breakdown. After a short
stay in hospital, I began the process of healing and recovery with help from my
family, friends, and a therapist. It was a difficult time, but fascinating. My
experiences of psychiatry were mixed. I knew the clinicians wanted to help, but
I felt our encounters were not long enough or deep enough. The subjects of this
program, healing and recovery, were barely addressed. I'm a great fan of the
good psychiatry can do and the benefits of the right dose of the right
medication. But my experience, like that of many patients and former patients,
led me to ask serious questions about how psychiatry understands and treats
people in distress and how they can recover. My name is Horatio Clare. I'm an
author and journalist. Together with the renowned psychiatrist, Femi Oyobode, we
are asking, is psychiatry working? This is episode six, healing and recovery.
You have to stabilize the actual symptoms, in my view, and then you've got a
chance to repair all the other things that have gone wrong. When I first
attempted to take my own life, I actually went to a police station before being
taken to hospital. I was arrested and made to be a criminal. I think we have
these two opposite poles. We have excessive coercion at one end and we have
exclusion at the other. We live in a world that's absolutely obsessed with scans
and blood tests. Diagnosis isn't scientific. It's people making a judgment about
other people's behavior. What's key to this work is love and kindness, an arm
around the shoulder, a hug in the morning. These programs are following the
stages of a breakdown, from crisis to diagnosis, medication and recovery. There
is great hope and light here, but some of these stories are not easy listening.
Do look after yourself as we go in search of recovery. Femi, how does psychiatry
view the concept of recovery, and has that view changed over time? I think it'd
be helpful if I said something about how doctors in general think of recovery,
and that's exactly how psychiatrists also think of recovery. So doctors think of
the symptoms that the patient presented with and see whether at the end of
treatment, whether those symptoms have totally resolved or not. And then given
what they know about the natural history of that condition, by which I mean the
long-term outcome of that condition, they have some sense of whether the person
is likely to have recurrences or not. Therefore, there's a muted sense of what
it means to say somebody's recovered, because at the back of your mind, you've
got this notion, if they haven't really had all their symptoms resolved, you do
not want to say that they've recovered. And I think the change that's occurred
is that patient groups have appropriated the term recovery to mean that even
though the symptoms are not resolved, yet they feel that they can re-engage with
life. So this transfers the power from the doctors to the patients, so that the
patients become active agents in their own life, active agents in describing
what their outcomes are, and then they can embrace the residue, if there are
residual symptoms, or not. And they can find ways to live in such a way that
they're fulfilled within their lives, irrespective of whether the doctors think
that all the symptoms have resolved. Do you think a wider cultural shift towards
a more hopeful perception of what can happen after a crisis would help people
recover faster and more strongly? I think so, I mean, but of course you know
that cultural shifts are not things that happen overnight. But in theory,
conceptually, I agree with you that if we were to live in a culture where it's
expected that people, even though they've had a psychiatric disorder, an episode
of illness, or even several episodes of illness, that does not mean that they're
incapable, does not mean that they're not able to function, doesn't mean that
they're unable to live with family, doesn't mean that they're unable to partake
in society in the usual way. So expectation makes a lot of difference to how
people see themselves, and also how they expect their lives to go. And you've
talked to me about international and different cultural examples. For example,
you said in Nigeria a single episode of psychosis is much more common with a
recovery behind it. Yes, I mean, we know from the International Pilot Study of
Schizophrenia, which is done all those years ago in 1972, you know, it's
reported in 1972, that the outcome of schizophrenia in the third world, that a
single episode of what we call schizophrenia is much more likely to have a
better outcome. And the search has been on for the last 50 years to try to
understand what it is that underlies the better outcome in the developing world,
because you'd expect for there to be worse outcome, given that the modern
psychiatric treatments are probably worse. And one of the possibilities, it's
not the only possible answer to this question, but one of the possibilities is
that it is the expectation within wider society that underlies the better
outcome for schizophrenia in these cultures. At the University of Birmingham, we
found a striking example of recovery in action. Better than well. Luke Treynor
is one of its service leaders. He has seen peer support make a huge difference
to many lives, including his own. Luke has found that having a purpose larger
than oneself is key to recovery. I am the programme manager of Better Than Well
Collegiate Recovery Programme here. That's an addictions recovery peer support
service for students in recovery from addiction and for other mental health
conditions that are kind of impulse-based quite often. When you look at the kind
of root causes of addiction, there is a kind of malady, which I identify with,
which underlies addiction. And I suppose that the kind of simplest way of
looking at it is that I try to fix what's going on internally with external
things. How do you go about helping people recover? Are these essentially
12-step programmes based on the Alcoholics Anonymous programme? No, they're not.
And there's always a danger if you've got a kind of homogenous recovery that
kind of dominates any programme. So, I try to do it in a way that's not too
complex. So, we are very much of the mind that there are many ways to recover.
There isn't just one way. I come from a 12-step recovery background, so I can
support students who are more inclined towards that spiritual direction of
things, I suppose. But we have SMART Recovery here, which is an evidence-based
CBT-type recovery. We have a meditation-based recovery, which is a meditation-
based recovery. Which isn't necessarily spiritual at all. It's more your
mindfulness kind of thing. So, there are a lot of options. In terms of how
students recover, I suppose what unites all of those recovery types is peer
support and connection. The connection, the therapeutic value of students
recovering together. That is the thread through all of these recovery kind of
ideologies. Can I ask, in your case, are you clear about what took you down that
road? I am. There was an early life trauma for me, which I think was probably
the catalyst for it. So, alongside my recreational use of HASHISH LSD, the more
experimental stuff, for me, I was coping with feelings and thoughts that I
couldn't handle without telling the people that I experimented or was taking
recreationally with. So, I would be very much... We're talking about the early
90s, the rave scene. But most of the other people there that I know were just
doing that and then they were getting on, going to school, getting on with their
lives, having steady relationships or whatever. I was taking benzodiazepines on
a daily basis. I was drinking from early in the morning. And I was taking
amphetamines just so I could stay on my feet with that cocktail of things in me.
So, yeah, for me, I very much identify with the fact that drugs felt like a
solution to the problem that was me for quite a long time in my life. That's
beautifully put. And then it turns out that the solution to the problem that the
drugs made is you becoming, in a sense, a healer. I wonder if you could talk
about the role that your work plays in your ongoing recovery and strength. Yes,
it is a huge part of it. The recovery kind of world that I come from, we have a
phrase, which is kind of get out of self and help others. That's quite a lot to
unpick. But there is a feeling that I can identify with and a lot of people can
identify with that things start to become darker when we're too isolated in our
own head, in our own thoughts, not running our thoughts by others or not
reaching out and having connection with other people. So as much as it is a
joyous thing, I would advise it for anyone to be of service to your community. I
think that's good for all people. For addicts of my variety, it's an absolute
necessity. I need to do that. I need to do that on a daily basis. In the
morning, I orient myself in that direction. How can I be of most use to the
people around me? And that just works. Pragmatically, it just works. And I see
the same for the other people I support. So I'm now in a position where I have
supported people who support people who support people who support people. And
this is the wonderful thing. This is a gift for me in my life today to see this.
Pfizer is another one of the students who have benefited from this service. The
one I go to on a Friday is called Recovery Celebration. So I quite like that
because it wasn't like therapy. It was, you know, we're celebrating people in
recovery. I think my first ever session, it was quite overwhelming just because
I wasn't sure if I should have been there. But then when other people were
talking about their experiences, even though it wasn't something that I'd
suffered with in terms of, like, an addiction, but I related to their thoughts.
And that was overwhelming for me because I was like, wow, there are other people
who are kind of dealing with the same thoughts as me. And it felt like a little
bit less lonely. That must be very powerful. Could you talk about what kinds of
thoughts that you were dealing with? Yeah, so since about the age of 12, I've
suffered with an eating disorder. The thoughts are very similar to an addiction
mindset in terms of secrecy, guilt, shame, and using something like a behavior,
for example. I used to exercise compulsively and frequently. And it came to a
point at one point in my life where I was completely hiding everything I was
doing, which, as you can imagine, led to me being hospitalized in the children's
hospital. And I've had a spell of many, many months in inpatient facilities. So
you can imagine it was getting quite boring, quite tiring, and quite repetitive.
And I realized that I really don't want to live in and out of hospitals. And
I've had my fair share of therapy techniques. So one of them was making, like, a
little placemat to kind of sit under your food when you eat. So you can kind of
look at things while you eat in the hospital, right? And you'd kind of write
motivations or maybe pictures of your family. And one of the big things on my
placemat was one was cricket, because I play a lot of cricket, and two was
university. I really wanted the university experience, and it was something I
was really, really aiming for. At that point, I was in GCSE stage, so, you know,
it was a long way to go. But I think it was good because having an actual
achievable goal of university and now to sit in the University of Birmingham is
quite surreal. And I know that since I've gotten here, well, I can set another
achievable goal. And I find that quite helpful to set these goals, but in a
healthy way. You describe you wanted to get better, you didn't want to be in
hospital, and you wanted education, and you had a dream that you made come true.
So all of those things come from inside you. Was there external help that helped
you get to where you are? I mean, my biggest, biggest support is my mum, because
she really stood by me. In terms of my medical teams and other support, there
was very intense support, but they do try to gradually decline it because it's
not sustainable to live your whole life in services. So, yeah, my mum is still
always here, but I think although I, right now, am not in a stage where I'm
physically or mentally unwell, I think that this group is the exact support that
I need because it's my choice to be here. All of the therapy that I've had in
the past, it's not my choice. I was sectioned under the Mental Health Act
numerous times, taken to hospital against my will, forcefully. So it's a big
thing for me to be in control. So the fact that I am here, but it's for a
positive thing, and I have the option, if I want to leave, I can. Also the fact
that all my therapy before was very based just on me. It was like 5 to 1 kind of
ratio that my mum, my doctor, my psychologist, everyone all saying, you need to
do this, whereas this is like there's maybe five, six people who turn up to a
whole group and there's Luke, but he's not really giving us, like, you have to
do this. It's like a safe space to just talk openly, knowing that if anything
gets out of hand, then you're in good hands. What's the relationship between
dependency and mental health disorders and distress? Very complex relationship,
very complex indeed. We know, for example, that in the early phases of a major
illness like schizophrenia, for whatever reason, and we don't understand it
entirely, something to do with attentional difficulties and something to do with
weird and unusual experiences, a lot of people self-medicate with substances
primarily with cannabis. So that's one possible relationship. Another way of
thinking of it is to say that if you're thinking of alcohol abuse, a lot of
people who misuse alcohol, who become dependent on alcohol, have, the men, have
social anxiety, so that they start to drink in order to control their social
anxiety and then they discover that they become dependent on alcohol. So that's
another root of the relationship. It seems worth putting a question mark against
that idea that cannabis is used as self-medicatory when there's nothing to
suggest. Cannabis specialists believe that, in fact, cannabis can cause the
schizophrenic breakdown. Oh, of course, yes, yes. So we're not saying that
cannabis is innocuous. Sadly, cannabis itself can induce an acute onset of
illness. And part of the huge psychological benefit of this group was clearly
peer support. Why does peer support work? For all sorts of reasons. And the
first simple straightforward answer is that we're social animals. And given that
we're social animals, I mean, the benefit of being involved with other human
beings is inestimable. So that's a very simple, straightforward way of thinking
of it. The second thing is to say something about the benefits of being in
groups. So this idea that when you're in a group, you get a fellow feeling
because you're in a situation where you're with other people who are similar.
The second thing is the idea that the other people have difficulties and you can
help them given your own experiences. And then they can help you too, given
their experiences. And then you might see people who are further down the
journey and they're starting to come out of their difficulties. And that gives
you hope. So that idea of the installation of hope, it gives you hope. That the
arc is bending towards recovery, which is also very, very important. Let's look
more closely at the elements of recovery and healing. Mike Slade is Professor of
Recovery and Social Inclusion at the University of Nottingham. One of the
influential understandings that we've developed is the CHIME framework. So CHIME
is five processes that people with their own experiences of mental health
problems identify as important for their own recovery. And CHIME stands for
connectedness, hope, identity, meaning and empowerment. And of course,
interestingly, missing from that list is no symptoms. So I think the old
understanding of recovery that has emerged from psychiatry and mental health
systems really isn't the modern understanding, but it's about supporting people
to get on with their life despite any life challenges relating to mental health
or other things that they might have. Does your considerable work on recovery, a
lifetime of work on recovery, give you an impression of what somebody who's
going to have the best chances of recovery, how they need to act and think and
do? I can answer that at two levels. One at individual and one at collective.
Because I think blaming an individual for not recovering and seeing it through
their own efforts is not really aligned with the best empirical evidence that
suggests recovery is partly a social endeavour. So, for example, one route to
recovery for many people is getting a job. But if because of stigma and
discrimination no jobs are available to someone with mental health issues, it's
not really fair to locate the responsibility for change at the individual level.
Now, that said, I think there are a number of things that we could really do
better in our approaches to supporting people. So the first is not to be
communicating indirectly or directly that we want you to be a good patient. One
of the challenges is from the traditional mental health system view, the job of
the individual with mental health experiences is to take their treatment as
prescribed. That is actually counterproductive because what that does is
increase dependency and reduce any sense of agency or ability to make change.
The second thing that individuals can do is to deliberately seek out credible
role models of recovery. Now, that might be through online mutual peer support
forums, or that might be what the mental health system is starting to do of
introducing mental health peer support workers, people with their own lived
experience. But finding people that can provide them with some hope, some
possibility of a good future, is a really central starting point. And the third
thing, I guess, is about identifying and really being in touch with and working
towards dreams and passions. I mean, a mental health clinician will call these
goals, but that may not always be the most useful term that individuals use. But
just, you know, what would make life worth getting up for? And there it speaks
to societal opportunities to contribute. It speaks to individuals having some
level of choice and agency in the life that they're leading. So if I can find my
tribe, if I can find hope, if I can identify goals and pursue them with agency,
does your work show that I can recover? Well, people are very different, so it's
not possible to give invariant answers, but broadly that's a better approach
than just taking treatment. And indeed, what we find with recent research that's
just been published, in fact, is that there is a much higher rate of personal
recovery, this idea of living as well as possible, than of clinical recovery.
And for some people, they go together, that people get on with their life, they,
of course, get better, have no symptoms and have a life worth living. But many
people live with mental health issues and also find a positive way forward in
their life. Now, that sounds a kind of small academic distinction, but it's a
huge difference, for example, in what the job of the mental health system is.
Can I ask you, the question this series is asking is, is psychiatry working? Do
you think it is? I think psychiatry is working for some people some of the time,
and the challenge is that psychiatry acts as if it is working for all people all
of the time. So choice, and genuine choice, is at the heart of the
transformation that's needed in the mental health system, I would suggest. So
it's not that we want to, or need to, or indeed should get rid of psychiatry and
all its associated expertise, but rather that should become one part of the
options available to individuals looking to recover. Femi, we started this
series with a question about a crisis in psychiatry, and I asked you if it was,
and you said it was, and for the reasons that you gave. And six episodes later,
here we are. Presumably, you wouldn't do it, you wouldn't become a psychiatrist
and give it your life, if you didn't think it was working and capable of working
better. Yes, it's been a most worthwhile career, over 45 years of it. And the
people who work, if I specify the psychiatrists, the people in psychiatry, the
vast majority of them are dedicated, committed, enthusiastic, and totally
devoted to the work, for all sorts of reasons, but primarily because it's a
human subject, and the purpose of it is to somehow relieve human suffering. Lots
of patients of psychiatry feel, for one reason or another, that they are subject
to stigma. I suggest to you that psychiatrists too feel stigmatised. Oh, no
doubt about that at all. So there's as much, I don't want to put it that way,
but it is true, there's as much stigma against the psychiatrist from within the
medical profession as there's stigma against patients from the wider society.
Why? Some of it is to do with the fact that the conditions that we encounter
remain mysterious. And most of medicine deals with things which are clear-cut,
and therefore this aspect of the mystery of the disorders that we encounter
makes us different from the rest of medicine, so that's one aspect of it. The
second aspect of it is that it's a contested territory, and because it's
contested, that makes it very difficult for people to want to work in it. So
some people come when they're fourth or final year in medicine, and because they
see the contestation in the field, they are appalled and disenchanted because
they assume that they will work in a field where there will be some degree of
appreciation of their efforts, but that's not necessarily true in psychiatry,
whereas it's true, for example, in paediatrics and in obstetrics. If psychiatry
is waiting for its next evolution, does that necessarily or solely come from a
development of a new drug, or are there other things that psychiatry is pursuing
in terms of knowledge and practice that you're excited about? I don't think it's
true to say, or it's certainly not kind to say, that psychiatrists are
preoccupied with drugs. I just want to remind people that psychoanalysis was
introduced by psychiatrists, that cognitive behavioral therapy was introduced by
psychiatrists, so psychiatrists are always looking for other things aside from
drugs to aid and assist the people that we see. And so there will come other
forms of talk therapies, and I'm also sure that there will be new social
therapies that will be aiming not at talking, but at altering, re-engineering
social fabric of society, and that may also make a lot of difference. But no
doubt we will also get new forms of treatment, which will be medical in nature,
and which will be of immense help to others. For my own purposes, I was reading
Emil Kraepelin's book, which was published in 1919, and his description of the
patients that he was seeing in his hospital, and totally unrecognizable. If you
were practicing, if you're practicing psychiatry today, because people are not
that ill, or if they're that ill, they're that ill for a very, very short period
of time. Whereas in his day, in the early part of the 20th century, people would
have been ill, consistently ill, and be in hospital for years, not for months or
days. So there's been incredible, incredible change, which is not as recognized
as it ought to be. But we have a long way to go to do as much good as all of us
wish. This journey through how psychiatry treats people in trouble has been
hugely heartening in many ways. The system brims with professionals of enormous
expertise and compassion, who are devoted to helping people towards happier,
healthier lives. At the same time, there is no doubt that psychiatry faces
enormous challenges. The lack of progress in drug development and prescription,
the lack of oversight and contact with patients, the wish to treat people as
nuanced individuals, but the lack of tools and time to do so. The dire need for
more inpatient services, delivered in wards which should all be well-staffed,
well-run, caring and healing places, but which too often are not. Psychiatrists
and psychotherapists know that every kind of suffering, from the most mild to
the most severe, can be helped. The knowledge, the treatments and the therapies
do exist. Recovery is everyone's right, but not everyone's experience. I wonder
whether psychiatry is doing enough to demand and deliver the changes that
clinicians know their patients need. All of us who are in recovery know how
lucky we are, and all of us know that luck alone is not enough. We need
psychiatry working, and we need it working better. Tom Sutcliffe will be here to
start the week next, after we hear from Ritala Shah about the world tonight. Hi
Ritala. Hello Ron. Tonight, a new post-Brexit deal for Northern Ireland. Rishi
Sunak and the EU Commission President Ursula von der Leyen have reached an
agreement which the Prime Minister says removes any sense of a border in the
Irish Sea. We'll hear reaction to the deal from the Democratic Unionists, who've
said they still have key areas of concern. Also, could Brexit really be done
this time? Why has this negotiation appeared to be much smoother than the ones
which preceded it? And as this is my last time presenting the world tonight,
we'll be looking back on how the world has changed over the past 15 years. Do
join me on The World Tonight at 10. Ritala, thanks very much. We look forward to
it. Now here's Tom Sutcliffe to start the week. Hello. What has capitalism ever
done for us? It's made prodigious advances in global wealth and longevity, some
would say, and they have the figures to prove it. A planet on the brink of
ecological disaster and grotesque levels of inequality, others reply. And they
have the figures too. With us on the programme today, the independent Senator
Bernie Sanders, who made a run of the Democratic presidential nomination that
had more Conservative party managers seriously worried. His new book, A
Manifesto for a Better America, tells us it's OK to be angry about capitalism.
Martin Wolff, chief economics commentator for the Financial Times, isn't so much
angry as deeply anxious. His book is called The Crisis in Democratic Capitalism,
and it argues that we should be profoundly worried about the troubled
relationship between free markets and free societies. And the economist Kate
Raworth joins us too to talk about whether capitalism is sustainable on a finite
planet, or whether we have to replace it with something else entirely. I'd like
to start with a definition of terms, really. And Bernie, I noticed in your book,
the cover uses the word capitalism unqualified. I think I'm right in saying that
the text throughout always qualifies it. You talk either about uber capitalism,
an intense form of capitalism, or you talk about fetid capitalism. Am I to
assume from that that it's all capitalism you're angry with, or just some forms
of it? Well, Tom, I think what we have seen in recent years is an incredible
level of excess. Bosses, owners always made more money than their workers. When
I was growing up, I think the ratio was maybe 20 or 30 to 1. It is now 400 to 1.
There has always been inequality, of course. Today in America, there is more
income and wealth inequality than in the history of our country, where you have
three people owning more wealth than the bottom half of American society.
There's always been concentration of ownership. Big corporations have had power.
Today, I believe you have more concentration of ownership in sector after sector
than we've ever seen. And in politics in America, and some people in the UK may
not be familiar with it, we have in America the best democracy that money can
buy, because billionaires can now spend unlimited amounts of money buying and
selling politicians. So you haven't quite answered my question. Is there a form
of capitalism that would work? Sure, it is not my view that the government
should run every mom and pop grocery store in the world. Absolutely not. I
respect innovation, respect small business, but I think we have reached a level
of excess right now that must be dealt with. Martin Wolf, you use a lot of
qualifications too. You talk about crony capitalism at times, welfare
capitalism. You talk about democratic capitalism. What's the core definition for
you of what capitalism is? It's interesting that in a way from a different
starting point, I ended up in a fairly close place to Bernice. So the broad
definition to me is of a market economy. That is to say one in which
decentralized markets operating, obviously with the profit motive as a central
element, but not necessarily the only one. It depends what people bring to it.
With independent actors, independent of the state, with private property, which
can be organized in very different ways. So that's my general sense of it. And
of course, as we know, over the last 250 years, depends on when you think it
started, you could go back to the Renaissance, but I don't want to do that. It's
institutional forms internally. The corporation, for instance, came along quite
late in this itself. It's a development of the mid 19th century and its
framework, political moving from oligarchy to democracy or to change, all
compatible with capitalism. Kate Rainworth, it's a word that always needs some
form of qualification, does it? To refine it and sharpen the definition. Yeah,
well, it's a big word. To me, capitalism is, yes, it's markets and it's
business, but it's more than that because those have been around for millennia.
To me, capitalism is an economic system that prioritizes above all, delivering
profit for the owners of wealth. And that's in terms of dividends for those who
own stocks and shares in corporations. That's in terms of rent for those who own
land and housing and real estate. And that's in terms of interest for those who
own other people's debt. And the key consequence of this is not just the obvious
that it enriches the already rich. It systematically puts a squeeze on
everything else that we value. So it underpays and undermines waged workers. It
privatizes public goods like health care and transport. It exploits care that's
provided by families and communities. It degrades the living world on which
everything depends. It appropriates land and culture from indigenized and
racialized communities. And crucially, it captures the legal system and the
political system so that it can secure and reproduce its privilege. You clearly
think that there is something absolutely integral to capitalism that leads to
these kind of bad conclusions. And Bernie, I think you would share that. You
describe the economic system in the United States as propelled by human greed
and contempt for human decency. I'm not a writer by trade. I'm a politician. I'm
a United States senator from the state of Vermont. And what I see with my own
eyes every day is incredible levels of greed, which I literally honestly cannot
understand. I don't know why if somebody is worth $5 billion, they need to step
on other people in order to earn another $5 billion. Right now we're dealing
with an uptick in labor organizing, people wanting to form unions in America.
And those workers are being met on the part of some of the largest corporations,
Amazon, Starbucks, Apple, others, who are saying, no, we have billions of
dollars. We're not going to give you the right to organize. And through illegal
activity, they're crushing union organizing. You say billionaires should not
exist in your book. Absolutely. No kind of billionaire. I don't, and I really
don't. You know, somebody starts a business, they work hard, they create wealth.
Fine. They're going to come rich. But how rich do you have to be? Again, in my
country, you've got three people who own more wealth than the bottom half of
American society. So, yeah, I think we should have a tax system which says,
good, good luck to you. You've made hundreds of millions of dollars. I think
that's enough to live on. I don't think you need $30, $80 billion. Martin Wolf,
what's your view on that? Should billionaires exist? Do they represent, as it
were, a symptom of a system that's going wrong, that they exist at all? Can I
comment on both because they're very important? I think it's, I disagree pretty
profoundly with what Kate said. Capitalism, to me, was essentially the inverse
of that. The pre-capitalist society was one of unlimited rent extraction by very
narrow elites in feudalism, autocracies, monarchies, in which essentially a very
small number of people truly owned everything. Everybody else was a serf or near
a serf. This is a common recurrent theme. They were the most unequal societies
they could be. And capitalism said, actually, everyone can equally have a go at
starting a business, and many did, and incredibly successful. That's how the
Industrial Revolution happened. You can do the best you can for yourself, and it
started off a process of immeasurable enrichment, and it led, in my view, to
democracy. But, and this gets to Bernie, it has always had a chronic tendency to
excess and instability. It's a very complex, very complicated, decentralized
system. It needs to be contained by politics, and politics is part of, that's
why democracy is so important in my book. It's the thing that responds to
capitalism, and it's this delicate and complex marriage that we have to manage.
Now, is a billion too much? My view is we should really try to stop wealth
transmission across the generations, and I can see the case for wealth taxes,
but if you start a business which just turns out to be worth $100 billion, and
that's your achievement, I don't have a huge problem with it. What I do have a
problem with, and I agree completely with Bernie on that, is allowing them to
buy politics. In both your books, you talk about rising inequality, and really
kind of staggering rises in inequality, not just within countries, between
regions, between countries, and also between kind of populations. I think that
when people outside of the United States look at my country, they think, well,
this is the wealthiest country in the history of the world, and certainly in
some respects it absolutely is. People do not know that over 60% of Americans
today are living paycheck to paycheck. That means they're working hard, and at
the end of the day, have nothing. They don't know that 85 million Americans,
unlike here in the UK, are either uninsured in terms of health care or
underinsured. They don't know that a half a million Americans are homeless, that
we have a child care system which is in total disarray, that 45 million people
who have left higher education have student debts. So I think the misery and the
pain that currently exists in the United States is not something that we talk
about enough, and that is precisely why I wrote the book. Kate Raworth, I want
to bring you in, because we're not going to do a lot of kind of academic
economic terms here, but I do want to bring you in on the Kuznets curve, because
this relates to this, I think, this idea of inequality and whether it's integral
to capitalism. Can you explain what the Kuznets curve is, and perhaps who Simon
Kuznets was, because that's relevant too, isn't it? OK. In the 1950s, there was
a fantastic economist in the US called Simon Kuznets, and he gathered a little
bit of data that he could find from the US, the UK and Germany. It was just bare
scratchings of information. He put it together and he said, I think I see a
surprising trend. It looks like as countries get richer, first they get more
unequal, but then they seem to get more equal. Now, in his paper, he said this
wasn't what I expected to find. He thought the rich would get richer and the
poor would get left behind. So he tried to explain it. Was it to do with urban
to rural migration? He couldn't make sense of it. And he said, this is based on
probably wishful thinking. I hope it doesn't lead to any unwarranted dogmatic
generalisations. But oh, poor Simon Kuznets, because that's exactly what
happened. It became known as the Kuznets curve and it underpinned half a century
of policy that said, if you care about inequality, don't try to redistribute it
because you might get in the way of growth. And look, growth evens things up
again. Well, growth does not lift all boats and trickle down does not work. It
took Thomas Piketty to come along in 2014 and say, now we've actually got all
the data. It's not at all the case. It did seem to work for a time, didn't it?
It seemed to work in South Korea. It seemed to work in Indonesia for a period.
Thomas Piketty came along. He said Kuznets was right at that time. It looked
like it worked. But you know what? He was measuring it from before the wars to
after the wars. War destroys the capital of the wealthy. And after the wars,
governments invested in health, education and housing. It was war that evened
things up, not the unlimited growth of the market. But the power of that has
carried on. And actually, you mentioned Indonesia and countries in East Asia,
they managed to grow with low inequality. They disproved the Kuznets curve. So
it's such a false idea that this should inform policymaking today. Even the IMF
say, why can't policymakers get it out of their head? They think there's a
tradeoff between redistribution and growth. There isn't. We need actually
economies that are equitable. Martin, you have a figure in your book, which is
very striking, that in 1820, the average real income of the wealthiest country
in the world was five times the poorest. By 2017, the richest country was 70
times richer than the poorest. That's absolutely correct. And that reflects the
great takeoff of the 19th century, which was the success of capitalism combined,
of course, with imperialism. We can discuss how far that had anything to do with
it. I think less than many people think. But that's a complicated issue. But
obviously, if you start off, no economic development process is equal. It never
is. It can't be. So it started off in basically Western countries, Britain, then
America, Germany, so forth. They started generating 2%, 3% growth in GDP per
year, decade after decade after decade. Well, for instance, China, nothing
happened under the Qing and then the chaos. So over time, you got these
incredibly huge gaps. These gaps have closed with many countries, but there's
one huge outlier, not because it's a capitalist society, and that's sub-Saharan
Africa. That's where the poorest countries are. Non-development is the biggest
problem for inequality. So, Bernie, I think your view would be that, as it were,
winners consolidate their winners and that these gaps will increase over time. I
wish very much, I envy Martin, because I wish I could be a historian. It sounds
like a lot of fun. But I have a day job, which is to do everything I can to
protect a shrinking middle class in America and a struggling working class and
people who are living in desperation. And all I can tell you, I can't go back to
the 1800s or the early 1900s, but I can tell you, according to a not
particularly progressive organization called the Rand Corporation, they
suggested that in the last 50 years, there has been a $50 trillion transfer of
wealth that went from the bottom 90% to the top 1%. And I can tell you that in
America today, real inflation accounted for wages have been more or less
stagnant over the last 50 years, while the billionaire class has become
phenomenally richer. So I live, you know, my job is forcing me to live in the
reality of today. And what I will tell you, there is a class warfare going on in
the United States. The wrong class is winning. One of the things those
billionaires spend their money on is the political process, which brings us back
to what Martin's book is about, that knitting together of democracy. You
essentially think you're living in an oligarchy in America, do you? Of course we
are. When you have a handful of people controlling the economy and controlling
or significantly controlling the political process, I would call that an
oligarchy. In America today, and I don't know how many people in the UK are
familiar with the process, but as a result of a terrible, terrible Supreme Court
decision called Citizens United, billionaires can now legally put money into
what's called a super PAC. You can put hundreds of millions of dollars without
disclosure. And this super PAC then puts 30-second ads on television. They
essentially elect or defeat candidates that they like or that they dislike. Some
might say that billionaires are just spread betting here. I mean, 230
billionaires contributed to Biden, 133 to Trump. These are figures from your
book. How many contributed to me? Not many. Not many. Anyone who thinks that we
don't have both political parties heavily dominated by big money does not
understand American politics. Martin Wolf, this is exactly what your book is
about, this tension between sort of democratic politics and capitalism. Just
explain sort of the kind of core of your book. Well, first of all, I agree
completely with Bernie's description of what's happening. So it is obvious that
if you want a democracy within a market economy which generates inequality,
which it will, clearly, it's not going to be perfectly equal, there's no doubt
about that, and if you allow money to buy politics, democracy is fundamentally
subverted. The point I make in what we are trying to do in a society which is
both a market economy and a democracy is separate power from wealth. That's what
we're trying to do. What I stress is that's a historically unprecedented thing
to do in a complex society. Normally, over 8,000 years since the agrarian
revolution, wealth and power were the same thing. We tried to separate them, and
the separation is really hard, but the crucial thing, and this is, I think, very
much in line with what Bernie is saying, is that, of course, there need to be
very tight rules on how money can be used in politics. I believe in the public
financing of political parties, for example, and I think they need substantial
support in many ways. I think the sort of hidden money that the Americans now
tolerate is a catastrophe. I want to come on to Kate Raworth and donut
economics. You wrote a book in 2017 called Donut Economics. Explain to us what
donut economics is, because that's an attempt to come up with an alternative,
isn't it? Indeed. It sounds like a playful name. It's incredibly serious. It's
the one donut you can actually have without it being bad for you because it's
conceptual. So think of a donut that comes with a hole in the middle. The goal
is to leave no one in the hole. Leave no one falling short on the essentials of
life without health and education and housing and voice. Get everybody out of
the hole, but at the same time, don't overshoot that outer ring, because that's
where we put so much pressure on the life support systems of our planetary home.
We destroy the only known living planet in the universe. It's pretty simple and
hard to disagree with, I hope. Meet the needs of all people within the means of
the living planet. For me, this is the starting point of 21st century economics.
When I studied economics at university 30 years ago, it never had a goal. The
goal was implicit and it was endless growth. We need an explicit goal. And if we
start there and say what kind of economy would be in service to meeting the
needs of all people within the means of the living planet? Now we're in a
completely different conversation. And to me, the goal is not generating profit
for the owners of wealth. The goal is to be going from a degenerative economy
that we've inherited to becoming regenerative of the earth and the living
systems from the deeply divisive economy that we've just been describing. Make
it one that's distributed by design. And that is an exciting 21st century
economic project. Are we beyond that point now or should we be beyond the point
where growth is the only metric? Martin Wolf. I don't think it should be the
only metric. Growth is the outcome, inevitable outcome over time of a
decentralized market system because people are going to look for new ways of
doing things in the process. They're going to find investments. They're going to
do investments. There will be net investment. There will be growth. That's what
happens. So the really crucial question is how you stop it and what sort of
society will be able to stop it. Now, I think the probably my profound
difference, I actually understand a lot of what Kate is arguing. But my view is
the only sort of society that could actually actually achieve what she seems to
want worldwide is a global dictatorship. I can't see any other way of getting
there. Well, let's have a thing. And the let me just give one little
illustration of this. So we've agreed or two of us have agreed that we are
living in a terrible world. So right now, our real GDP per head average in the
UK and other developed countries is three times the global average, which from
which it follows that roughly 80 percent of you, 85 percent of humanity on
average living well below it. And some, as you already said, are far below it.
Now, this new no growth static economy can't be sold to the rest of the world if
we don't give up our excess, which is two thirds of our national average income.
I just don't imagine how you're going to persuade people in this country, for
example, that actually not only do they have to give up growth, actually, we
have to shrink our economy even more to achieve this, but actually give away
most of it to subs. I don't have a completely ethically understandable,
completely impossible. Let's we're coming towards the end of the program. Now,
we should talk about, as it were, what forms of regulation might work. Well, in
the book, I pick up on a speech that Franklin Delano Roosevelt gave in 1944. And
what he said is we are very proud in America of our political rights, the nature
of our democracy, Bill of Rights, etc. But he also said that you cannot be
really free unless you have economic rights as well, guaranteeing economic
rights. What does it mean? Health care is a human right. We can do that. We
could do that in the UK. You have your problems. You can improve it. We can do
that in the United States. Every man, woman, a child. We can make education from
child care through graduate school, public and free. We can do that, at least
for the public universities. We can make sure that all people have affordable
housing. All right. We can provide the basic necessities of life to all people
and let the market do its thing. But the mechanism for that is taxation, in your
view, and redistributive taxation. Government must play a very important role in
making sure that all people have the basic necessities of life. Yes. Kate. So I
want to come in with something optimistic because I think there is a very
different economy possible. And I don't think it's a return to feudalism. I
don't think we have to look to communism or indeed global dictatorship. I think
we can democratise the economy. First, public goods provide public provisioning,
right? Health, education, transport make it provided by the public sector. But
when it comes to the world of business, we can change and transform the world of
business by changing its deep design. And I mean changing the purpose of a
company. It is not here to maximise returns for the shareholders. Shareholder
value. They never even step on the premises. They may buy and sell the shares in
the day. Why should their interest be put first? No, let's give business a
purpose as it always has been possible to do. It's here to make good livelihoods
for people. It's here to restore the living world. It's here to build community,
to produce things people need. So we need to democratise the ownership by having
companies that are owned and governed by those directly with a stake. I'm
talking about employee owned companies or cooperatively owned. I'm talking about
putting workers on the board, putting supply chain on the board, putting nature
on the board. Companies have started putting nature on the board and saying what
would nature ask for this business to do? Of course a company must make a
profit. Not a lot of companies. I mean I think you're talking about Patagonia.
I'm talking about faith in nature. I'm talking about the cutting edge. Can we
look at the cutting edge? You need an altruistic oligarch to make that happen,
don't you? To take the company and say this is what I'm going to do with it. I
don't think you need an altruistic oligarch. Most people have a purpose. I don't
think we are born full of greed. When you go to university you're taught about
rational economic man. You're taught that economics is about profit and
competition and self-interest. And I teach students in business schools right at
the moment and so many of them are like oh, apparently I'm a bit naive. I have
to toughen up and be greedy. It creates this greed in us. Look, we can create
companies and they exist all over the world that are set up to deliver for their
employees. They're set up to repair the world. They are owned by those with a
vested interest in the company and they pursue purpose. Employee-owned
companies, right? They don't get financed by capital markets because they won't
return their quarterly returns to the capital markets. They build slowly, they
last long and they focus on the purpose that they serve. If we redemocratize the
ownership of business, we are transforming capitalism and we're transforming
away from capitalism because we're no longer pursuing endless profit. Martin
Wool. This is a complicated subject. I have sympathy in some respect but it is
worth remembering again as with so many things, there have been experiments.
Yugoslavia had worker-managed companies and I follow that quite closely because
it really interested me. The system collapsed and there are quite profound
reasons why it did. The incentives that are created by having an employer,
employees run them is, for example, they want to share the rent too and they
won't accept new entrants into the firm because maximizing the wages becomes
their objective. That happens to be the case. And you can't eliminate capital
markets because we actually need new capital in new business. That's what allows
them to grow really rapidly. And you want, Kate wants, really new things to
happen quickly. Well, that's going to take new businesses growing a lot. And by
the way, this starts off with mass expropriation, which people are going to
resist. So I think it's just much more complicated. Bernie, I don't think you're
talking about mass expropriation, are you? You're talking about. Bernie Sanders.
Well, we're talking about a progressive tax system. Some may call that mass
expropriation. But the idea. Look, we are living in 2023, not 1923, not 1823. We
have extraordinary technology. We're looking at artificial intelligence. We're
looking at robotics. So I think the question that Kate is posing is given all of
that, given the threat that climate change poses the very existence to this
planet, it's time to rethink economics. And I like the idea of worker ownership
is something I have believed in a long time. Managed to get a 50 million dollar
authorization to help workers figure out how they can own the plants that they
live. But I think it is absolutely the moment. I don't know that we have too
many choices given climate to rethink economics. We need to change the culture
so that business people say, look, it's important to produce a product, pay your
workers a decent wage, involve them in the process, protect the environment. It
cannot simply be profit, profit, profit. I just like to say for the record, it's
capitalism that began with mass expropriation in closing the commons and a
century of colonialism. And it continues today. I'm not talking about mass
appropriation. I'm talking about when the founder of a company retires. Does he
sell it to the capital markets or does he pass it on to his employees? That is a
trend. Wales aims to double employee owned companies by 2026. Scotland has a
goal. We've run out of time, I'm afraid. Thank you to all of my guests, Kate
Raworth, the author of Donut Economics, Bernie Sanders book, It's OK to be Angry
About Capitalism and Martin Wolf's The Crisis of Democratic Capitalism are both
out now. Many thanks to today's studio engineer, Bob Nettles. Next week, it is
20 years since the Iraq war. Kirstie Wark discusses its legacy. But for now,
thank you and goodbye. Start the Week was presented by Tom Sutcliffe and
produced by Katie Hickman, and you can find previous editions on BBC Sounds.
Analysis of all the day's events coming up on The World Tonight in just a moment
after we take a look at the weather. And tonight, most of the UK will have... We
are making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third party
services and platforms. And the BBC stream you are currently listening to will
stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker
and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening
on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds. A few light
showers whilst south-east England could have some sunshine breaking through in
the afternoon.