TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-20-23H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 on 92 to 95 FM, on 198 Longwave, on digital and on BBC Sounds. This is BBC
Radio 4. Today professionals not know when to stop. We discuss the relationship
between the press and the police. Scotland's finance minister throws her hat in
the ring to be the next leader of the SNP. Kate Forbes is open about her
religious beliefs. I am a practicing Christian. I practice the teachings of most
mainstream religions, whether that's Islam, Judaism, Christianity, that marriage
is between a man and a woman. What should be the place of religion in politics?
That's all after the BBC News read tonight by Charles Carroll. President Biden
has promised that the United States will stand with Ukraine for as long as it
takes during an unannounced trip to Kiev. At a joint news conference with
President Zelensky, Mr. Biden pledged to provide further military support and to
implement further sanctions on Russia. From Kiev, here's our correspondent James
Waterhouse. A little over a year ago, few thought Kiev would last beyond a
couple of days after Russia launched its full-scale invasion. It's why the sight
of the world's most powerful politician at the heart of a country still at war
is so significant. In a reminder that this conflict truly began far before
February last year, Joe Biden and Volodymyr Zelensky visited a memorial to
soldiers who died during this nine-year war. Another 500 million dollar military
package was also announced. While this has been welcomed, Kiev is hoping to
shorten the time delay between Western aid being promised and used. More than 30
countries, including the UK, the United States, Germany and France, have said
that a ban on Russian and Belarusian athletes competing in international
sporting events should remain in place. They were responding to efforts by the
International Olympic Committee to allow these athletes to compete at the Paris
Olympics as neutrals. Ukraine says it will lead a boycott of the event if that
happens. Lancashire police have confirmed that the body found in the River Wye
yesterday was Nicola Bulli. The 45-year-old mother of two disappeared while
walking her dog at the end of last month. Her family said she had been the light
of their world. They also hit out at the media and members of the public who
they accused of vilifying them, as our correspondent in Preston, Nick Garnett,
explains. The family has said that they are furious with two news organisations,
Sky News and ITV, for making contact directly with the family when they
specifically asked for privacy. They again, they said, have taken it upon
themselves to run stories about the family to sell papers and increase their own
profiles. It is shameful they have acted in this way and they said, very
straightforwardly, leave us alone. And that was directed mostly at the
traditional media but also at social media networks as well. Junior doctors in
England are to go on a three-day strike next month after voting overwhelmingly
for industrial action. The main union, the British Medical Association, said
that almost every doctor who cast a ballot voted yes. The Health Secretary,
Steve Barclay, said the announcement was deeply disappointing. Our health
correspondent, Sophie Hutchinson, reports. This is a significant escalation in
the industrial action in the NHS. These junior doctors include the bulk of
medics ranking below consultant level. Of the 47,000 who were balloted by the
British Medical Association, the vast majority agreed to strike. The three-day
walkout, the longest single strike in their history, is likely to hit the
already beleaguered NHS hard, heaping pressure on the government. The junior
doctors are calling for above inflation pay increases but the government has
said pay in line with inflation is unaffordable and that the action will mean
more cancelled appointments for patients. Scotland's Finance Secretary, Kate
Forbes, has told the BBC she wouldn't have voted for her government's gender
reform bill in its current form. She was speaking after announcing her bid to
take over the SNP leadership from Nicola Sturgeon, joining the Health Secretary,
Humza Yousaf, and the former Minister, Ash Regan, in the race to lead the party.
Ms Forbes said she had significant concerns about gender self-identification.
Officials in southern Turkey say at least three people have died and around 200
others are injured after an earthquake with a magnitude of 6.4 struck the
region. People are reported to be trapped under the rubble. The area was amongst
the hardest hit by the quakes on February the 6th, which caused the deaths of
more than 46,000 people in Turkey and in Syria. Our correspondent Laura Bicker
is in Hatay. There is fear, some panic, and the small aftershocks keep coming.
Lines of ambulances and rescue crews are trying to get to some of the worst
affected areas where the walls of badly damaged buildings have collapsed. A
number of structures that were left standing after the tremor on February the
6th have now crumbled, including a bridge. The Hatay mayor has said that there
are people trapped under the rubble. Many cracks in roads have become deep
scars, making it more difficult for the emergency services to get where they may
be needed. A group of conservative Anglican church leaders from around the world
have said they no longer recognise the Archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby,
as the head of the global Anglican Communion. It follows the Church of England's
decision to allow blessings for same-sex couples. The 12 leaders accused the
church of going against historical biblical faith. Supermarkets are facing a
shortage of tomatoes, with shoppers across the UK unable to find them on the
shelves. The issues have been caused by poor weather in Europe and North Africa.
Unusually cold conditions in Morocco delayed the tomatoes' ripening before bad
weather stopped ferries and lorries crossing to Europe. Here's our business
correspondent Theo Leggett. Pictures of empty shelves in supermarkets and
complaints about shortages of some products, especially tomatoes, have been
circulating on social media for several days. Now the British Retail Consortium
has admitted that harvests have been affected by what it calls difficult weather
conditions. During the winter months, a large proportion of the produce we
consume is grown in southern Spain and Morocco. Both regions have been affected
by poor weather in recent weeks, including storms and a cold snap. This has
affected crop yields and growing times, making it more difficult for wholesalers
and retailers to get hold of the supplies they need. Along with tomatoes,
cucumbers and peppers are understood to be in short supply. The BRC says
supermarkets are working with farmers to ensure customers are able to access a
wide range of fresh produce. And Professor Dame Angela MacLean has been
appointed as the government's new chief scientific advisor. She'll be the first
woman to hold the role and will take up the post in April. She was a member of
the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, known as SAGE, during the
pandemic and she was deputy to the current holder of the role, Sir Patrick
Vallance. Thank you, Charles. You're listening to The World Tonight with Rita
Lashar. Secrecy, symbolism and air raid sirens, all a feature of Joe Biden's
trip to Kiev today. The president took a 10-hour train ride from Poland to reach
the Ukrainian capital in a visit which the White House said was intended to
reaffirm America's unwavering commitment to Ukraine's democracy, sovereignty and
territorial integrity. That's a message which won't have been lost on Moscow and
as Joe Biden and Vladimir Zelensky were in St. Michael's Cathedral in central
Kiev, air raid sirens could be heard. Not unusual, but a reminder of the
proximity and intensity of the war. As the first anniversary of the invasion of
Ukraine approaches, Russian forces are stepping up their assault on the eastern
city of Bakhmut. They've been trying to capture it for more than six months now
and Vladimir Putin appears to be pushing for a victory before Friday the 24th.
President Zelensky said the defense of the city would continue but not at any
price. Our senior international correspondent Orla Goren reports now from the
outskirts of Bakhmut. The battle for Bakhmut is now at close quarters inside the
city and on the outskirts. Ukrainian troops are still defending every inch but
the enemy is closing in. It's hellish according to President Zelensky who says
Bakhmut must be defended but not at any cost. The snow is coming down now. We're
at a concealed position on the outskirts of Bakhmut just hearing some more
shelling there. We're with troops from the 28th Brigade. They're part of the
defense of the city and Bakhmut is still in Ukrainian hands. The Russians have
been stepping up their attacks. They have gained some ground. But the mortar
team we are with are fighting on, targeting enemy positions two kilometers away.
I'm with Victor, one of the troops here. He ran a shoe business before the war.
He has a wife and two children, one of them a baby just 18 months old and he
hasn't seen them since the war began. He's been fighting since the very start.
And are you worried the baby doesn't remember you? Yes he don't remember me.
When I went to the war he was so little. He don't understand about when I speak
in the Weiber to telephone and video conversation. He don't know who I am. We
want the war to finish yesterday. When will be it we don't know. We're in the
corridor of a busy hospital. We can't say where. And military casualties are
being brought in. In the space of just a few minutes we saw three ambulances
arriving outside. There were two heavily wounded soldiers, both stretcher cases
carried out with drips in their arms. And there were two walking wounded. The
floor is covered in mud. There's been so much traffic, so many boots coming from
the battlefield. Doctor, could I ask you first of all are you happy to tell me
your name? My name is Miroslav. It's almost a year now since the invasion
happened and Ukraine came under attack. Did you ever think the fighting would
still be like this a year on? I thought it would last a long time, he says,
because the country we are fighting wants to destroy us using all its strength.
And that country doesn't have any way back. I've just come along the corridor
here. There are one, two, three, four wounded men on stretchers. They're covered
in foil blankets to keep them warm and to protect against shock. Seeing the
steady stream of casualties being brought in here, you get a sense of what this
fight is costing Ukraine, of the price this country is paying to defend its
territory. Paula Gurin reporting from Bachmut. Yuri Saks, an advisor to
Ukraine's Ministry for Defence. I asked him about the battle for Bachmut and
reports that Russia would claim the city in the coming days. In the east we have
seen in the past four to six weeks there was a build-up of troops, there was a
build-up of military equipment. So this could be construed, I suppose, as
intensification of Russia's offensive. Whether it can be called that offensive
which everybody was talking about. Our understanding is, and our approach is,
maximising the losses of our enemy while keeping our losses at a minimum. This
gives us time, first of all, to prepare for our counter-offensive. What would be
the symbolism of losing a town like Bachmut? We call it the fortress of Bachmut,
but Bachmut is Ukraine. We are fighting a smart war. We are not prepared to use
our soldiers as cannon fodder as the Russians do. We keep on preparing for our
counter-offensive and we hold up the enemy for as much as we can where the enemy
is trying to carry out attacks. President Biden was in Kiev today. How important
was this visit? It is hugely important because it sends the right signal to
Ukrainians that our allies are with us, they will stand with us until victory,
and it sends the same message with a different connotation to the enemy. Has the
US been a better ally than your European neighbours? I think the correct way
would be to say that they've been a leader on many occasions. They were the
first to send Ukraine the multi-launch rocket systems, for example. You know,
but the tank coalition, you know, the UK was the first country to actually say
that the tanks will arrive in Ukraine, the Challenger 2 tanks. By and large, of
course, the US, by sheer weight on the international arena, is showing
leadership on many occasions, but European countries are very powerful allies as
well. China's top diplomat Wang Yi is in Moscow today. We heard the US Secretary
of State Antony Blinken suggesting that China's considering giving lethal
support to Russia, in other words more weapons. How concerned are you? You know,
it would be not a very good development if that was to happen. We don't have
that information confirmed yet, you know, and we will have to wait and see. And
of course we will continue to speak through our diplomatic channels to our
counterparties in China with the view to convincing them, you know, and I'm sure
that our allies will do the same, right? So our president was very clear when he
said that, you know, this would not be the right decision by China in these
circumstances. Why do you think Antony Blinken would have made that public? I'm
sure he had his own reasons and his own data that he relies on, but as far as we
are concerned, we will just continue to advocate for, you know, for other
countries not to provide Russia with lethal weapons, because we have seen what
happened when, for example, Iran began supplying Russia with these drones,
right, which are used to destroy Ukrainian electricity infrastructure, to
destroy cities and houses and kill people. Just finally, I remember speaking to
you and many others in the run-up to the war. Nobody could quite believe that
this would happen, that Russia would invade. The war's gone on for a year. Will
there be a second anniversary? I surely hope that this is the first and the last
anniversary for us and for the whole world, and the most important thing is that
we are confident that it can be the last. We are confident that if we all step
up our efforts in terms of, you know, military support provision and all other
aspects of defeating Russia economically by sanctions and everything, you know,
this is what our president said today, that we hope that this year will be the
year of our victory, of our joint victory. It is in nobody's interest to prolong
this war, to turn it into a frozen war. That's Yuri Sakin, advisor to Ukraine's
Ministry for Defence. Lancashire police have confirmed a body found in the River
Wire on Sunday is the missing mother of two, Nikola Buly. The 45-year-old
disappeared during a riverside dog walk in St Michael's-on-Wire more than three
weeks ago, sparking a major search operation. In a statement read out by the
police, Ms Buly's family played tribute to the one who made our lives so
special. The family also questioned the role of some sections of media during
the investigation. Our girls will get the support they need from the people who
love them the most and it saddens us to think that one day we will have to
explain to them that the press and members of the public accused their dad of
wrongdoing, misquoted and vilified friends and family. This is absolutely
appalling. They have to be held accountable. This cannot happen to another
family. We tried last night to take in what we have been told in the day, only
to have Sky News and ITV making contact with us directly when we expressly asked
for privacy. Do the press and other media channels and so-called professionals
not know when to stop? Well that's that statement read out by the police from
Nikola Buly's family. Danny Shaw was the BBC's home affairs correspondent and he
has many years of experience of covering crime and missing person stories.
Danny, there's been a lot of discussion about the activity of people on social
media, criticism of the police for how they manage the comms in this case, but
this was a criticism of traditional media, of responsible media. What do you
think has happened here? I don't know exactly what's happened with Sky and ITV
making direct contact with the family but I know that in that sort of situation,
when the family have had the worst possible news that a body has been found, you
have to approach something like that with the utmost sensitivity and normally if
you've got a request for a statement or comment in those circumstances it would
have to go through official channels and that would be through the police and
then the police might relay that through a family liaison officer to the family
concerned. It's possible if direct contact is made that's because journalists on
the ground had a relationship with the family previously but really you've got
to really take a step back and think whether or not the family want any kind of
contact given particularly that when the statement from the police came
yesterday they said that the family wanted privacy. Neither Sky nor ITV are
commenting right now but in a situation like this obviously if it's a missing
person there is a need sometimes often for the police to publicise that, to get
as many people to come forward who might be helpful to the inquiry. There is a
difficult balance in all of this isn't there? There's a balance obviously the
police need the media to publicise appeals and they have done that during this
inquiry. I think what the police don't understand and I speak to many police
officers around the country of different forces, they don't quite understand
that it's not something where the media just take a police press release and put
it out there. They're not you know just doing the publicity on behalf of the
police. The media also have a legitimate role in asking the police questions
about an inquiry. They might want to speak to the senior investigating officer,
they might want to speak to the person that's leading the search teams and I
don't think they quite, I don't think the police quite understand that sort of
there is a bit of a transaction that's of you know that there has to be a bit of
compromise on both sides and it seems in this particular case that the
relationship between the press and the police is just completely broken down at
quite an early stage. But once again it's as if we're turning the attention back
onto the police whereas this criticism was very much of the media. Are there
rules? Leveson 2 was supposed to happen, it was supposed to look into the
conduct of the press relations with the police, never happened. Are there other
rules? There are clear rules for broadcasters. There's the Ofcom code and it's
possible that Sky and ITV, that there's a potential breach of the Ofcom code in
terms of respect of privacy and there are codes for newspapers as well, there's
codes for the BBC. In terms of social media that's much more challenging because
how can you stop these TikTok detectives, these amateur sleuths from sort of
descending on the area, coming up with conspiracy theories. That's something
that's very difficult to police and some of that behaviour has been absolutely
disgusting. Danny Shaw, thanks very much. Paid for five days but actually
working for four. That's the principle behind a pilot of a four-day working week
and squeezing quarts into pint pots appears to have been a success. More than 60
companies around the UK began the six-month trial and almost all of them have
decided to continue with this way of working with no loss of pay for their
employees. Jo Ryle is director of the four-day a week pilot and Claire Daniels
is CEO of Trio Media, one of the firms that took part. Good evening to you both.
Claire Daniels, why did you decide to take part in this and how did you change
the way you work? Hi, good evening. For us it was very much around productivity,
looking at ways that we could be more productive as a business and just being
totally open-minded to what that might look like. I think the biggest thing is
that mentality change in changing the way you work and having a mindset shift of
actually the five-day working week model is outdated and people aren't
productive for the full time during that time. So when you look at that and you
look at how long at work people are productive versus how long they might be
distracted by personal affairs or things like that, you start resetting the
balance and changing your mindset and going well let's have four really focused
work days and give people a much better work-life balance. So you're doing away
with the jacket on the back of the chair with nobody in sight but how are you
measuring success? How do you know this is working? Well for us one of the key
measures for success was financial performance because for any business owner
that's what it comes down to and whilst we were on the trial we performed 33%
better than the six months prior and 47% better than the year before. So it
seems to me that actually you know giving people a better work-life balance
meant they were happier employees and they performed better. Jo Ryle that is
extraordinary clearly there is some sort of improvement there but does it
suggest that actually before productivity was actually just quite poor in these
firms? Well we have an acute problem in the UK where we work some of the longest
hours in the world, longest hours in Europe except for Greece, while having one
of the least productive economies. So all these long working hours aren't
actually producing good results at work and so what this trial has shown is that
you know across a wide variety of sectors of the economy, four day week is a
win-win for both workers and employers and it will improve productivity and so
you know we're really pleased with the results. It's a major breakthrough for
the movement towards a four day working week. We're looking forward to the
report being published tomorrow. But hang on it might work for some people in
some sectors but what about I don't know if you work in hospitality or if you're
a lawyer or an accountant or someone who has to put in billable hours, how would
it affect you? You're not going to be able to work you know the same number of
hours in four days are you? Well it's not good you know it's not going to be an
immediate change overnight for everyone. There's going to have to be a
transition to get there. We say we want to see the four day week be the normal
way of working by end of this decade. But what this pilot has shown, this is
probably the most exciting bit, is that a wide variety of sectors, we had
hospitality companies, retail, manufacturing, construction and they've all done
it in their own way but they've all managed to reduce hours by 80% while
maintaining pay and you know that nearly every company took part as continuing
of the four day week at the end of this pilot and I think that's really telling.
Claire Daniels what did you do? Did you sort of shut up shop for a day or did
you stagger people's working week? Yeah we staggered so it was really important
to stay a five day week company and we said we split the team in half so half
them do Monday to Thursday and half do Tuesday to Friday. And were people
resistant? Were they open to this as an experiment? There was a real mix I think
the expectation is that everyone will just jump at the chance but equally you
know we had habitual over workers who were concerned about how their performance
would be judged if they couldn't get all the work done in four days. So there
was definitely a lot of work to be done in terms of people's mindset and giving
them the tools and resources they needed to be able to make it a success. You I
think have 13 employees, do you think that made it easier to do something like
this? Because I mean essentially you could all sit down and kind of thrash it
out couldn't you? Yeah I mean I can't comment on what the difference might be to
rolling it out in a larger organisation but it was definitely useful that I did
take the whole team along on the journey with me and you know could speak to
everyone face to face to ease any concerns and make sure that yeah people had
what they needed. And what would you say to anyone who's listening thinking that
would never work? What would be your one bit of really sort of key advice? It
would be do you think you're getting the most productivity out of your people as
it currently is today? You know I just think there needs to be a change in
mindset. Claire Daniels, Jo Ryle, I imagine there'll be lots of people going
into work tomorrow and demanding change. Thank you both very much. Three members
of the SNP have now declared they're standing to replace Nicola Sturgeon as
party leader. Health Secretary Humza Yousaf and Finance Secretary Kate Forbes
and the former Community Safety Minister Ash Regan have all begun to set out
their stalls and will be lobbying to win backing from high-profile party figures
in an effort to win the votes of the wider membership. And while you might
expect much of the debate to focus on how to push the party's core agenda of
independence or perhaps on public services, it's striking that the religious
beliefs of two of the candidates have already come under scrutiny. Kate Forbes
is a member of the Free Church of Scotland which takes a conservative position
on women's reproductive rights and same-sex marriage. In an interview with the
BBC today she made her stance clear. I am a practicing Christian. I practice the
teachings of most mainstream religions whether that's Islam, Judaism,
Christianity, that marriage is between a man and a woman but that's what I
practice. As a servant of democracy in a country where this is law I would
defend to the hilt your right and anybody else's right to live and to love
without harassment or fear. The Health Secretary Humza Yousaf was asked about
whether he thought his colleague Kate Forbes's religion posed an issue and
whether he'd allow her to serve in his cabinet. I'm a person of faith myself.
I'll be fasting Ramadan in a number of weeks time but I don't legislate based on
my faith. That is not the job I think of representatives to do. So these are
questions for Kate Forbes to answer. Our party has done well by being a socially
progressive political party. It has garnered huge amounts of support by doing
that and I want to continue to make sure we go down that socially progressive
route. The MP Tim Farron was the leader of the Liberal Democrats from 2015 to
2017. When he resigned he said he felt remaining faithful to Christ was
incompatible with leading his party. His new book A Mucky Business Why
Christians Should Get Involved in Politics is out now and Polly Toynbee is a
Guardian columnist and vice-chair of Humanists UK. Humanists believe we can live
ethical and fulfilling lives without religion on the basis of reason. Good
evening to you both. Tim Farron, you said you faced questions about your
Christian faith from the very first day of your leadership. So leading a party
brought your faith into focus in a way that really before wasn't scrutinised on
the back benches. I guess that's probably true. I also think just to cut the
chase that there are ways of being a Christian and in leadership where you
handle the questions that I got more wisely than I did. Which would be what? I'm
hopeful that Kate Forbes is a wiser person than I am. Well when you get asked
questions about, as Kate did today, about what does the Bible teach and issues
to do with sexuality, personal morality, a better place to go is to help people
to go backwards. The Bible isn't a list of prohibitions. The Bible is, if you
like, a great love story from God to humanity and I believe it to be true and if
it is true then it's going to change how you choose to live and it will also
give you a very different worldview than if you don't believe it. And as a
liberal I take the view that we've got to recognise that there are multiple
worldviews and to be a liberal is to recognise there must be a place for all of
them in a civilised liberal democracy. Polly Twomby, surely in a pluralistic
society, in a democracy, there should be space for anyone of any faith to lead
their party or the country? Absolutely and the humanists are the greatest
defenders of people's right to believe whatever they want to believe but that's
very different to if they step over the border of imposing religions on other
people. I mean we now know that this country, in the last census, Christians are
now a minority and the reason for that is a big shift towards people who have no
religion and they don't want to have things imposed on them by people who are
getting their commandments from somewhere else. But what people think privately
is entirely the business. I mean none of us, we call ourselves rationalists,
none of us are very rational. We all have different irrationalities within us so
you don't particularly want to pick on the religion, the religious, as being
exceptionally unreasonable but it is unreasonable when you have 26 bishops in
the House of Lords actually deciding on our laws. Well yes because the reason we
don't have an assisted dying law is entirely because of the religious because
for many many years now the public have been strongly, 80% in favour of it. Tim
Ferrin has a sort of secular liberalism become ascendant and actually that makes
it more difficult if there is a perception that people like you with strongly
held religious beliefs might be imposing those values on others who simply don't
share them. Yes secular liberalism and liberalism in name only because I think
this assumption that if you have an absence of faith you are a reasonable
rational person and if you have a faith well we'll tolerate you but you're
pretty eccentric and I think that it is wrong to think so I say I know exactly
what Polly means that she doesn't want people imposing their religious faith on
others and I always, at least I hope I do, take the view that it is not my job
as a Christian in politics to legislate to make people who are not Christians
live as though they were. However, however, to say that a person everybody's got
a worldview nobody is neutral at all there is no neutrality let's establish that
for sure in which case the idea that if you have a religious faith let's call it
that you have to leave though that value system at the door but if you don't
have one then you can take it with you that's illiberal and it's total
intellectual nonsense. Polly Twainby? Well I think you know to some extent he's
right that what people think privately is their own business but it's the moment
it steps over into the public and I do think you know we have a disproportionate
influence the fact that 30% 30% of our state schools are run by religions mostly
C of E and Catholic and some others I mean it's bizarre when most people have
nothing to do with it and yet they command you know that a third of our state
education. But very briefly Polly Twainby, do you think we pick on Christians in
particular after all Hamza Yusuf is Muslim, Rishi Sunak is Hindu, should we look
at other faiths and ask how tolerant those faiths are? Of course I mean I
haven't seen any sign of Rishi Sunak or Sadiq Khan or anyone imposing their
religions on anyone else so if it's a private matter that's their own business
as I've said you know I don't think all of us rationalists are necessarily all
that rational we don't claim superiority but we don't want anybody else to
interfering with our lives. Tim Farron very briefly do you feel picked on? No I
mean if you're a Christian first of all you are to live counter-culturally so
you if you are not standing out you're doing something wrong and our job when we
are got out is to turn the other cheek not whine about it. Tim Farron, Polly
Twainby, thank you both. Douglas Latchford was an art dealer but he was also an
art smuggler and now an astonishing hoard of his has come to light in London. A
vast trove of royal jewelry from Cambodia's medieval Angkorian Empire. Cambodian
experts say they've never seen most of the jewelry before and are stunned by its
existence. The loot's now flown from the UK to Cambodia's capital Phnom Penh.
It's set to go on public display later this year. Before the collection left
London Celia Hatton was given a preview. We're entering a top-secret compound in
South London. It's holding long-lost treasures originally stolen from the
Cambodian temples of Angkor Wat. Eventually we enter a small brightly lit room.
Inside Cambodia's Angkorian crown jewelry. Thousands of years of priceless
history it was looted and then hidden away in London for decades. You can see
the gold really sparkling. Now it's been rediscovered. We can see a row of
crowns one two five crowns and then this beautiful gold cup to think that this
is solid gold dating back to the 11th century. Many of these pieces were stolen
in modern times. Taken during the country's three decades of civil war that
began in the 1970s. They were funneled into a secret collection belonging to the
British dealer and known art smuggler Douglas Latchford. He died in 2020 while
awaiting trial in the US. It's still a mystery how these artifacts ended up for
sale in the UK. In an industrial area of North London I meet Brad Gordon an
American lawyer who's the head of Cambodia's investigations team. He first saw
the jewelry last summer. I was driven by a representative of the Latchford
family to an undisclosed location. Latchford's family promised to return his
stolen collection to Cambodia after he died. The authorities didn't know what
they'd receive. They certainly didn't expect it to be handed over in a parking
lot. I was shown the back of the vehicle. Inside were four boxes of Cambodia's
greatest treasures. I felt like crying. Some of the jewelry has surfaced before.
Latchford included a handful of it in a book he co-wrote in 2008. Even after he
was formally accused of dealing in stolen antiquities by the US he maintained
his innocence. They've seen too many Indiana Jones films. Here he is in a rare
interview in 2004. As far as I know there is no such thing as a smuggling
network and I certainly don't belong to any smuggling network. Last year our
team traveled to Cambodia and met former looters who are now government
witnesses. They told us they stole items for Latchford which he and his network
then sold on to private collections and UK institutions like the British Museum
and the V&A. I believe this is the greatest art crime in history. This went on
for decades. We asked the Met Police if Latchford's UK associates are also being
investigated. They declined to comment noting they don't identify anyone under
investigation prior to being charged with a criminal offence. So in a very
careful process a headdress has been unpacked from a box. Since we saw the
collection in London it's been flown back to Phnom Penh in a top-secret mission
where it's been welcomed by Cambodia's authoritarian leader Hun Sen. He's facing
another election this year and could paint this as a political win. So this is
on the walls of Angkor Wat. Now we're looking at what could be the real-life
object. Politics aside, Cambodians want their antiquities returned. After
decades in the dark the jewellery will soon be on display and in the spotlight
once again. Celia Hatton reporting. As we've been hearing it's almost a year
since the full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine and all this week we'll hear
from people who've lost family and friends in the war. My World Tonight
colleague James Kumarasamy has been speaking to Andriy Shevchenko. He's the
former Ukrainian ambassador to Canada. Last July his brother Yevhen Oleferenko
died in battle. He studied history and he got his education in one of the best
Ukrainian universities and history was his passion and I guess at some point he
realised that there are times to study history and there are times when you are
part of the history and it's up to you to make some history and that's what he
did. And when the Russians invaded were there any doubts in his mind about what
he would do? He had been preparing himself. He actually took some classes at the
military academy. He was a civilian but there was an option for civilians to
take those classes and get some training. So on day one he just took his
backpack and he showed up as a volunteer and first he joined territorial defence
in Kiev and then quickly he moved to the Armed Forces of Ukraine. And how did
you and the rest of the family feel about it? Well I think from day one we knew
that nothing should be taken for granted and I think all these months we worried
about him. We also were so proud of him when he became a platoon commander and
that's pretty much what we feel right now. I want to hear a bit more about him.
He was known as Elvis wasn't he? Why was that? That was his call sign and he had
this fancy haircut. He loved music. He was a frontman of a music band. His music
wasn't like Elvis music. It was like heavy metal punk music. I think it was it
was terrible enough to use it as a psycho weapon against the Russians. Black
Forces the band was? Well it's called in Ukrainian Chortori. So it's kind of
like you challenge the Black Forces with your music and I think in a way he felt
he was challenging the Black Forces with his decision to join the Armed Forces.
And it was a very successful if sadly a short career in the Armed Forces. You
said he became platoon commander. Tell us a bit more about what battles he was
involved in. So yes he joined Territorial Defence first and then he joined the
International Legion as a platoon commander. He had three squads under him.
There were two Georgian squads and there was one mixed back. His platoon was in
Lysychansk. It was one of the most dangerous places to be and his platoon was
one of the last units to leave Lysychansk and he managed to get his platoon out
of there with no casualties, with no wounded soldiers under his command. And he
was the first casualty in his platoon. And what do you know, Andrei, about the
exact circumstances of his death? The Russians were preparing a major tank
assault and prior to this attack there was a heavy shelling. So there was this
piece of shrapnel which went literally one centimeter above his bulletproof vest
and unfortunately that was enough to take away his life. It was a quick death
and his comrades were able to get him out of that place quickly enough to
collect his body but it wasn't quick enough to save his life. Do you remember,
I'm sure you do, the moment you heard what had happened, what your thoughts
were? It's terrible. It's like you feel that part of yourself is cut off. And
then I had to take my sister and Yevhen's wife and my sister's boyfriend and all
together we went to talk to Yevhen's mother and that was probably one of the
most difficult conversations I have ever had in my life. And I hope I would
never have to go through anything like this for the rest of my life. I want to
end, Andrei, with perhaps a happier memory that you have of Yevhen from his
youth. When you think of him and you want to have warm and happy thoughts, what
comes to mind? Well he was a very fun person to be around. He loved music, so it
was always about music. And it was also about travel. He loved to travel. And
after Yevhen died, the family made a decision to split his ashes into three
portions. One of them is buried in this very important memorial cemetery in
downtown Kiev. And now there are many new fresh tombs there with our fighters
and soldiers. We took the second portion and we dispelled it over this beautiful
bridge in downtown Kiev over the Dnipro River. He loved the place, he loved this
city, and he stood up to defend the city. And we took the last portion to the
Carpathian Mountains. He was a great fan of travel and there was this one
specific mountain that he loved to climb. So the family went to the summit of
this mountain and that's where we let the last portion of his ashes to fly over
the country that he was ready to defend with his life. So for me, I think Yevhen
will always be this fantastic boy with this extraordinary smile, with his taste
for music, for life, for travel. And it's a great inspiration for the rest of my
life and I know for many, many people who knew him. That was James Kumarasamy
speaking to Andrei Shevchenko about his brother Yevhen. Tonight's closing
headline, President Biden's pledged the United States long-term support to
Ukraine in its fight against Russia. He was speaking during a surprise trip to
Kiev today. That's the World Tonight. I'm Ritula Shah. I'll be back tomorrow at
10. But for now, from me and everyone on the programme, good night. Studio
Direction was by Alison Purcell-Davies. The editor was Jack Hunter. In just a
moment, we begin a classic Russian novel. First though, some advice on things to
say to your smart speaker. BBC Sounds. If you own a smart speaker, did you know
you can access a whole world of BBC content through it? To get started, just
say, open BBC Sounds. Then ask your speaker to play whatever you want. You could
listen to a music mix, like this. Play Focus Beats. Or try a new podcast. Play
Desert Island Discs. And of course, if you want to listen to live radio, you can
just say, play Radio 4. Music, radio and podcasts available on most smart
speakers. Just say, open BBC Sounds to get started. Well, our book this week is
considered the founding text of modern Russian literature. It follows a young
but world-weary aristocrat whose life in 1820s St. Petersburg is one long blur
of parties, dinners and balls. Roshan Stone reads Alexander Pushkin's novel in
verse. Eugene Onegin. My uncle, man of firm convictions. By falling gravely ill,
he's won a due respect for his afflictions. The only clever thing he's done. May
his example profit others. But God, what deadly boredom, brothers, to tend a
sick man night and day, not daring once to steal away. And oh, how base to
pamper grossly and entertain the nearly dead. To fluff the pillows for his head
and pass him medicines morosely while thinking under every sigh, the devil take
you, uncle. Die! Just so, a youthful rake reflected as through the dust by post
he flew, by mighty Zeus's will elected sole heir to all the kin he knew.
Ludmilla's and Ruslan's adherents. Without a forward's interference, may I
present, as we set sail, the hero of my current tale. Onegin, my good friend and
brother, was born beside the Neva span, where maybe, reader, you began, or
sparkled in one way or other. I too there used to saunter forth, but found it
noxious in the north. An honest man who'd served sincerely, his father ran up
debts galore. He gave a ball some three times yearly, until he had no means for
more. Fate watched Eugene in his dependence. At first, Madame was in attendance,
and then Monsieur took on the child. A charming lad, though somewhat wild.
Monsieur Labey, a needy fellow, to spare his charge excessive pain, kept lessons
light and rather plain. His views on morals ever mellow. He seldom punished any
luck, and walked the boy in Lietny Park. We've all received an education in
something, somehow, have we not? So thank the Lord that in this nation a little
learning means a lot. Onegin was, so some decided, strict, judges, not to be
derided, a learned, if pedantic sort. He did possess the happy thought of free
and easy conversation, or in a grave dispute he'd wear the solemn expert's
learned air and keep to silent meditation. And how the lady's eyes he lit with
flashes of his sudden wit. How early on he could dissemble, conceal his hopes,
play jealous swain, compel belief, or make her tremble, seem cast in gloom or
mute with pain, appear so proud or so forbearing, at times attentive then
uncaring. What languor when his lips were sealed, what fiery art his speech
revealed, what casual letters he would send her. He lived, he breathed, one
single dream. How self-oblivious he could seem, how keen his glance, how bold
and tender, and when he wished he'd make appear the quickly summoned, glistening
tear. Some mornings still abed he drowses until his valet brings his tray. What,
invitations? Yes, three houses have asked him to a grand soiree. There'll be a
ball, a children's party. Where will he dash to, my good hearty, where will he
make the night's first call? Oh, never mind, he'll make them all. But meanwhile,
dressed for morning pleasure, bedecked in broad-brimmed bolivar, he drives to
Nevsky Boulevard to stroll about at total leisure until Breguet's unsleeping
chine reminds him that it's dinner time. He calls a sleigh as daylight's
dimming. The cry resounds, make way, let's go. His collar with its beaver
trimming is silver bright with frosted snow. He's off to Tallinn's late and
racing, quite sure he'll find Kver and Pasing. He enters, cork and bottles
spout, the comet wine comes gushing out. Bloody roast beef's on the table, and
truffles, youth's delight so keen, the very flower of French cuisine, and
Strasbourg pie, that deathless fable, while next to Limburg's lively mould sits
ananas in splendid gold. The theatre's full, the boxes glitter, the restless
gallery claps and roars, the stalls and pit are all a jitter, the curtain
rustles as it soars, and there, ethereal, resplendent, poised to the magic bow
attendant, a throng of nymphs, her guardian band, Istomina takes up her stand.
One foot upon the ground she places, and then the other slowly twirls, and now
she leaps, and now she whirls like down from eel's lips she races, then spins,
and twists, and stops to beat her rapid dazzling dancing feet. As all applaud,
Onyegin enters, and treads on toes to reach his seat. His double glass, he
calmly centres on ladies he has yet to meet. He takes a single glance to measure
these clothes and faces with displeasure, then trading bows on every side with
men he knew, or friends he spied, he turned at last, and vaguely fluttered his
eyes toward the stage and play, then yawned and turned his head away. It's time
for something new, he muttered. I've suffered ballets long enough, but now didlo
is boring stuff. While the lamps, both in and out, still glitter grandly all
about, and while the horses bored at tether still fidget, freezing in the snow,
and coachmen by the fires glow, curse masters and beat palms together, Onyegin
now has left the scene and driven home to change and preen. Shall I abandon
every scruple and picture truly, with my pen, the room where fashion's model
pupil is dressed, undressed, and dressed again? Whatever clever London offers to
those with lavish whims and coffers, and ships to us by Baltic seas in trade for
tallow and for trees, whatever Paris, seeking treasure, devises to attract the
sight, or manufactures for delight, for luxury, for modish pleasure, all this
adorned his dressing-room, our sage of 18 summers bloom. At least three hours he
peruses his figure in the looking-glass, then through his dressing-room he'll
pass like flighty Venus when she chooses, in man's attire, to pay a call at
masquerade or midnight ball. But look, Onyegin's at the gateway, he's past the
porter, up the stair, through marble entry, rushes straightway, then runs his
fingers through his hair and steps inside. The crush increases, the droning
music never ceases, a bold mazurka grips the crowd, the press intense, the
hubbub loud, the guardsman clinks his spurs and dances, the charming ladies
twirl their feet, enchanting creatures that entreat a hot pursuit of flaming
glances, while muffled by the violin the wives, their jealous gossip, spin. But
what of my Eugene? Half-drowsing, he drives to bed from last night's ball, while
Petersburg, already rousing, answers the drumbeat's duty call. The merchant's
up, the peddler scurries, with jug in hand the milkmaid hurries, crackling the
freshly fallen snow, the cabbie plods to Hackney Row. Impleasant hubbub mourns,
awaking. The shutters open, smoke ascends in pale blue shafts from chimney ends,
the German baker's up and baking, and more than once in cotton cap has opened up
his window trap. But, wearied by the ballroom's clamour, he sleeps in blissful
sheer delight, this child of comfort and of glamour who turns each morning into
night. By afternoon he'll finally waken, the day ahead all planned and taken,
the endless round, the varied game, tomorrow too will be the same. But was he
happy in the flower, the very springtime of his days, amid his pleasures and
their blaze, amid his conquests of the hour? Or was he profligate and hale, amid
his feasts to no avail? Yes, soon he lost all warmth of feeling. The social buzz
became a bore, and all those beauties, once appealing, were objects of his
thought no more. Inconstancy grew too fatiguing, and friends and friendship less
intriguing, for after all, he couldn't drain an endless bottle of champagne to
help those pies and beefsteaks settle, or go on dropping words of wit with
throbbing head about to split. And so, for all his fiery metal, he did at last
give up his love of pistol, sword and ready glove. We still, alas, cannot
forestall it, this dreadful ailment's heavy toll. The spleen is what the English
call it. We call it simply Russian soul. T'was this our hero had contracted, and
though, thank God, he never acted to put a bullet through his head, his former
love of life was dead. I too had parted with convention, with vain pursuit of
worldly ends, and when Eugene drew my attention, I liked his ways, and we made
friends. I liked his natural bent for dreaming, his strangeness that was more
than seeming, the cold, sharp mind that he possessed. I was embittered, he
depressed. With passion's game, we both were sated, the fire in both our hearts
was pale, our lives were weary, flat and stale. Eugene and I had both decided to
make the foreign tour we'd planned, but all too soon our paths divided, for fate
took matters into hand. His father died, quite unexpected, and round Eugene
there soon collected the greedy horde, demanding pay, each to his own, or so
they say. Eugene, detesting litigation, and quite contented with his fate,
released to them the whole estate, with no great sense of deprivation. Perhaps
he also dimly knew his aged uncle's time was due. And sure enough, a note came
flying. The bailiff wrote, as if on cue, O'Niagin's uncle, sick and dying, would
like to bid his heir adieu. He was prepared, like any craven, to sigh, deceive,
and play his part, with which my novel took its start, but when he reached his
uncle's haven, a laid-out corpse was what he found, prepared as tribute for the
ground. He found the manor fairly bustling with those who'd known the now-
deceased, both friends and foes had come a-hustling, true lovers of a funeral
feast. They laid to rest the dear departed, then wined and dined, and heavy-
hearted, but pleased to have their duty done, the priests and guests left one by
one. And here's O'Niagin, lord and master of woods and mills and streams and
lands, a country squire. There he stands, that former wastrel and disaster. And
rather glad he was, it's true, that he'd found something else to do.