TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-19H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at 6 o'clock. This is Tom Sanders. Good evening. Nearly 60 people,
including children and a baby, are now known to have died after a boat carrying
migrants sank in stormy weather off the coast of southern Italy. The European
Commission President Ursula von der Leyen is to meet Rishi Sunak in London
tomorrow, with expectations rising that they'll agree a new post-Brexit trading
deal for Northern Ireland. The Deputy Prime Minister Dominic Raab has said he'll
resign if an inquiry finds he's bullied civil servants, but he's again denied
the claims. Sports, Manchester United are close to taking the League Cup title
in the final against Newcastle at Wembley, and we report on an unusual boxing
match taking place in Saudi Arabia tonight. Nearly 60 people, including a baby
and several young children, are known to have drowned after a boat carrying
migrants sank off the southern coast of Italy. The vessel, which is believed to
have departed from Turkey, broke up in rough seas near the coastal town of
Krot√≥ne in the Calabria region. Bodies have been recovered from a beach nearby.
Here's our Europe regional editor, Danny Eberhard. The small, apparently
overcrowded boat broke up just off the coast in heavy seas before dawn. Footage
shows timber smashed into pieces washed up along the beach, along with parts of
the hull. A number of survivors, about 80, made it to shore. Images showed them
huddled in blankets, being attended to by the Italian Red Cross. Francesca
Basile is from the organisation. What we are doing right now is really taking
care in terms of protection needs of the people that are finally safe after such
a tragic moment. Some survivors have been taken to hospital. Initial reports
indicate the migrants are from Afghanistan, Pakistan, the Middle East and
Somalia, although full details haven't been confirmed. A major search and rescue
operation has been taking place by air, sea and also using submersibles. But
it's still not clear how many people were on board when the boat broke up. It's
believed to have crossed from western Turkey on what's known as the Calabrian
Route, a lesser used route to Italy than the ones from Libya and Tunisia. It's
lucrative for people smugglers and the Calabrian Mafia, the Indrangata, is said
to be involved. Italy's Prime Minister, Giorgio Maloney, has expressed her deep
sorrow at the tragedy, which she's blamed on people traffickers. Pope Francis,
who regularly defends the rights of migrants, spoke to crowds at the Vatican. He
said he was praying for the dead, the missing and those who survived. The UN is
calling for immediate action to prevent such horrific events. But precious
little progress has been made at the European level despite years of effort. The
European Commission President Odyssele von der Leyen is to meet Rishi Sunak in
London tomorrow with the expectation that they'll try to finalise a deal on new
post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland. In a joint statement this
afternoon, they said the talks would look for practical solutions for the range
of complex challenges around the Northern Ireland Protocol. Conservative and
Labour MPs have been told to come into Parliament tomorrow. Our political
correspondent, Ian Watson, reports. A deal with EU has seemed to be within grasp
for days, but somehow, rather like the horizon, the closer ministers seem to
get, the further it moved away. But no longer. In the strongest signal yet that
an agreement on Northern Ireland is imminent, the President of the European
Commission, Odyssele von der Leyen, will travel to London tomorrow for the talks
that could seal the deal. The Justice Secretary and former Brexit Secretary
Dominic Raab has offered a glimpse of what has been discussed. It's likely that
goods going from Great Britain to Northern Ireland and remaining there would be
exempt from checks. But there'd be no exception for goods going via Northern
Ireland to the Republic and therefore entering the EU. He's also suggested that
politicians at Stormont could have a say on any future EU rules that could
affect Northern Ireland. Mr Raab told the BBC's Laura Kunzberg programme that
all this could resolve issues with the existing deal. I'm doing the right thing
the right way for all communities of Northern Ireland, protecting the Good
Friday Agreement, which has come under pressure from the Northern Ireland
Protocol. Frankly, if you ask about the politics, fulfilling our manifesto
commitment on Brexit. I think in all those three areas what the Prime Minister
is seeking to do as a statesman is get the deal that will resolve these issues.
But getting a deal with the EU could actually be the easier of the Prime
Minister's tasks. Much trickier will be winning the support of the Democratic
Unionist Party who are warning that the wrong deal could deepen divisions. And
if the DUP doesn't like the detail of the deal, they'll continue to refuse to
rejoin a power-sharing government in Northern Ireland. The Prime Minister has
some work to do to convince some of his own MPs of the merits of a deal too.
Mark Frolenswa is the Chairman of the ERG Group of Eurosceptic Tory MPs and he
told Sky News he had concerns about a continuing role for the EU in Northern
Ireland. What we want is a situation where EU law is expunged from Northern
Ireland so it is treated on the same basis as England, Scotland and Wales. The
former Prime Minister, Sir John Major, told the BBC's Westminster error that the
occasional involvement of the European Court of Justice in resolving some
disputes between companies should not stop an agreement being made, arguing that
democracy was being thrown away while Northern Ireland still has no sitting
government. MPs at Westminster haven't yet been promised a vote on the deal but
Labour has signalled support. The shadow foreign secretary David Lamy said any
deal would be better than the current one and would be in a national interest.
The Deputy Prime Minister Dominic Raab says he'll resign if an inquiry finds
that he bullied civil servants. Eight formal complaints have been made against
him. The union which represents civil servants, the FDA, has separately called
on the Health and Safety Executive to investigate claims of widespread bullying
in Whitehall. Speaking to the BBC's Laura Coonsberg, Mr Raab denied he was a
bully. He was also asked whether he'd ever felt that, at times, he shouldn't
have reacted in a certain way. Look, in terms of working staff falling short of
any of the impropriety you refer to, look, of course we learn lessons as we go
and that's part of the relationship with civil servants but I'm confident that I
behaved professionally throughout and as I say, I think actually the vast lion's
share of the time, the vast majority of cases and the time we spend together,
civil servants and ministers, work very effectively together. But the General
Secretary of the FDA Union, Dave Penman, dismissed Mr Raab's comments. The
picture he paints is that everything's fine and the civil service and the
relationship between ministers and civil servants is OK. That's not the picture
that civil servants speak of. That's not their experience. One in six are saying
that they've experienced bullying or harassment or witnessed that in the last 12
months alone across 20 government departments. Israeli and Palestinian officials
meeting in Yemen have announced they're committed to taking immediate steps to
end a recent surge in violence. At the rare summit, as the rare summit took
place, two Israelis were shot dead in the occupied West Bank. Our Middle East
correspondent Yoland Nell has just sent this report from Jerusalem. This is said
to be the first time in years that Israeli and Palestinian security chiefs have
sat down together at such a meeting. It's remarkable that after almost a decade
without direct peace talks, the two sides said in a statement that they'd work
towards a just and lasting peace. With anxieties high about an escalation in the
Islamic holy month of Ramadan, which begins in late March, Israel made a
commitment to stop discussing new settlement building for four months. In
return, it's understood that the Palestinians will not take action against
Israel at the UN. No details were given about what would be done to prevent
further violence, but the challenge was made clear during the talks, as two
Jewish settlers were fatally shot while driving near Nablus. Already too far
right, Israeli cabinet ministers, key partners in Benjamin Netanyahu's
government, have rejected the statement, which has also been denounced by
Palestinian armed factions. Votes are still being counted in Nigeria's tightest
presidential election since the end of military rule in 1999. Yesterday saw a
chaotic but largely peaceful day of voting to choose a successor to President
Mohammad Jabbar-Buhari, who served the maximum two terms. Nigerians in some
parts of the country had to cast their vote today due to technical issues. The
former Environment Secretary George Eustace has said shortages of some fruit and
vegetables in the UK could continue for another month. Several retailers have
placed limits on items in the past week because of supply issues.
Representatives from the major supermarkets are due to meet ministers tomorrow
to discuss the issue. Our business correspondents issued extreme weather in
Spain and Morocco is the main reason for the shortages of products like
tomatoes, cucumbers and peppers. But UK farmers and growers have highlighted
that production here has also been hit by other problems like high energy costs
and labour shortages since Brexit. Today, on the Sunday with Laura Kunzberg
programme, George Eustace, who was the Environment Secretary until last year,
defended the government's approach. There isn't much different that the
government could have done in recent months and there's nothing they can do
immediately. We're going to have three or four weeks of this and the
supermarkets have got to work to get it right. But longer term, there are things
we should be doing. We should be committing to onshore production. So glasshouse
production of cucumbers and tomatoes, we should be trying to build that here. We
should have a more enlightened approach to labour. Speaking alongside the former
minister, the chef and founder of the Oaxaca restaurant chain Thomasina Myers
described the current problems as the tip of the iceberg. No one's really
admitting that our current food system is completely broken. There's a
propaganda that the food system somehow miraculously provide a cheap food for
all. But the very system which it depends is rife with insecurities, whether
it's to do the climate biodiversity or public health. The government says the UK
supply chain is highly resilient and well equipped to cope with disruption.
Tomorrow, the farming minister is expected to meet retailers to discuss how to
get supplies back to normal. A 14-year-old boy has been charged with a number of
driving offences after a car crashed into a house in Derby. Police say the VW
Shiran had been taken from a nearby property shortly before the incident. The
structural damage to the building is being assessed. Sports, Manchester United
are on top against Newcastle in the closing stages of an enthralling Carabao Cup
final, with a live update from Wembley as well as the rest of the day's action.
Here's Mike McCarthy. Well, let's head straight to Wembley. Newcastle United
running out of time for a comeback against Manchester United in that EFL Cup
final. Gary Flintoff is watching. Yes, Manchester United 2, Newcastle United 0,
Eric Tenhar, 13 minutes away from winning his first trophy in English football.
And it looks like the tens of thousands in black and white will be disappointed
after a spirited display. The Brazilian Casamiro opened the scoring with a
powerful header from a pinpoint Luke Shaw free kick. Then a shot from informing
Brazilian striker Marcus Rashford deflected in off Sven Botman. Newcastle have
thrown all the kitchen appliances at their opponents in the second half. They've
failed to find a way through. Manchester United 2, Newcastle 0. Well, the first
piece of major silverware in Scotland has gone to Celtic. They beat Rangers 2-1
to retain the league cup. Captain Alan McGregor has now won 17 trophies with the
club. It means the absolute world to me. Time after time, you're tasked to win
at this club and you do it on the biggest of days. You see, this is a special
group. It's always getting better. We can do both sides of the game. You have to
stick in the second half to get your reward, but that's it in this place. It's
rocking. In the Premier League, Tottenham strengthened their grip on a top four
place with a 2-0 win over Chelsea. Under pressure, Chelsea boss, Carrick Graham-
Potter, has seen his side win just one of 11 matches this year. The tie of the
fifth round in the women's FA Cup saw the holders Chelsea beat Arsenal 2-0 to
reach the quarterfinals. In the Six Nations, Scotland were denied a stunning
comeback. They recovered from 19-0 down to come within four points in France in
Paris, but ultimately lost 32-21 in a match where both sides had a man sent off.
And Australia are the Women's T20 World Cup champions after beating the host
South Africa by 19 runs in Cape Town. Mike McCarthy. In a few hours' time,
millions of people are expected to tune in to a boxing match, except the two
fighters are better known on social media than in a boxing ring. Jake Paul, who
has over 20 million followers on both YouTube and Instagram, takes on Tommy
Fury. He's the younger brother of the World Heavyweight Champion Tyson Fury, but
more famous for being on the reality TV show Love Island. Some fans say the
fight will be more entertainment than proper boxing. The BBC's boxing reporter,
Steve Bunce, sent this report from Saudi Arabia. They call this fight the truth.
Two novice boxers, a giant cash bounty of in excess of $20 million, and far too
much family pride. Tommy is the partner of fashion guru, Molly May, to have a
baby called Bambi. They met on Love Island. Tommy is unbeaten in just eight
fights. Yet Tommy is fighting for the heart and soul of boxing here in Saudi
Arabia. Jake Paul, you see, was a child star on the Disney Channel. He's a
YouTuber, an influencer. He's no boxer, the cynics say. He's unbeaten in six
fights and has never met a real boxer. They will fight over eight rounds
outdoors in the ancient UNESCO site of Deria. It's a real fight. Sure, they are
novices, evenly matched in muscles, profile and ego. As we say in boxing, it's a
50-50 fight. But not if you listen to what they have to say. Just because he's
got 22 million followers on Instagram, that doesn't make it a 50-50 fight. I've
come out on top 100 times out of 100 times. There's no way this man can beat me.
There's not a chance in the world. I'm excited. I'm excited to troll this kid
and to have fun and to make this promotion entertaining. It's awesome that he
finally signed and it's going to be a sacrificial lamb. Is it proper boxing or
entertainment? It's both. There is a belt. Celebrities are here. Cristiano
Ronaldo will be ringside. I like it. There's nothing wrong with it. Ding, ding.
Let the carnival stop. The headlines again. Several young children are among
nearly 60 people known to have drowned after a boat carrying migrants sank off
the southern coast of Italy. Rishi Sunak will meet the European Commission
President Ursula von der Leyen in London tomorrow, with expectations rising that
they're close to securing a new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland. The Deputy
Prime Minister Dominic Raab has said he will resign if an allegation of bullying
is upheld against him, but has again denied any wrongdoing. BBC News. And this
evening's news was read by Tom Sanders. This is BBC Radio 4 and now it's time
for Pick of the Week with Adam Porter. I'm not usually very keen on
anniversaries as news stories. By their very nature, they're predictable. But
this week's big anniversary a year since the start of the war in Ukraine was
different. A year ago, I was doing my usual job reading the news on Radio 2 and
5 Live. It was a night shift and in the early hours, Russia announced the start
of the invasion. Everyone had almost been expecting it because the build up of
troops on the border had been going on for months, but it still came as a shock.
Diplomatic efforts to prevent the war were still going on and the UN was meeting
in New York at exactly the same time in an effort to stop Russia acting. In the
newsroom, we had to completely rewrite the news for the whole of the morning
output, not just the next hour. BBC News at four o'clock. This is Adam Porter.
The Russian President Vladimir Putin says he's authorised what he called special
military operations in the Donbass region of Ukraine, claiming it was in
response to threats coming from Ukraine. There were reports of explosions being
heard in the capital Kiev and other parts. Back then, most experts thought
Russia would probably prevail in a few days or a few weeks at the most. Instead,
the war has ground on, causing unspeakably difficult circumstances for the
people of Ukraine. Radio 4 has broadcast a number of programmes to mark the
anniversary. In How Ukraine Made Us Care, Ash Bhardwaj looked not at the war on
the ground, but at the war for hearts and minds. As Ukraine was fighting for its
life, its image was more important than ever, and Zelensky would be at the heart
of it. Communications is often about leadership. Vera Michelin-Chapir singles
out a video that Zelensky posted the day after that late night conversation with
Boris Johnson as particularly significant. You might remember it. It went
rapidly viral and was played all over the news. Zelensky and Kombat Green on the
streets of Kiev, making clear that he's not leaving the city. He's asked if he
wants to be evacuated from Kiev, and he says, I need weapons, I don't need a
ride. And that becomes so powerful. We know at that moment that there are
assassins out to get him, and he gets out of the bunker. He takes a video of
himself. He becomes a war president. For many ordinary Ukrainians, that video
was a call to action. He's using the same means of communication as average
Ukrainians. But also this is a great message to all Ukrainians that you can show
what's happening on the ground. Just shoot the video, take the pictures, just go
and do it. This time last year, Valeria Shachanok was a photographer starting
her career in Chernihov, a city in eastern Ukraine. The war would change all
that. I'm Valeria. I'm from Ukraine, and I'm 21. I'm so young for this war.
People die, die in every day, like in another city, not only in my city. Seeing
what was happening, Valeria took out her phone and started to record. I remember
in the beginning of March, I made TikTok outside. I just go to a residential
building what was destroyed. And then in this moment when I make a video, I
heard a sound of explosion, but I felt that it's somewhere close. And when you
realize it, life is a moment. I make videos for TikToker, but it was so random
for fun. It was really a coincidence what happened. Valeria's videos depict a
grim reality in Gen Z vernacular. In her most famous video, My Typical Day in a
Bomb Shelter, she shows off her new life living underground. It's an example of
a TikTok trend in which people sarcastically share unusual things found in their
home that just make sense. A broken cupboard door, a painted-over light switch,
things like that. But in her version, Valeria stands next to a bombed-out
building. Her dog looks in confusion around the underground bunker. She dries
her hair with a heat gun. Her song, Caela Luna by Louis Prima, plays on top. To
open the clip, Valeria throws up her hands in a stereotypically Italian gesture.
I started to shake my hands like a darlin'. I said to my father, like, please do
that, mother do that. And I mean, I did this video in 10 minutes and I posted.
And after this video, like, so viral, one million, two million and now 50
million views. And after that, I felt that it's a nice way how to spread
information. The violence in Ukraine led to millions of people fleeing, with
tens of thousands of refugees coming to the UK, many staying with sponsor
families. Ukrainians in Britain were next on Radio 4 was presented by a teacher
called Olga, who shared the frustration of fellow Ukrainians she met who were
struggling to find work, homes and independence. But she also found one
inspiring story. Can you describe the place where we are? It is not so big
cottage, but it is so nice. It is so cosy here. Like home. Like home. Nearly
home. Yes. Are you happy with this place? Are your children happy? Yeah, very
nice place. Sometimes English girls, our neighbours come to us later games and
speak and we drink tea with them. It is so nice to see, like, my children try to
communicate with English, when English girls. They don't have this feeling like
they are isolated or something, so they are settled. Yes. Which is great. Yes.
It is so calm here, harmonic. We have blue sky, we have no bombs and a lot of
people around us try to help us. Not only our sponsor, it is a lot of people in
VivaLisko who try to help us to learn English, give us advice. They give us a
lot of support. Is it possible to live normal life for us Ukrainians here in
England? Yes, it is possible. When we started to rent this cottage, only my
husband worked and we have this opportunity to pay all rent. We received this
house benefit for two months and it was very important. Because you were on a
low income, now you are doing better? Yes. And you can pay your rent and you can
pay your bills. It is so important. I can only thanks to English government and
English people who think about it and to give us this opportunity to rent our
house because if we had no these, I don't know how we can live without it. It
was a very big help for us. I was happy to hear that they have managed to
organize to build their life. Now I feel motivated and I am not afraid to think
of building my own life in the UK until I will be able to get back home.
Journalists love words. The radio newsroom where I work has a proudly held
reputation within BBC News for pedantry. We know our rebut from our refute and
do our best to stop correspondence saying less when they mean fewer. But words
change and even we accept that decimation is a lot worse these days than it was
originally. So I was drawn to Matthew Syed's series about the word woke. In the
1930s it was used by African Americans in the segregated US southern states to
mean that they should be awake to the malevolent forces they faced, including
racism. Now it is most often a term of abuse. I could have chosen something from
each one of the five episodes. But this extract is from Thursdays which told the
story of a woman who took her baby son to a women's march in 2017 wearing a sign
round his neck saying I love naps but stay woke. Asia Romana, a culture writer,
takes up the story. Ideally it was supposed to be a very diverse march for
women, right? But in reality it was mostly white women and this is something
that it came under fire for because the organization of the marchers scene is
being not diverse enough, right? Like almost not woke enough. So the marchers
were being criticized on the one hand for using the word woke whilst not being
inclusive enough themselves but also on the other side for an approach to
societal issues that was deemed to be preachy and over the top. I think there's
a sense that woke almost immediately became used as a way of trying to paint
people who used liberal politics to be very shrill, hyperbolic and over the top
and so that was wokeism. There's also the added element of the internet. The
internet makes anything that is sincere immediately suspect and immediately
mockable. It's almost campy and it's over the top wide eyed naivete, right?
There was even this skit from the comedy show Saturday Night Live, a program
often described as on the left which pokes fun at the use of the term. I'm woke.
Woke. Woke. I'm woke. So why aren't my jeans? Now they are. Introducing Levi
Wokes. Sizeless, style neutral, gender non-conforming denim for a generation
that defiled labels. I think the moment you saw white people using it, it lost a
lot of its cynicism, its ironic humor, its self-deprecating, just all of the
internal ironies that attach to the phrase because it is part of black for
dacular. And the criticism then extended beyond satire to the form of woke we
see most commonly today, a pejorative term used to criticize someone as extreme
or zealous in their commitment to identity politics. This usage has been
embraced wholeheartedly by Donald Trump. Now we will defeat woke radicalism and
a continuation of communism. Women's March attendee, Prisca Kim. If I were going
to a march today, and if I were making a sign today, I wouldn't use that word.
It's just been completely disconnected from its original context. In hindsight,
I can see how when something starts to trend, like with, you know, I love naps,
but I stay woke. That line is just reproduced over and over and over again. Just
it becomes a buzzword. And then it's hard to take that word seriously. So I
think that maybe inadvertently we did play a part, but I can't say that we
purposely pushed it towards that direction. The publishers of Raul Dahl's books
were accused of wokeness this week because some words have been changed to suit
modern sensibilities. Now I have to confess that Dahl's books made very little
impact on my childhood. I was more into Enid Blighton, but The Secret Seven more
than the famous five, and resisting my father's attempts to get me to like
Arthur Ransom's swallows and Amazons as much as he did. But my sister tells me
she enjoyed James and the giant peach and the twits, and my nieces loved them
too. The controversy prompted a discussion on Monday's Today programme with the
authors of Philip Pullman and Anna Leskowitz from The New Statesman. Almost
every book has an evil adult who's overwhelming, incredibly fat or there's
qualities about them that we would find quite... They're described as an old
hag. Yeah, exactly. There's language like that that we find quite jarring today,
but also there's an overarching message in there about fatness being bad that we
would be uncomfortable with today. And I think, yeah, there's things like that
that I can understand the desire to want to change or update the language of the
books to reflect the time. But, you know, the issue is not with the word fat and
a lot of these characters are still clearly depicted as fat and the messages
remain the same. So I don't really understand the impulse just to remove that
word fat. It doesn't really change the content of the book. Well, they've also
at one stage, apparently, just taken colours out in colours. I mean, tractors
that are described as black can't any more be described as black. Are we saying
well, what are we saying about what they seem to have regarded as their
principles, their organising principles when they did it? Yeah, and there's also
a reference to the BFG cloak being black that's been removed. And that is just
sort of quite strange, like it's quite hard to understand the logic behind those
decisions. And I think there are elements of kind of language in the BFG that we
would find uncomfortable today around race. The giants in the BFG eat people of
different races and then Roald Dahl's used that as an opportunity to kind of get
some stereotypical jokes in about people of different races and children aren't
even really going to understand those and it sort of it feels like he's kind of
having a wink, wink, nudge with adult readers in those moments. So Philip, what
does it do to the literature aspect of it? What does what do? The attempting to
change words like this? Yeah. It doesn't do anything very much. If Dahl offends
us, let him go out of print. That's what I'd say. Read Frank instead. Real fit.
Read Phil Earl, SF site, Francis Harding, Michael more pogo, Mallory Blackman,
read, read Minnie Grey, Helen Cooper, Jackie Wilson, Beverly and I do read all
these wonderful authors who are writing today who don't get as much of a look in
because of the massive commercial gravity of people like Roald Dahl. But is that
the point that these books should still exist in their original form? Well,
they're not going to vanish because they'll still be around for years and years.
But be allowed to fade away in people's reading habits because they no longer
reflect the modern world. Well, yes, they should. They should be allowed to fade
away. Let him go out of print. Gaslighting is another word that's entered the
lexicon of the culture wars. It's a word I've often struggled to understand and
looking it up and being referred to a 1938 play or a film from the 40s doesn't
really help. Last weekend, Radio 4 had a modern retelling of the story in which
a woman is slowly manipulated by her husband into thinking she's going insane
until a police officer helps her to see what's happening. Rebecca Knight and
James Purfoy play the couple in question. All right, if you promise not to
flounce about, I'll tell you exactly what happens. Hey, okay. Okay, what do you
tell me? Sometimes when you go out, I sit here watching television or listen to
a book and well, those two gas lights slowly fade down to about half their usual
brightness. And then I hear noises. And how would you describe these noises?
Sometimes there are creaks as if someone is walking across the floorboards
upstairs. Other times there's a scratching sound away off as if someone is
trying to get through the plaster. And I hear footsteps again, getting fainter.
And those gas lights come up as if I was standing there by the fireplace,
turning the gas taps. Yeah, well, rats maybe. I don't know. I don't know what to
say. Do you think we should be seeing the doctor again? I'm telling the truth.
It happens just like I've said. All right, listen, listen, listen. We are
overbought and things have been hard, haven't they, for both of us. So you say
you don't see any of your friends anymore. Well, supposing you tried to.
Supposing we had a party. A dinner party, perhaps. And you could invite your
best friends, the people you know from drama school and back home from Bristol.
It could be your evening. Jack, that's a brilliant idea. Yes, please. Let's make
sure I'm well. I want them to see our lovely house and see how happy we are.
What's the matter? Oh dear. Oh dear. What's happened to the photo? Which photo?
The black and white one of me in the back garden at Enfield when I was little.
Oh no, not again. You're the only picture I have got of me before my mum was put
away. I haven't touched it. Why? Why do you keep hiding it? I really haven't
touched it. You don't even believe that yourself. Why are you so determined to
bury what little evidence there is of my past? I'm sorry. Is it in the drawer at
the end of the drop leaf table? Right, so you knew where it was all the time.
That's where it was the last time it vanished. It vanished, but you put it
there. I didn't put it there. Then who did? I don't know. Tippi, perhaps you
tidied it away. Why on earth would sane, intelligent, reliable Tippi do that?
Perhaps it was me, eh? Of course not. Who else is there? Are we still having a
dinner party? No, I think we need to see Dr Phillips again. Maybe we need to up
your medication. The drama, skilfully directed by Johnny Vegas, leaves you in no
doubt about what gaslighting means. If everyone who used the term understood it
fully, there might be less confusion. The play was accompanied by an edition of
Opening Lines, looking at Patrick Hamilton's original play. John York, a top
television producer, delved into its history and legacy. Reading the American
press cuttings, it becomes clear there is one moment in the Broadway production
that wasn't in the London one. And if you look, it's only in the American acting
edition. David O'Selznick, who produced the Hollywood movie of Gaslight, wrote
about it. Never before have I witnessed anything in the theatre remotely
approaching the effectiveness of this particular scene. The audience was so
terrified that part of it literally stood to its feet and screamed the hat, the
hat. The gaslights flicker and brighten. Manningham is about to return. Ruff
must now hide he cannot be discovered. The American stage directions tell us.
Just as he is about to leave, he feels his head. He has left his hat behind.
Just in the nick of time, he retrieves it and exits. We'll never know who came
up with that idea, the director, an actor or Hamilton himself. But it
demonstrates that with a play, I think, unlike say a novel, it's not just about
the written word on the page. It's about what happens in performance. Gaslight
made Hamilton a rich man. But you know what they say about money not buying
happiness. It can, however, buy you a lot of whisky. Patrick Hamilton died of
cirrhosis of the liver at the age of 58. Although awareness of this great play,
this marriage of psychological insight in popular form has dimmed, its acute
observation lives on. I think the first bit of gaslight where we think this
woman is mad and then you realise it's a man driving her mad is one of the great
things he ever wrote. His father was absolutely exercising coercive control over
his wife and his children. The Merriam-Webster dictionary made gaslighting its
word of the year in 2022. And through the exposures of Me Too and far greater
awareness of coercive control, the title has become a synonym for a type of
behaviour. One person's attempt to make another doubt their own sanity. And it's
the very stuff of other drama too. When I was executive producer of EastEnders,
I used the theme of gaslighting in the story of Trevor and Little Mo. The arches
the BBC Radio 4 soap opera painstakingly took us through the terror of the
abusive relationship between Rob and Helen. Vertigo to Memento, sleeping with
the enemy to Midsomer, a rich vein of horror, of literature, of art and of human
understanding, all can be traced back to Hamilton's tortured psyche finding
perfect expression in a play written 75 years ago and set 60 years before that.
It's quite a legacy. If it's clever word play you're more interested in then I
can recommend a repeat of the third series of The Absolutely Radio Show in Radio
4's Thursday late night comedy slot. I hadn't come across the programme before
and as I listened to this on a train I began to realise that my chuckling out
loud was making people look at me rather strangely. But it was when I got to
this sketch about Two Line Terry that I wanted to tell them they should go to
BBC Sounds and listen to the programme. I didn't of course. That would have been
weird. And now we continue with part 117 of Two Line Terry. The story of the
remarkable Scottish singer and whistler Terrence McCruna who had many hits in
the 1950s and 60s with his Two Line songs. It was 1963 and Terry was offered his
first film role in the romantic comedy Bikini Bloodbath. It was here he met and
fell in love with his temperamental Swedish co-star Monika Yip. Their
relationship was torrid and turbulent. Terry wrote about their ups and downs in
the song Stairs or Lift. She preferred to climb the stairs but it was the lift
for me. One could say we were raised differently. Then bad news. Terry was
shocked when he found out that Monika had been having an affair with Thomas
Tome, a handsome librarian from Gothenburg. Terry and Monika broke up. However
things went from bad to worse of Monika two days later when Thomas Tome left
her. She was incandescent with rage and was arrested by the police after an
incident in the Gothenburg public library. Terry attended Monika's court hearing
and wrote the number three hit Defacing a Library Book. After serving her long
sentence she was so old she went straight to the Your Next Old Folks Home.
Unfortunately she hated the living conditions and rebelled. The police were
again called and Terry sang about this incident in the number 47 hit Afternoon
Nap. Sometimes a word has both a literal and a metaphorical meaning. And if you
can find a word like that to use as a programme title so much the better. A case
in point was shocking on Radio 4 on Tuesday afternoon. Professor Sally Marlowe
investigated electroconvulsive therapy with the help of her friend Dr Tanya
Gergle who's had shock therapy almost 200 times to treat a depression which
hadn't responded to anything else. They went together to the hospital where she
was being treated. I would just think this was a regular treatment room. There's
a bed in the middle, standard medical stuff, lots of light coming in through the
windows. I mean there is equipment here that I don't know what that is and
presumably that is something to do with the treatment is it? Yeah so that's the
anaesthetic machine we've got there. Difficult airway trolley, crash trolley,
we've got our ECT machine here that delivers the treatment. And Anjali I'm
looking at the bed and I was expecting to see restraints and I can't see any. No
so most of our patients are consenting and we wouldn't be restraining anyone to
have ECT here. This button here is what delivers the treatment. So you literally
press it and hold it down? Yeah so I'll hold it down until it stops making a
sound to indicate that the treatment is finished. And then once I've done that I
will start monitoring the visual seizure. So it will be like you know the little
quiver of the lip or the eyes flickering or the toes. So yeah very quick, couple
of seconds and then the treatment is finished. There's a muscle relaxant as well
that is administered at the same time as the general anaesthetic so that
actually your body doesn't really convulse. There's no major convulsion of the
body because there's a muscle relaxant so. Yeah the convulsion is not very
strong. So the treatment's given, there's a seizure, Anjali what happens then?
Tanya will start to wake up. How long does that take? So it varies for each
patient but it's only a couple of minutes that they're in here in the treatment
room for. Tanya when you're lying on the bed and you get the anaesthetic what's
going through your mind? What does that feel like? Strangely find it quite
relaxing. I mean when I'm very unwell experiencing the sort of more psychotic
symptoms I sometimes then I'm very afraid but it's not fear of the physical
procedure, it's fear actually of just everything. I always remember Kathy who
always you know holds my hand. Like she's just done now. And so the people are
like holding my hand. I usually picture my family and have a nice picture in my
head and then just go off to sleep and it is actually quite a nice feeling. You
know think of something, it's a nice holiday and I think that helps. In spite of
ECT's reputation the message of the programme was that it works. It doesn't have
most of the side effects it's accused of, although Dr Tanya says she does suffer
some memory loss and your initial reaction to it is probably wrong. Occasionally
programme titles don't fully explain what you're about to hear. For example you
probably wouldn't expect the prayer for the day on Radio 4 to sound like this.
Good morning. I've been attending Narcotics Anonymous meeting for a few years. I
usually take place in environments that are emblems of social need, churches,
council owned multifunction rooms and Quaker meeting houses, which as a
practicing Quaker is awkward for me. Stillness on Sunday, NA on Tuesday. Their
rooms with scuffed carpet and fluorescent tube lighting. In the lobby is a
cubicle containing the final working payphone in Essay. There's a serving hatch
where soul sick people pass through all steer biscuits and cups of coffee, which
are almost devoured by the attendees who are still raw, active addicts, cup and
all. These are rooms that writer and music journalist Ian Penman might describe
as Little Englander stodged with everything revivalism. I've read about rooms
like these in a hundred years of NCVO and voluntary action which was started by
philanthropist Edward Vivian, Deamon Burchill. It's the best of democratic
localism. Community spaces where people can loosen the knots of their existence
or establish a mini symposium to reflect on bus timetables or acrimony between
two warring neighbours. If his dog barks after midnight one more time, he's
going to become part of my crazy paving and there's something to be said about
the healing potential of group confession. At NA there's different viewpoints,
different coping mechanisms about a shared communal malady. You can focus group
your pain with this in mind. God, thank you for keeping me clean and serene and
thank you for underlining the moral imperative that drives us to help each
other, especially the ones disadvantaged by the greed of others. Go lightly.
Amen. Hope Lonergan and thank you to listeners who emailed about that edition on
Tuesday because I wouldn't have heard it otherwise. As Trevor Lambert from
Berkshire wrote, any one of them is worth a listen, even for heathens like him.
Another new series this week was the comedy panel show The Ultimate Choice.
Steph McGovern gives two comedians a choice between two unpalatable options. A
good subtitle might be The Lesser of Two Evils. The success of programs like
this depends on the panelists and it got off to a flying start with Zoe Lyons
and Dane Baptiste, who were given the choice between living in an ideal property
in two fictional places, Walford or Mordor. I love the way Zoe Lyons is so
quick, she even manages to incorporate noises off into her thinking. Yeah, I
can't remember the last time I right moved Mordor at night. Oh, look, we can get
there, dear. I'm not a fan, I've got to say of the old Albert Square, too noisy,
there's a lot of stuff happens on a daily basis. That market never shuts either,
that would really get on my nerves. Christmas time would be an absolute
nightmare, because you know some car's going to come careering around the corner
at any minute, somebody yelling, leave it not, leave it! And you're like, oh
God, it's just, oh. From what I do know, and I know of myself, I'm quite an
outdoorsy girl, I do favour a flatter shoe and a sturdy anorak, and I just feel
the inmoor door with its endless mountain ranges, I'd probably have a happier
existence. Yeah, maybe. Yeah. And I'd just spend quite a long time, oh, there we
go, somebody's dropped her armour. So the orcs next door, they're always
clanging about in their armour. This is why we've never invited them over for
Christmas drinks, it's just, we're not each other's people. So yeah, I think
Mordor. Okay, Dane, what are your first thoughts? It's a tough one. The pros of
Albert Square are the fact there's still a lot of independent business there, a
lot of market stalls, family run pub, and you know, getting on a property down
there in London would be like the holy grail. So consider that. That being said,
as Zoe correctly pointed out, Mordor is particularly scenic, a lot of stuff
going on down there, I think it'd be relatively secluded, I do value my own
personal space, but then at the same time, I think a lot about amenities. Let's
say I want to get some elven bread. How far? I have to go to get to Rivendell.
But then at the same time, Ministerif is not too far away as well. And you know,
Saruman's there, he's kind of lonely. I'm like Saruman, all you do is hang
around here playing with this orb, it's time for you to live your truth. Look at
this tunic. You're obviously repressing something. I just want you to feel
comfortable being who you are. So some of you are going to be like, what the
hell are you talking about? And some of you are going to be like, this is a very
well considered decision. I feel like Albert Square, being in London, we're not
too far. I'm not sure what line. I mean, that's part of the problem, isn't it?
Transport links is a very big thing for me. But it's not on the map. Yeah, it's
not on the map. And so you might as well be in Mordor, really. Many people
probably remember where they watched the opening ceremony of the London 2012
Olympics. I was on my way home from work on a train with a dodgy mobile signal.
So missed most of it and had to catch up later. Frank Cottrell-Bois, who wrote
the scene in which the Queen jumped out of a helicopter with James Bond,
described how he, his producer Tracy Seawood and director Danny Boyle made it
happen. This edition of Witness History on the World Service is a 10 minute gem
of a programme. We decided that it would be possible if we hired an actress and
the actress looked a little bit like the Queen, but dressed exactly like the
Queen. And we put the address in the helicopter and just faked it and that would
be fine. So all we needed was permission from the palace to represent the Queen
in that way. And also the inside track on what the Queen would be wearing on the
day. So Tracy went to the palace and she sort of explained this to Angela Kelly,
the Queen's dresser, who said, oh, you mean you don't want her to be in it? And
Tracy said, well, no, of course not. No, we'd be having an actress who wouldn't
dream of asking the Queen to do that. She went, oh, I wouldn't mention that if I
were you, she wants to be in it. And so Tracy came back from what should have
been a very ordinary meeting with the news that I would now be writing a script
for the Queen of England. And Danny would be directing the Queen of England in a
sketch with James Bond. We were just aghast. Starts with an establishing shot of
Buckingham Palace, which is obviously unmistakable. Then a taxi pulls in onto
that huge forecourt and out steps James Bond. And we track James Bond up the
stairs inside the palace and he's got that, you know, that panther-like walk of
his. And then some corgis follow him. And on the day, the corgis were very
problematic because corgis are not the most cooperative of dogs and they're not
good tempered either. Were they actually the Queen's dogs? They're actually the
Queen's corgis. Oh, wow. And Mark, the designer, was sort of in charge of them
on the day and they took a lot of bribing to behave properly. So James Bond has
to brave the corgis. Then he opens the door and there's a figure of a woman
sitting at a desk working and she doesn't acknowledge his presence. And then he
coughs and she turns around and says, good evening, Mr Bond. If you look at the
way Danny's directed that moment, it's brilliant because he holds on the back of
her head for a long time. And then she turns to camera and you go, oh my days,
it's actually the Queen. And a friend of mine was in New York at the time. It
was a hot night. He had his window open and that moment when the Queen turned
around to the camera, he said you could hear all over Greenwich Village where he
lived, the other side of the world, you could hear this cheer go up because, you
know, no one was expecting that. One of the great things about BBC Sounds is
that all the BBC's radio stations are available wherever you are. Another
country from Radio Scotland gives me a weekly fix of country and Americana
music, even though I live on the south coast of England. This week, the
presenter, Ricky Ross, was talking to the award winning singer songwriter Margo
Price, who's written a memoir about the cost of striving for success in the
music industry. The title of the book is such an ambiguous title, you know,
maybe we'll make it out of interest for you know, what signifies making it. I
grapple with that a bit as I as I sit here and say, you know, it's not about the
trophies, it's not about the awards. It's fame and success is kind of can be a
monster and it can be a monkey on your back in the way that anything else can.
And, you know, at times I just I've realized about myself that I have this kind
of personality that's like I'm going to go out, I'm going to do things, even if
it's not good for me. And, you know, as I've put away some of my less healthy
addictions, like the cigarettes and the cocaine and the late nights partying,
you know, the career can become that. Yeah. Yeah. But I continually remind
myself that if you can do what you love with the people you love, it's the best
thing on earth. No band is more famous than the Beatles and no band's breakup
has ever been so closely examined. Archivon Four, presented by Jennifer Lucy
Allen, marked the 90th birthday of Yoko Ono, by exploring her art and music and
asking the question, did she break up the Beatles? It made clear that her
intellect and her avant-garde ideas were a major factor in what attracted John
Lennon to her. Some Beatles fans bitterly blame her to this day for the split
and refused to accept that there were already signs that things were coming to
an end. Yoko Ono herself has always rejected the suggestion. Of course I didn't
break up the Beatles. If I had, then I'm a very strong woman. You can't have
four very strong men, you know, just listen to me and break up or something like
that. It wasn't like that at all. Has this got anything to do with you think the
fact that John Lennon has teamed up with Yoko Ono and Paul McCartney with Linda?
No. But I think that it would be easier for four men to get on with each other,
for four men and four wives. Everybody was so upset with us so that they made
stories, the fact that we were together. Racism was always there, but it was
more than that. It was something about John being their treasure or something.
And then, you know, it seems like I stole that from them or something like that.
It was so shocking. I just didn't understand why that was happening, really. The
abuse and derision Yoko received before and after the Beatles broke up was
unparalleled for a musician. There were negative headlines and reviews across
the mainstream and music press. At a gallery opening for John's art, 365 white
balloons were released, with note cards directing people to write to John via
the gallery. Most came back with negative comments about Yoko and John's
relationship. Which of this attention included offensive, racist and sexist
language, as well as threats, as she told Michael Parkinson in 1971. You've got
a lot of race letters, John. Why did you marry a Japanese? You know, things like
that. You'll stab you in the neck. I got a door, you know, somebody sent me a
door, you know, a rubber door with lots of pins stuck on it, you know, things
like that. I want to love this country because this is my husband's country and
I thought of that. I think it's a very interesting country. But it's, you know,
I'll be a master if I love this country when I'm constantly abused, you know,
whatever. It's just a thing. I was an easy target and they called me Dragon
Lady. Later I thought about, oh, it's great Dragon Lady. I mean, Dragon is a
very powerful animal and there's a mythic being. And so I accept, you know. And
once I said I accept, nobody wants to call me a Dragon Lady. It's great.
Somehow, Yoko stared it all down, remaining hopeful and optimistic. Her and John
didn't just rise above it, but rose above it to demand world peace. Friday saw
the conclusion of Radio 2's Piano Room month. Over the past four weeks, 20
artists from Suzanne Vega and Pink to Michael Ball and haircut 100 have
performed at the BBC's made of veil studios with the BBC Concert Orchestra. They
each sing a couple of their own songs and a cover. The final performer was
Stormzy, who chose a favourite song of mine from the early days with my husband,
Get Here by Alita Adams. If I show you a list of my 100 favourite songs, there
would be a lot of Whitney Houston classics, Stevie classics and I just love a
song that can move my spirit. And a lot of the time, most of the time these are
songs that are way out of my vocal range. And I always, I'm singing them all the
time. I'm in the shower, it's a deli, I'm singing it. And when the idea to do
Piano Room with the orchestra came up, I was like, ah, like, let me enjoy this
for myself. You know what I mean? And so we found, I think we brought the key
down. We had to bring it down to like, where's my sweet spot? But yeah, just a
beautiful song that like timeless and also just reminds me of the power of music
where it's like, you know, Alita Adams, when she made that song them years ago,
I'm sure that she didn't know that it was going to touch some kid in South
London, you know what I mean? Who's this rapper and he would want to cover it.
But yeah, man, that's the power of music. And yeah, I just wanted to have my go
at it and hopefully touch someone in a similar way where it just sweet someone's
spirit or strikes a chord in them or pulls a heartstrings. So yeah. Stormzy's
version has a vulnerability that the original doesn't. But just listen to these
words. They're witty at the same time as being laced with longing and the idea
that there are always hills and mountains to get over borders on the profound.
Goodbye. I don't care how you get here. Just get here. I'm sorry. Stormzy with
get here. Pick of the Week was presented by Adam Porter and produced in Salford
by Nick Holmes. The selections featured today are available on BBC Sounds and
you can find links on the Pick of the Week website. Next week's programme is
presented by Rajan Dattar. If you have any suggestions for that, you can
volunteer them by emailing potw at bbc.co.uk and volunteers also required next
this evening in the archers. This year is part of Red Nose Day. You could win an
iconic BBC treasure. We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are
distributed via third party services and platforms and the BBC stream you are
currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an
internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the
manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to
stream on BBC Sounds. We'll find the terms and conditions and privacy notice.
You must be 18 or over to enter. The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday.