TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-05H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This room is next. This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio station.
You're listening to the newsroom from the BBC World Service coming up. 141
countries reiterated a clear demand to Russia. Withdraw senior troops home and
in this war. The United Nations General Assembly overwhelmingly backs a
resolution calling on Russia to end its invasion of Ukraine. It's four hours GMT
on the 24th of February. At this point a year ago, the first Russian missiles
had started to fall. I'm Gareth Barlow in London. And I'm James Walterhouse in
Kiev looking at how the past year has shaped Ukraine. We'll also explore the
military outlook for the two sides and hear a remarkable story of how the war
has brought people together. Also to come, the former film mogul Harvey
Weinstein is sentenced to 16 more years in prison for rape and sexual assault.
And we'll also have a round up of the latest sports news. You're listening to
the BBC. Hello, I'm Neil Nunes with the BBC News. As Ukraine marks one year
since the start of Russia's full-scale invasion, the UN General Assembly has
overwhelmingly backed a call from Moscow's forces to withdraw immediately. More
than 140 countries voted in favor of a resolution condemning the war. The
support from our correspondent at UN headquarters in New York, Nedetofik. Draft
resolution A slash ES11 slash L7 is adopted. In this symbolic hall, the one-year
anniversary of the war was marked with a resolution calling for a just and
lasting peace. The vote showed where countries of the world stood, but also how
little positions have changed since the first time the General Assembly
condemned Russia's invasion in March. Nevertheless, nearly three-quarters of the
world body has consistently supported Ukraine. Only a handful of countries voted
against it, including Belarus, North Korea and Syria. China, India and South
Africa were among 32 abstentions. Russia's deputy ambassador to the UN dismissed
the resolution as useless. But the EU's foreign policy chief, Josep Borrell,
said the message from the UN vote was clear. On the Russian side, there is a
small handful of votes confirming that in the eyes of the world, the aggression
against Ukraine needs to stop. And it needs to stop now. Beijing has urged
Russia and Ukraine to hold peace talks as soon as possible. A paper released by
the foreign ministry said conflict in war benefited no one. It said further
aggravating tensions could see the crisis spiral out of control. North Korea has
test-fired four strategic cruise missiles into the sea, the state news agency
said the missiles traveled 2,000 kilometers. It added that the drill
demonstrated the readiness of what it called Pyongyang's nuclear combat force. A
rare blizzard warning has been issued for parts of southern California from
early Friday through to Saturday evening. Millions of residents have been told
to prepare for unusually cold weather and snow. The winter storm has already led
to emergency services in California's Bay Area being inundated with calls
regarding fallen trees and downed power lines. More from Peter Bowes, who is in
Los Angeles. It is extremely cold here and the torrential rain we've been
getting over the last few hours is beginning to turn into snow. And weather
forecasters say over the next few hours we're likely to see blizzards in
California around Los Angeles, the kinds of which long-term residents here have
never seen before. Peter Bowes with that report from Los Angeles. From London,
this is the latest world news from the BBC. The government of Madagascar says a
powerful storm which hit the east coast of the island is now known to have
killed at least seven people. Cyclone Freddie brought torrential rain and strong
winds, tearing roofs off houses. It's now heading towards Mozambique, where it's
expected to make landfall within hours. A court in Sierra Leone has ruled that
the main opposition candidate for the presidential election in June must stand
trial on corruption charges. Samura Kamara was chosen as the candidate for the
All People's Congress three days ago. He says the case is politically motivated.
The current president, Julius Mardabillo, is set to run for a second term. A
Russian Soyuz capsule has lifted off from Kazakhstan to bring back three men
stranded on the International Space Station. It'll be some time before the two
Russian cosmonauts and an American colleague return to Earth, as Rory Gallemore
now reports. Missions on the International Space Station usually last six
months. By the time these three men are scheduled to leave in September, they'll
have spent a full year in orbit. That wasn't the original plan. A capsule
already attached to the ISS was supposed to make the return journey. But it
began leaking coolant late last year. Liquid particles were seen spraying into
the blackness, forcing the cancellation of a spacewalk. The new capsule is
carrying supplies, although there's no replacement crew on board. Boeing has
temporarily suspended deliveries of the 787 Dreamliner again in order to conduct
analysis on a fuselage component. The Federal Aviation Administration said
deliveries would not resume until it was satisfied the issue had been addressed.
The aerospace giant, Riek, commenced deliveries of the planes last August after
they had been halted for more than a year due to previous problems. Boeing said
production of the 787 would continue as normal. BBC News. You're listening to
The Newsreel from the BBC World Service with me Gareth Barlow. It's a grim
anniversary. As dawn broke in Ukraine one year ago, pretty much to the hour,
Russia launched its full-scale invasion of the country. Its military attacked
from the north, east and south and so began the biggest conflict in Europe since
the Second World War. The cost has been huge. The UN estimates at least 8,000
Ukrainian civilians have died. Millions are homeless or refugees. Cities have
been flattened. As many as 100,000 Ukrainian troops are dead or wounded and
Russia's losses are thought to be higher. Twelve months have passed with the war
showing no signs of ending. And so the UN General Assembly in New York has now
overwhelmingly passed a resolution calling on President Putin to withdraw his
troops from Ukraine immediately and unconditionally. The US Ambassador to the
UN, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, told said Moscow had been given a clear message.
Today's vote was really historic. You saw one year after Russia's illegal,
unprovoked, full-scale invasion into Ukraine where the countries of the world
stand. These 141 countries reiterated a clear demand to Russia. Withdraw. Send
your troops home and end this war. So then, what does the vote mean? A question
I put to our North America correspondent, Peter Bose. It shows us that the world
is in about the same place as it was a year ago with overwhelming opposition to
Russia's invasion and the ongoing war in Ukraine. The resolution reaffirmed
support from 141 countries for Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity
and it rejected any Russian claims to the parts of the country that it now
occupies. Seven countries voted against, 32 abstained, including India, South
Africa and China. The French Foreign Minister said Russia can and must stop
tomorrow. I don't think anyone in that room expected that to happen. But that
was the sentiment of the room. Her Japanese counterpart said next year we should
not meet here to mark the second anniversary of this senseless war of
aggression. With regards to this resolution, with regards to this session of the
UN General Assembly, what does it mean in real terms? Is it just a symbolic vote
or is there some implication of it? Well, it has no legal implication, so it is
largely symbolic, but it does show where the moral weight of the world is right
now. And I think that is the significance of it, that overwhelmingly countries
believe and support Ukraine's right to exercise self-defence. And that's
significant coming from this body, of course, which has at its heart the goal of
keeping peace around the world and at a time when in some quarters support is
waning. Here in the United States, for example, Gareth, there are some in the
Republican Party more openly now questioning the amount of money that the United
States is spending on providing arms for Ukraine. There's no questioning the
Biden administration's commitment, as we've heard from the president over the
last few days. But I think what we've heard from the General Assembly is a
global statement of really steadfast support for Ukraine. But the reality is
Russia will turn a blind eye and a blind ear to that global statement, surely.
It won't have any impact or certainly very little impact on Russia's, let's say,
battlefield strategy. I think where it could make a difference, difficult to
quantify though, is in the arena of psychological warfare, that this is a
message to President Putin that there remains this globally strong resolve to
oppose Moscow's war. Peter Bowes. Well, a year ago, the BBC's James Waterhouse
had been in Kiev for just six weeks and then the Russian invasion began. Since
then, he's covered the conflict and spent time with Ukrainians whose lives have
been irrevocably changed by the war. I caught up with him and asked how the past
year has affected the people of Ukraine. I remember in the weeks building up to
the invasion, people would very calmly say to me, well, we will fight. You know,
it's about defending my country. It's about defending my very existence and my
children's future. And at the time, you know, it was it was quite a thing to
hear, but you sort of thought, well, you know, it may well never come to that.
How do you know until that moment comes? But on the whole, they were serious
about it. I think you had the resilience of the general population who have had
to learn to live with this. You've had the volunteers who signed up in their
millions and then you've had the transformation of Ukraine's military and
weaponry. And I think Vladimir Putin miscalculated. Whenever I drive around
Ukraine, I think two things. Firstly, you can see why Russia wants to take it.
It's this vast, fertile landscape. And the second thing I think is I can't
believe Russia thought it could take it, given its vastness. It should have
taken it. It was the far superior, bigger force. It still has huge mass over the
Ukrainians. And yet the Ukrainians still managed to stay to the defence they
are. To what degree on the ground and amongst the ordinary Ukrainian population
do they feel continually supported by the West? We see often lots of calls that
frustration etched on the face of Vladimir Zelensky, calling for more weapons,
faster weapons, weapons to be delivered more quickly. But do you feel as though
Ukraine still fills that sense of brotherhood with the West, with NATO? I think
in a political sense they are clearly grateful for the help that's been provided
so far. But you're right, they are frustrated with the rate it has arrived.
Before this invasion, what people cared about was who was helping us and with
what. And there was frustration named at Germany who was initially hesitant and
sending in January military helmets and hospitals. You know, Ukrainians are
saying, well, I can't fire those. And I think that's been the sentiment ever
since. But when you talk about brotherhood, I think it's more like a neighbour
across the road that they feel. Because despite the political will of Ukraine as
a whole on issues of wanting to join NATO and wanting to join the European
Union, they ultimately have not been realised. And so you have Ukraine sort of
falling through the gap. I think people feel that. And I think that is a deep
source of resentment for the majority of Ukrainians. Thus far, both the EU and
NATO have been non-committal of just when that will happen at the moment. It's
kind of political platitudes on saying one day, yes, our future is together. A
sense that the country is to some degree being kept at arms reach. I think so. I
think I've seen a lot of official visits come here and you see Ukrainian flags
crossed over with the European Union flag or the UK flag or the US flag. And
messaging is vital in war. And you see Ukraine is trying to push itself
westward. And we've seen in times gone by when whenever Russia's aggression
increases, Ukraine leans further to the west politically. This full scale
invasion has kind of blown that out of the water. But it's still reaching. It is
still not fully incorporated into these wider blocks towards the west. It is
throwing everything westwards politically to try and achieve that whilst trying
to throw everything in a military sense towards the east to keep Russia at bay.
And ultimately, it still hopes to repel Russia completely. But it feels a long
way off from that point. James Waterhouse there. And let's explore further the
point James just made. Can Ukraine continue to withstand the might of the
Russian military machine? Dr Jonathan Marcus is a former BBC correspondent and
now an independent diplomatic and defence analyst. He gave us his assessment of
the conflict now and the outlook for the next few months. This is not last
year's war. The stakes are just as high, but the two armies have changed.
Ukraine's forces not just survive the shock of battle, but are fought back,
inflicting reverses on the Russian invaders. All this came at a cost of heavy
casualties and Ukraine is busy trying to build up new brigades and divisions for
the offensive to come. On the other side, many of Russia's best troops were
killed and their units shattered in the early stages of the conflict. Moscow has
had to mobilise tens of thousands of poorly trained conscripts. It has enlisted
convicts and it has had to reach deep into Soviet era stockpiles of weaponry to
equip its newly organised formations. All this sets the scene for what could be
the most critical period in this conflict. This latest phase will be a drama in
two acts. The first, a Russian offensive in the east, largely focused on
securing more of the Donbass, is already underway. It is likely to build over
the coming weeks. Ukraine's aim will be to inflict heavy losses on the Russian
forces, to try to conserve its own combat power as much as possible, and then to
launch what will be the second act of the drama, to go onto the offensive
itself. Many analysts believe that Ukraine's goal will be to drive southwards to
sever the so-called Russian-held land bridge, the band of Ukrainian territory
that links Crimea with Russia to the east. Everything now depends upon how
successful Kiev and Moscow have been in generating, training and equipping new
combat units. Resolving problems in ammunition supply will be crucial for
success. By the time spring turns to summer in Ukraine, we should know how
decisive this new phase of the fighting has been. For Russia, stalemate may be
enough. But Ukraine has to demonstrate its counter-attacking capability. It must
show its Western backers that the huge amounts of weaponry, training and money
that it has received are actually making a difference. Western support for
Ukraine remains strong. But if the war does turn into a stalemate, would there
be similar levels of backing, say, this time next year? Perhaps. And this is
maybe President Putin's lifeline. There is no real balance in this conflict, and
it goes way beyond the fact that Russia is the larger and, on paper at least,
the vastly stronger player. The war is being waged on Ukrainian soil. It is
Ukraine's towns and infrastructure that are being destroyed. And for Ukrainians,
this is a national struggle for survival. Of course, Mr Putin would like
Russians to see the conflict in similar terms. Perhaps some do. But slowly, as
the casualty toll hits home and economic sanctions begin to bite, what then? And
surely, in Mr Putin's mind, there must be one other fundamental question. How
will Russians judge this misadventure when the guns eventually fall silent?
Jonathan Marcus and plenty more coverage of the first anniversary of the war in
Ukraine across the BBC World Service today and in later editions of the Global
News Podcast. Let's move on now to another story that we're following. The
disgraced Hollywood film producer Harvey Weinstein looks likely to spend the
rest of his life in jail after a court in Los Angeles sentenced him to 16 years
on rape and sexual assault charges. That's in addition to the 23-year sentence
he's already serving. It was the allegations against Mr Weinstein that fueled
the Me Too movement and dozens of women have spoken out about sexual harassment
and abuse by powerful men since then. Saphir Bhatitza has the story. He was the
legendary film producer at the top of his game, with the world at his feet. But
Harvey Weinstein became the first major figure taken down by the Me Too movement
and was sent to jail. And on Thursday, another conviction for attacking an
actress in a hotel room in Beverly Hills during a film festival in February
2013. In court, the victim recounted her trauma. Before that night, I was a very
happy and confident woman, she said. Everything changed after the defendant
brutally assaulted me. There is no prison sentence long enough to undo the
damage. Harvey Weinstein is already serving a 23-year prison sentence for a
separate conviction in New York for rape and sexual assault. More than 80 people
have made rape and misconduct claims about him, dating back to the 1970s. But he
maintains that he is innocent and that all of his sexual encounters were
consensual. He called his accuser an actress with the ability to turn on her
tears. Please don't sentence me to life in prison, he told the court. I don't
deserve it. Weinstein will be appealing, but he's 70 years old. So this sentence
means that life and death in prison are now very likely for this once revered
Hollywood star. Staying in the US, the state of Ohio there is an increasingly
fierce criticism of the way the authorities have handled the aftermath of a
major train crash early this month, which caused a major chemical spill. Cleanup
efforts in the town of East Palestine are continuing after the incident, in
which a total of 38 railcars derailed. Nearly a dozen of them were carrying
hazardous materials. Announcing the findings of an initial report, a senior
federal investigator, Jennifer Hermendi, called for an end to politics
surrounding the disaster. She said there was no indication the train's freight
train's crew did anything wrong, but the accident didn't need to have happened.
Enough with the politics. I don't understand why this has gotten so political.
This is a community that is suffering. So I don't care about the politics. What
I care about is figuring out how this happened. But I can tell you this much.
This was 100% preventable. Well, those investigations are ongoing, with a final
report not expected for at least a year. In the meantime, the blame game
continues. Nomi Iqbal reports. We haven't got any formal conclusions yet from
this report by the National Transportation Safety Board. But as well as the
wheel overheating, the train was also said to be travelling below the speed
limit when it came off the tracks. Eleven cars carrying hazardous materials,
including vinyl chloride, spilled near the Pennsylvania state line. It prompted
an evacuation. But fears have been growing about the short and long-term impact
of the toxic wreckage on people's health and the environment. Speaking from the
town today, the transport secretary Pete Buttigieg said the community didn't
want to do politics. He's been criticised for not visiting sooner, including
from former President Donald Trump, who showed up in the town yesterday.
President Biden hasn't visited yet, but he sent federal agencies to help
residents after being criticised for not doing that straight away. Nomi Iqbal.
Now let's take a look at some of the other stories we're following. To mark the
one-year anniversary of Russia's invasion of Ukraine, the Eiffel Tower in Paris
has been lit up in the blue and yellow colours of the Ukrainian flag. The
gesture of solidarity with the people of Ukraine will remain until Sunday. Two
Pakistani brothers who were held without charge for two decades in the
Guantanamo Bay military prison have been returned to their home country by US
officials. Abdul and Mohammed Rabbani are the latest detainees to be released
from the Cuban facility. Forty people remained in the prison when President Joe
Biden took office in 2021. He says he hopes to close it down. The Flying
Scotsman, one of the world's most famous steam trains, took to the rails for the
first time 100 years ago today. It was designed by Sir Nigel Gresley and built
in Doncaster in the north of England at a cost of £7,944. That's around $9,500.
The train took its name from the daily London to Edinburgh rail service, which
started back in 1862. It was the first locomotive to reach 100 miles per hour.
And new film instalments of The Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit, which are
based on the JRR Tolkien novels, are reportedly in the works at Warner Brothers.
That's after the studios struck a collaboration deal with the Middle Earth
Enterprises. The original Lord of the Rings trilogy, directed by Peter Jackson,
scooped 17 Oscars and earned billions of dollars at cinemas worldwide. Now let's
switch to sport and Richard Newman's joining us. England going well in the
cricket, Richard. Yeah, it got better for England after a bad start on day one
of the second test with New Zealand in Wellington. Stefan Shemotz has been there
watching for us and Stefan England well and truly have a new start, don't they?
Absolutely they do, Richard. Harry Brooke on 184 not out is fourth century in
six tests. England 315 for three as the reign in Wellington gives some respite
to a New Zealand attack that has been bullied by Brooke and Joe Root. Their
partnership is worth 294. It's dragged England from 21 for three. Brooke with
some breathtaking stroke plates taking him to 807 runs in total in his six
tests. No player in the history of test cricket has more runs after nine
innings. For Root, this is a first hundred in eight tests. It was greeted by a
huge cheer by the travelling fans and was the last action before the weather set
in. England 315 for three. Thanks Stefan. Staying with cricket, we now know the
first team through to the Women's T20 World Cup Final as well. Australia, the
reigning champions, beat India by five runs. They've done it again. Can anyone
stop Australia? They seem to be winning practically everything in the women's
game at the moment. Yeah, they are pretty ruthless. This will be their seventh
straight Women's T20 World Cup Final for them. They're also the 50 over
champions, the Ashes holders. England played the host South Africa on Friday.
You'd have to say on form, England had the best chance of beating Australia.
They became the first team in the tournament's history to go past 200 in an
innings in their win over Pakistan this week. And look, a team transformed under
their new head coach John Lewis. But South Africa have the benefit of home
support too. So that's not a foregone conclusion. Ah, from it. And let's just
turn our attention to football now. Man U beat Barcelona in the Europa League.
And after years of struggling, is any signs that these teams are well and truly
on the up again? Yeah, extremely positive signs if you're a Manchester United or
a Barcelona fan. United through to the last 16 draw, winning 2-1 at Old Trafford
to go through 3-2 on aggregate. It was a great tie, really entertaining, a bit
chaotic at times, which made it a lot more fun. Relatively speaking, most
football supporters would take the struggles of United and Barca. But they've
been nowhere near the historic heights in recent years. And that's why they're
playing in the Europa League. But that looks to be changing. And briefly, any
other significant results? Well, the Dutch Giants Ajax are out. They lost 3-1 to
Union Berlin of Germany. Juventus and Roma are among the teams through as well
as are the Ukrainian side, Shakhtar Donetsk. Richard, as ever, thank you. Now
then, troves of historical artefacts are unearthed every day all over the world.
It's the same here in England. And in recent decades, many of those pieces have
been left to gather dust in warehouses because of a lack of space in museums.
Now, the public body, Historic England, says time's running out to find a
solution before the stores fill up completely. Here's our science reporter,
Patrick Hughes. Some of the most interesting archaeological finds made today are
discovered during building works. Archaeological contractors, hired by
developers, can unearth anything from finely decorated Roman metalwork to
ancient Bronze Age tools and pottery. The finds are supposed to go to museums.
But as many museums are running out of storage space, it's becoming increasingly
difficult for contractors to find homes for them. Archaeologists say it's a
missed opportunity for people to learn about their history and heritage.
Historic England and the Arts Council England are talking to the government
about plans to open a national archive that could loan the artefacts out to
museums and researchers. Historic England say they are concerned that if storage
space runs out, councils will no longer be able to compel developers to excavate
sites of archaeological interest and national treasures could be lost forever.
Patrick Hughes there. We return now to Ukraine. Millions of Ukrainians have been
displaced since Russia invaded a year ago. And around the world, many people
have opened their doors to host refugees. One such family are the Baskins from
London. The Jewish family, they saw a plea for help from a Ukrainian woman and
her two sons and decided to welcome them into their home. Initially, they
thought they were just offering support to strangers, but have since discovered
a surprising link between their families that goes back generations. Daniela
Rolfe reports. For almost a year, Anna Lickollet and her two sons, Alex and
Mark, have lived with Shelley Baskin and her family in North London. We just
wanted to help because we felt that as Jewish people, we've kind of been in a
position where we needed help. As everyone got to know each other better, Anna
told Shelley about her grandfather, Nikolai Diki. During the Second World War,
he took in Jewish families, hid them from the Nazis, saved their lives. Years
later, Anna's grandfather was awarded a medal by the Israeli government for his
courage, honouring him as righteous among the nations. When she told Shelley
about him, something clicked. When I got the photo of the medal, I looked at it
and I thought, I know this, that's so weird. I've seen this before. It's the
medal that my grandfather produced when he was alive. Neither woman could quite
believe it, but archive records showed Shelley's grandfather, Moshe Hecht, had
made the exact medal awarded to Anna's grandfather. When my grandfather was
alive, he had a factory for metal work in Israel, so he produced medals for
people who the Israeli government gave medals to, and Anna's grandfather was one
of them. It's unbelievable, and when I told my mum and my father, it's, no.
Maybe it's another situation, yeah, but it's true. You think this will be a
lifelong friendship for you both? Yeah. You'll start with each other now, yeah.
We're like family now. A remarkable report by Daniela Ralph, wrapping up this
edition of the Newsroom programme. Plenty more online, bbc.com.com. This is the
BBC World Service, with the winner of the English as a Second Language prize for
the International Radio Playwriting Competition. My name is Aynoor Karim. I'm a
writer from Kazakhstan in my play. It's a funny story about a student who finds
someone else's passport and wants to give it back to its owner. I thought I'd
better take it to the police station myself. It's on my way. Wait, wait, wait,
wait, wait. Show me the passport. At first, I felt a little bit like I was
limited in the way how I can express myself, but then I like it even more,
because you close your eyes and you just need to imagine... Muslim Adarv. Not a
Kazakh? Why isn't the nationality stated in that passport? Why do you say he's
not a Kazakh? He is a Kazakh, absolutely. I would be happy if people just laugh
and enjoy it. The man lost his passport. He must give it back. Ooh, what a face.
The Passport, Saturday at 19 and Sunday at 12 GMT. BBC World Service, welcome to
Heart and Soul. I'm Peter MacJove and this is my story about leaving the
Catholic Church to follow traditional African spirituality and the reaction I've
received. IFA is the ancient fate of my people, the Yoruba. It's changed my
life, but my family in Nigeria remain devout Christians and they don't yet know
I've converted. Coming out of the IFA closet, that's Heart and Soul just after
the news. BBC News with Neil Nunes. Ukraine's President Vladimir Zelensky has
welcomed a vote at the United Nations calling for the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of Russian troops. The resolution was backed by an
overwhelming majority of countries which Mr Zelensky described as a powerful
signal of global support. Today marks exactly a year since the full-scale
invasion began. China has called in Russia and Ukraine to hold peace talks as
soon as possible. A paper released by the Foreign Ministry said conflict in war
benefited no one and urged all parties to stay rational and exercise restraint.
North Korea has launched four cruise missiles into the sea. It's the latest in a
series of provocative weapons tests. A rare blizzard warning has been issued for
parts of southern California from early Friday through to Saturday evening with
millions of residents told to prepare for unusually cold weather and snow.
Madagascar's government says a powerful storm which battered the island's east
coast has killed at least seven people. Cyclone Freddy is now heading to
Mozambique. A senior federal investigator in the United States has called for an
end to the politicization of a rail disaster in Ohio. Jennifer Humandy was
announcing the findings of a preliminary report into the crash which caused a
major chemical spill three weeks ago. The American billionaire financier Thomas
H. Lee has died. He was 78. Media reports in New York say he shot himself in the
Manhattan headquarters of his investment firm. A Russian Soyuz capsule has taken
off from Kazakhstan to bring back three men stranded on the International Space
Station. The two Russian cosmonauts and their American colleague are due to
return to Earth in September. BBC World News. Hiya, hello. Hiya, hello. Hiya,
hello. BBC World Service, welcome to Heart and Soul. Hello, hello, hello. Hello,
hello, hello. Unusual activities for a rainy afternoon in suburban South London.
A handful of people are gathered in a dinky basement where a British Nigerian
woman is chanting over some food and drink and small wooden statues all arranged
on a mat. This is Ifa, or Ishese, the traditional faith of the Yoruba people and
is growing in popularity, both in its native West Africa and throughout the
diaspora. I'm originally from Brazil, from the city of Salvador. We have one of
the greatest Yoruba diaspora communities in the world. And how long have you
been practicing Ishese? Since last year, I grew up being Catholic, being
Christian, but at some point for me I realised that wasn't working for me. There
was things that I was disagreeing with, like, guilty. Guilt treatment? Yes.
Everything is a sin. Exactly. And I feel I'm able to express my spirituality in
a more free way. I share her dilemma. I too was once a Roman Catholic, but I'm
one of the many people now rediscovering the faith of our ancestors. My name is
Peter Wallachar-McJob. I'm Nigerian, and I'm also a BBC journalist. And for this
week's Heart and Soul, I want to explain my journey, why people like me are
giving up the church for traditional African religion and how those who don't
believe sometimes react. I've come to this ceremony to prepare myself to come
out of the Ifa closet. I'm going to be heading home to see my devoutly Christian
family, and I'm expecting a showdown over my beliefs. All the time, Isha'Sheh
practitioners are demonised. They're ostracised, and nobody stands to our aid.
Omobolanle' Eliyagu is the person officiating at today's ceremony. She is the
Iyaneefa, also known as the Mother of Mysteries, the High Priestess. There are
also Fathers of Mysteries, known as Babalawas, and much more to understand. To
me, Ifa is not a religion. To call Ifa a religion would be to undermine what Ifa
is. Ifa is the esoteric word of Elidumari, by which Elidumari speaks to the
world. Elidumari, also sometimes referred to as Olon, is the supreme God who
created the universe and everything in it. Ifa also has other deities called
Orishas. A popular one is Ishu, the deity of justice who outsiders wrongly
interpret as Satan. It's his statuette that's on show today. As the ceremony
resumes, Ababala will spit gin over Ishu. It's an offering to the God. Then he
splits a colour knot and throws the pieces onto a plate to see how they land.
This is one way of knowing the will of the deities. The first tenet of Ifa is
what's known as Iwaqbele, which is good character. What do we mean by good
character? It's do I respect all the elements that Elidumari has created? Do I
respect the Orishas? Do I respect my fellow devotees? Ifa will speak through the
Babalawas, the priests or the Yannifa, giving direct instructions of what
Elidumari is saying. It's going on for that person, what they need to do, what
they need to not do. It's a divination tradition. You're having direct
communication with God or with the Orishas. Crispin Adegu is another diaspora
devotee who's studying to become a Babalawa. As he explains, Ifa is not just
about submitting to God's will. Devotees are co-workers with the divine. We play
an active role in our own destiny. For example, people usually come to Ifa with
issues like, I really like this guy, is he a suitable husband? Or I'm really
struggling finding work? So it's about taking responsibility. There is a perfect
realisation of you, but your job is to try and figure out what that is and find
it. As a devotee, what is it that one does? How do you profess this religion?
Generally, when you pray, the idea is first you give praise to the Orishas, to
God Almighty, to your ancestors, to the sun, to the moon, to the earth. Then you
give thanks, then you ask for forgiveness, and then finally you ask for the
things you're actually praying for. It makes sense, doesn't it? If you wanted
something from your boss, you'd probably have to say the nice things first.
Yeah, exactly. No one owes you anything. More and more people of African descent
are embracing Ifa, especially as they increasingly reject the colonial past. But
one of the reasons I haven't professed my faith to my family is that some
aspects of Ifa are pretty gruesome. These animal sacrifices are the heart of
what Ifa represents, this blood letting of salt. Can you talk us through that?
Sure. People make offerings to the Orishas, which can be anything from
colonnuts, fruits, flowers, cooked foods, and also animal sacrifice. Everyone
says, oh my God, blood, demonic. But what's happening is you're taking a chicken
and you're offering the life force of that chicken either to clear away negative
forces or to bring forth good things like pregnancy or a new job or new love.
And you say a prayer over the animal, you offer its blood to the shrine and then
you cook it and you eat it. Crispin discovered Ifa quite by chance. He's a
professional musician and went to Cuba to learn all about the traditional drums
known as batak. Those drums are used in Ifa worship and he soon began exploring
the Orishas, spurred on by his own half Jamaican ancestry. My own journey to
started in an unplanned way. In 2013, I was living in the UK and I had a dead
end job. I was a devout Catholic at the time, but I had already started having
some reservations. I'd always wanted to visit religious sites like the Vatican.
And when I did go, it felt like mere tourism. The spiritual encounter was hoping
to have was lacking. Out of desperation, I decided to try my wife's Pentecostal
religion, but that didn't move me either. They wanted 10 percent of my income.
At that point, I just lost it. Then in 2014, I had the chance encounter, which
changed my life forever. Hello. I escaped a man living in South Africa who had
not seen since university, my old friend, Shegmu. You know, I remember the first
time we had this conversation because you look different from what I remember
you as when we were in uni. You know, you had like dreadlocks, carrie shells and
beads on your neck. And then you told me that we were babalau. I think I was
expressing some disillusion with religion. You know where you're meant to be.
You're not doing your job. I remember I can tell that you're a born leader, but
you can't be doing many out jobs. You need to be in an institution where you're
present yourself as a leader because that's what that Odu was saying at the time
when I casted that Odu. An Odu is a divine message. In my case, the Odu told me
things about my life that Shegmu couldn't possibly have known himself. There's
no way you would know that I was in a job that I didn't like. So I found that a
bit surprising when you said that. You see, once you cast that effect and that
effect comes up, it tells you clearly that this is what's going on with Mr. A.
Mr. A is in this situation. He's meant to be with a different height in life.
And I stopped doing the job that I was doing. Then I started to travel the world
and then I go into the BBC, you know. The IFA devotees will always be at
advantage than a regular guy. I was convinced. Slowly I overcame the taboo
around IFA. I became a devotee and I've never looked back. But I've also never
told my family. So now I've got to go back home to come clean about this big
elephant in the room. My hometown, Abeokuta, is a mid-sized city about 80
kilometres from Lagos. Like most places in this part of Nigeria, it's noticeably
Christian and my old local church of St. Anne's is packed for Sunday Mass. This
church for many, many years was my home. I was born here. I was baptized right
here in this church in 1974. And I grew up here a devout Catholic and altar
server. I had my first early communion. I had my confirmation. So coming back
here today, I have mixed feelings. For those who have seen the church, that time
we have the same vision, the same aim. And I know that time we're forthcoming,
very hardworking, going to the church to clean the church almost every weekend.
You know, we are just passionate about the whole thing. Michael is one of my
oldest friends and still attends this church every Sunday. Back when we were
teenagers, we started the religious group together, the St. Augustine Youth
Society. We wanted to be the best, most devout kids. We even gave Michael a
nickname, Monsignor. There were a lot of people there encouraging us to grow up
the Christian way. So it was a very good thing. And I believe and know that
those things still propel in us. You know, because we're just turned into
intruders and mentors. You know the reason? Because we saw ourselves as brothers
and sisters. And I just thought most times I tried to imagine that if eventually
someone decided we're going to marry at the end of the day, why don't we marry
within ourselves? It's really exciting for our private. It's hard to hear
memories of our former solidarity in Christ, knowing that I no longer share
those values. But at least I don't have to make any big revelation to Michael.
He's seen my Facebook page, so he already knows I'm not going to church anymore.
The very first day I saw that, I was shocked. I was like, I hope this is not
going to be true. As a journalist, I don't really blame you. You need to dig
deep for you to see what's actually happening. But there are some concerns. My
first concern is, I really don't want to miss your path. Secondly, I know Mommy
very well. When Daddy was alive, I know him very well. Daddy is no more. God
dressed his soul. But Mommy is still very much alive. He's right. My devout
Catholic father died two years ago, not knowing his son had left the faith. And
crucially, I've yet to tell my mom. The news is likely to distress her. This
isn't going to be easy. Next up is my brother Felix. He must know something of
what I'm going through, because he's left Roman Catholicism for the Pentecostal
Church. He's seen what happens when you act on your conscience. Pentecostal
Christianity believes that. Being a Christian is not what you profess. You have
to live that lifestyle. And you need God to assist you. Am I right then that
being a Pentecostal is a better option than being in Orthodox settings like the
Catholic Church, for instance? Okay, that's a good question. But at the end of
the day, God is not going to judge your son. Did you go to a Catholic or do you
go to a Pentecostal Church? He's going to judge your son. Are you a Christian?
There are two main of Christianitys, people that live like Jesus Christ. I feel
that if that does help me live according to the same ideals that Jesus espouses
in Christian teaching, the devotee's ideal is to have humility, respect, love,
and compassion. But I'm feeling nervous now. Felix is like so many others here
in Nigeria. He sees Christianity as the only faith worth following. At the end
of the day, we believe that the God that you read about in the Bible is the real
deal. We don't believe that there's another one or somewhere. Now, the Almighty
God is saying that if I want to have a good relationship with me, it has to be
via asserting my son as the ultimate. Every other thing is fake. It's a fairly
uncompromising line. What would Felix think of my day? I decide to just hint at
it. Would you consider traditional belief as evil or demonic, satanic evil?
Traditional religion. Where? If the practice has to do with human sacrifice,
fetish practice and others, of course it's demonic. When we say it's evil. The
larger society are splintering black. They cannot handle this because... I'm on
Skype again, this time to another old friend, Femi, who used to worship with our
group in the Bay of Quetta. Now, he's an if I devotee like me, but he's still
very much in the closet, scared of the stigma. They judge you, they nail you,
they condemn you. Yeah, it's almost like we're devil-worshipping, isn't it?
Exactly, exactly. Is it hidden then? Are you making an effort to hide it so that
you don't want people to know about it, so they don't judge you? Yes, I'll say
so, 100%. So, your elder brother, is he aware of this transition? Oh, no. What
about your mother? No, she's not. Does your wife know? No, she doesn't. Only my
father. Only your dad? It was Femi's dad who introduced him to IFA. Femi became
very ill, and they both wanted some deep spiritual advice. But one of the most
eye-popping things that he told me is that his dad still goes to Mass, and so
does he. I've tried to create what I would call imbalance. Are you saying you
still keep your Catholicism? Yes, as you do. The classic case is my own father.
I was shocked when you told me, because when you're talking about how a devout
Christian father looks, your dad is the epitome of that. Exactly. Calm, gentle.
I would never, ever believe that somebody like that. There you go. There you go.
So, you have so many of them, so many of them that play so well, because they
know it's a lost cause. It seems that even as some people profess Christianity,
or for that matter Islam, many also consult your wishes when the chips are down,
asking their own ancestors for help when they are their lowest ebb. That gives
me comfort, as I contemplate telling my dear mom about my own conversion. First,
though, I'm off to see another brother, Emmanuel. He's younger than me, but I've
got some trepidation because he's another evangelical. The likelihood that he'll
criticize my spiritual path is high. Emmanuel is big on faith. He says we are
facing a salary being paid each month, and in a car going when we turn the
ignition. So why not faith in God? And he thinks I should have more faith, even
as my instincts take me away from Christianity. You know, we are all Christians,
but now I seem to be like the black sheep, if you like, but become really
interested in African religion. One thing I want to tell you today is this. I
want you to write it down. It is for God to introduce himself to each person.
There are things he wants us to do. There are things he wants us to get. The
insight is also to know. That is why people will still go on different sojourns.
You know, even like yours, I feel that at the end of the day, your Christianity
is going to be deeper. So you feel like this African spirituality is just like a
tangent of sorts. What God has to say over an issue is actually the truth. So
for yours, one of the things I need you to be doing is a short prayer. Lord,
reveal yourself to me. You understand? So if I conscientiously pray to say God,
reveal yourself to me, I will snap out of this thing that I'm doing and find my
way back. It is going to be a transformation. God is aware of what is happening
to you. This is humbling. Emmanuel is so forgiving, so magnanimous, and his
faith in Christianity. And as he sees it, Christianity's ability to bring me
back from the brink is moving. I love my family. I don't want to hurt them or
offend them, but I don't want to leave a lie either. I need some advice, and I
know where to get it. I've just learned that if I said my old friend in South
Africa, who I scribed when I was in England, has now returned to Nigeria. What's
it like for you here? Remember, he gave me that Udu, or spiritual message, all
those years ago. I want to tell you today, it's just the beginning. You've not
seen anything yet. This Udu is a great Udu. This Udu says you are a chosen
child. You're not in this world just to do regular things that every other
person does. No. You're going to do yours exceptionally. That's what this Udu is
saying. This Udu will never come down without fulfilling everything that has
come to do. If a shaker's take on my dilemma is unequivocal. My advice to you,
don't relent in your morning prayers. Don't relent in the work that you need to
do to propel you on your destiny. Because the advice says that having a good
destiny is not enough. But knowing how to go on that path to fulfill that
destiny is very important. If you continue to do that, you will get to the
eyesight of your destiny. Your mum is going to cut it short. Why do you think
our society, especially in Nigeria, look at your vast spirituality as evil? Why
is that attitude still here? Well, the reason for that is ignorance. A lot of
our people do not love themselves. A lot of our people are still under slavery.
They are still brainwashed. They just love embracing other people's things. Let
them continue that way. This is the point where I finally have to put this
matter to bed. It's time to be honest with my mother. You know, I remember our
days where we go to morning mass, and after we are through, we go to our usual
Sunday mass, then we go back in the evening for benediction, all of that. So I
think out of all of us, my Catholicism was second to none. Am I right? I am
right. My wish has always been that all my children should attend the same
church that I attend. You know, we had all these songs. Do you remember them? Om
Nes Densas, Om Nes Po Poli. I have a beautiful relationship with my mother. I
have always been in mommy's boy. Then about three years ago, she saw me wearing
a necklace and bracelet, which signify if I devotional, and she queried it. We
haven't addressed the matter since. No. It's like you went back in time. So I
see you are very happy, mommy. It brings a lot of smile to your face. The reason
why I want to have this chat, mom, is because, you know, I speak openly about my
issues. And maybe since 2013, I've not been to church. And now I find myself on
this journey of traditional African spirituality. There. I've said it. My mom's
face tells me all is not well. I don't think you have my support. You don't have
my support. That babala would there, whatever name you call it. Somebody that is
practicing the African religion, most of them, they tell a lot of lies. I wanted
not to be disappointed in me. Perhaps there's some way I can soften the blow a
bit. I remember my talk with Femi and raised that. There's a friend of mine. We
are on the same path. But he practices it in his home, and then he goes to Mars.
And he said to me, he realizes they don't really interfere with each other. Just
like our grandfathers and great-grandfathers will have done when the Europeans
came. They carried on with their ishe sheh, because they know that when problem
arises, that's what they will rely on. I don't care to that. I don't buy that.
You can call your God whatever name that you want, when you are on your own. But
not is he sheh weh. You have to love God and love human beings. Exactly. So
these are the things that are there. The concept of homo lua b, meaning to
behave appropriately, you know, to be kind. That's exactly what they say. It is
the fetish, the fetish side of it. What is the fetish? When you need to kill a
cow, kill a chicken, put the blood or something, something, all those ones. The
expression on my mother's face almost makes me cry. I immediately want to tell
her it's okay, and that I will abandon my plans. But then I realize, this is the
moment where I need to rise to the occasion. For me, this is a cultural
renaissance. My forefathers, they were decent people, and they had their own
commune with the divine. So I'm saying, the Africans, who didn't have the Jesus
encounter in their own spirituality, are we saying they are all doomed for
hellfire? Are they all going to perish? I'm going to be achieved by the grace of
God very soon. And I want my son, my pitta, to come back to the Christian faith.
In fact, that will be the greatest present that you can give me. And that was
that. Mom didn't want to talk about it anymore. But it's okay. I'm no longer in
the closet. I'm finally true to myself and to my loved ones. Before I leave
Nigeria, I'm going to do something very special. I'm about to take part in an
IFA ceremony, and this one is actually for me. It's going to be a series of
worship, devotions and prayers. And the purpose is to set me up spiritually for
the year ahead, such that I am one step ahead of every circumstance. Again, the
priest spits libation over effigies. He prays for blessings in my workplace and
protection from all dangers, and raises a series of curses on my enemies. At
last, I feel confirmed in my new faith. It's been a rollercoaster of emotions
for me, but this is how I see it. If the Chinese, Indians, Jews, Arabs,
Europeans and more can all embrace their own spirituality, why should I, an
African, a Yoruba man, consider my heritage, my culture, my tradition, to be
devil-worship? That's all from Hearts and Soul this week, and from me, Peter
McJobe. The programme was produced by Mike Gallagher. To hear more stories, go
to bbcworldservice.com. This is the BBC World Service, and on The Inquiry this
week......at bbcworldservice.com Discovery. In the final episode of Bad Blood,
we look to the future. We hear the story of the rogue Chinese scientist and a
pair of genetically modified twins, and ask, what are the cutting-edge genetic
technologies now available? And what kind of future?