TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-14H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 FM 198 longwave on digital radio and BBC sounds. This is BBC Radio 4. Hello and
welcome to the World at One with me Sarah Montagu. After The Telegraph publishes
WhatsApp messages from the former Health Secretary Matt Hancock, Labour says the
Covid-19 public inquiry is taking too long and wants answers now. Nobody denies
that dealing with Covid was unbelievably difficult, especially in the early
days. But care home residents and staff were simply not a priority. The
newspaper claims Matt Hancock rejected advice from senior medical officers early
in the pandemic. He says that's not true. The Prime Minister says leave it to
the inquiry. Is it too late for that? We'll ask what we knew about testing
capacity and transmission at the time. The Greek president declares three days
of national mourning after a train crash near the city of Larissa killed at
least 36 people. Nothing has been left from the two first carriages after the
impact. The two trains they were travelling at a great speed and the drivers
didn't know that the other was coming. Also in the programme. We celebrate the
singer-songwriter Joni Mitchell as she becomes only the third woman to be
awarded the Gershwin Prize by the US Library of Congress. The BBC News is read
by Jane Steele. A spokesperson for the former Health Secretary Matt Hancock says
it is categorically untrue that he rejected advice to give coronavirus tests to
all those going into care homes in England. The allegations are based on more
than 100,000 WhatsApp messages leaked to the Daily Telegraph. The Prime Minister
has refused to comment and insisted the Covid inquiry was the right way to
investigate the government's handling of the pandemic. Here's our political
correspondent Ian Watson. A series of messages from April the 14th 2020 suggest
that Matt Hancock initially welcomed advice to test everyone going into care
homes in England. He appeared to change his mind later though and only gave a
commitment to test those who'd come from hospitals. A spokesman for Mr Hancock
said that had been because more widespread testing hadn't been deliverable.
Subsequent messages suggested Mr Hancock managed to exceed his target of 100,000
tests a day by the end of that month because the figure was based on the number
of tests dispatched rather than those completed. Mr Hancock's spokesman said all
of his messages had been handed over to the official Covid inquiry which was the
proper place to make an objective assessment. At PMQs Sir Keir Starmer called
for that inquiry to conclude by the end of the year. The Prime Minister said the
inquiry was independent and that he wouldn't comment on the piecemeal
information that had been leaked. In the middle of April 2020 around 20,000
Covid tests were carried out each day in the UK. Our social affairs editor
Alison Halt has been looking back at what was happening in care homes at the
time. During the week when Matt Hancock sent his messages about testing warnings
about the impact of Covid on care home residents were reaching a crescendo.
Council bosses told the government reliable testing was needed and generally
social care appeared an afterthought. The number of residents dying from Covid
also hit its peak. It was said at the time the capacity to test people was very
limited. Experts later concluded the two main ways Covid got into care homes was
from patients discharged from hospital and through staff moving between homes.
At the time there were few new residents from elsewhere. It may be hard to
square Mr Hancock's leaked messages with his claim that a protective ring was
thrown around care homes but probably only the public inquiry armed with all the
facts will be able to judge the decisions made. The chair of the Covid-19 public
inquiry Baroness Heather Hallett has insisted it will not be a whitewash. She
said the process would not drag on for decades and that she wanted it to reach
conclusions and make recommendations as soon as possible. The Chinese foreign
ministry has rejected a claim from the FBI that Covid-19 most likely came from a
government-controlled lab in Wuhan saying it has no credibility whatsoever.
There has been no new scientific evidence to support the US Bureau's theory.
Some other American agencies believe it developed naturally. Our China
correspondent Stephen Macdonald reports from Beijing. The US intelligence
community had a history of misdeeds involving fraud and deception according to
China's foreign ministry spokesperson. As such, Mao Ning said their conclusions
regarding the origins of Covid-19 had no credibility. This followed FBI director
Christopher Wray saying his agency had believed for a long time that the
coronavirus could most likely be traced back to a lab leak in China. Mao Ning
said Covid origin studies shouldn't be politicised. However, she also repeated
conspiracy theories regarding a potential global source of the virus, saying
there were concerns about a US lab at Fort Detrick. More than 200 police
officers are using thermal imaging cameras, drones and dogs as part of the
search for a missing baby in Brighton. The parents, Constance Martin and Mark
Gordon, have been travelling the country for 53 days to avoid the police. They
were arrested on Monday on suspicion of child neglect and were then re-arrested
yesterday on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. The governor of the
Bank of England, Andrew Bailey, has said it may be necessary to further increase
interest rates. Speaking at an event in London, Mr Bailey said no decision had
yet been taken. He added that the economy was behaving as expected, although
inflation was slightly lower than predicted. Police in Greece say they have
arrested a station master after two trains collided head-on, killing at least 36
people. More than 60 others have been taken to hospital. The crash happened near
the city of Larissa. The Greek prime minister has vowed to get to the bottom of
what happened as the country enters three days of national mourning. Our Europe
correspondent Jessica Parker reports. The president of Greece has described the
crash as an unimaginable tragedy. Just before midnight, two services which
authorities say were on the same track collided. One was carrying freight, the
other around 350 passengers. Many, it's reported, were young people heading back
to Thessaloniki after a Greek Orthodox holiday. Those on the scene say that the
first two carriages were completely destroyed. The cause of the collision isn't
yet clear, but police say the station master at the nearby city of Larissa has
been arrested. Rescue workers have been searching for any remaining survivors in
what's being described as Greece's worst train crash in living memory.
Researchers have shown that some birds of a feather really do flock together. A
study of captive flamingos showed that boulder birds had stronger and more
reliable relationships with others sharing similar personalities. Scientists at
the University of Westminster and the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust also found
that submissive flamingos tended to spend their time with birds of a similar
character. In cricket, England are struggling to chase a target of 210 against
Bangladesh to win the first one-day international against Bangladesh in Miapur.
A short time ago, the tourists were 161 for six. Jane, thanks. What has long
been clear about the UK response to the Covid pandemic is that something went
wrong in care homes for older people. In the early weeks of the disease, their
residents accounted for a third of all Covid deaths. The protective ring that
the government claims to have thrown around homes was not very protective. That
has long been known. The question has always been whether more could have been
done, whether given what was known about the disease in the early days and in
the understandable chaos of government with a pandemic sweeping the globe,
whether mistakes could have been avoided then and, of course, could be avoided
if we ever face the same situation again. The Telegraph's Splash Today says the
then Health Secretary Matt Hancock rejected his Chief Medical Officer's advice
to test all those going into care homes, instead choosing to test only those
coming from hospital. Now, it's a story that's come from Matt Hancock's WhatsApp
messages, all of which have been given to the Telegraph by the journalist Isabel
Oakeshott, who helped Mr Hancock write his pandemic diaries and who has decided
to make them public because she says she fears the Covid public inquiry will be
a colossal whitewash. But the picture the Telegraph paints is only from a
selection of the WhatsApp messages. Matt Hancock says it is wrong and libelous.
In a few minutes, we'll look at what's been claimed and what testing capacity
was at the time. But the subject is currently being debated in the House of
Commons because of an urgent question from the Labour Party. It also came up at
Prime Minister's questions this lunchtime when the Labour leader Keir Starmer
used his final question to ask about the Telegraph's lockdown files. I don't
want to finish this session without asking about the Covid disclosures in
today's Daily Telegraph. Now, we don't know the truth of what happened yet.
There are too many messages and too many unknowns. But families across the
country, families across the country will look at this and the sight of
politicians writing books, portraying themselves as heroes or selectively
leaking messages will be insulting and ghoulish spectacle for them. At the heart
of this is every family who made enormous sacrifices for the good of the country
or who tragically lost loved ones. The country deserves better. The Covid
inquiry has already cost the taxpayer Â£85 million and hasn't heard from a single
government minister yet. So can the Prime Minister assure the House no more
delays, that the inquiry will have whatever support it needs to report by the
end of this year? Mr Speaker, the last couple of years were an incredibly
difficult time for everyone involved in the health service and I pay tribute to
all their hard work and I know the House will join me in that regard. Now,
rather than comment on piecemeal bits of information, I'm sure the honourable
gentleman will agree with me that the right way for these things to be looked at
is the Covid inquiry. That's why we've established the Covid inquiry and he will
know, he will know as I have, he has mentioned it one or two times before that
he was a lawyer in a previous life, that there is a proper process to these
things. It is an independent inquiry, it has the resources it needs, it has the
powers it needs and what we should all do in this House is let them get on and
do their job. Well Matt Hancock's spokesman said this morning that the full
documents have already been made available to the inquiry which he said is the
proper place for an objective assessment so true lessons can be learned. The
chair of the Covid-19 public inquiry, Baroness Heather Hallett, referred to the
Telegraph story at the beginning of proceedings today. May I correct some
misunderstandings in the reports of yesterday's proceedings and the release
today of government WhatsApp messages? First, this inquiry will not drag on for
decades. I have been determined from the outset that the inquiry must reach
conclusions and make recommendations as soon as possible if we are to achieve
our aim of learning lessons and reducing suffering in any future pandemic. That
is why I sought the express agreement of the then Prime Minister to issue
interim reports. So with respect to certain commentators, comparisons to other
countries are unhelpful. Furthermore, I wish to emphasise there will be no
whitewash. Well how accurate and fair a picture has emerged in the lockdown
files? And did Isabel Oakeshott do the right thing in breaking her non-
disclosure agreement to give the messages to the Telegraph? Camilla Tominy is
associate editor at the Telegraph. Good afternoon. Afternoon. Can I start by
just asking you, do you accept that what emerges, because it is just WhatsApp
messages, is a sort of partial picture? I think we admit that in the copy. We
say that this is only part of wider conversations. However, when you have been
presented with 2.3 million words and you can see the rapidity and regularity
with which messages were pinged on WhatsApp that then informed major decision
making, then we think there is a legitimate public interest for the public to
know what was said at the time in these messages. I suppose it is then what you
claim from that, because I think everyone is accepting that these are the
WhatsApp messages, I think even Matt Hancock does, but his criticism is that
there has been some selection in what is being portrayed. Yeah, we are baffled
by that, the suggestion that we have somehow doctored these messages. It is
simply not true. The part which he alleges to be missing is actually there and
we have published in full from the very beginning. I think Isabel Oakeshott
wrote in her commentary, which was in today's paper, that she obviously worked
with Mr. Hancock on the pandemic diaries and she gives him credit for wanting to
push for more openness. I think there was a point at which they put the book
before the cabinet office and people there wanted to redact a lot of it and he
pushed forward. Some of the messages from early March 2020 have been deleted,
but this is day one of, as you can imagine, a pretty fulsome investigation and
therefore more text messages and other analysis will be forthcoming. Okay, but
what's not, so the headline on the Telegraph from your splash, Hancock rejected
Whitty's advice on care home tests. What is not in here is what has been
suggested, is a meeting and it's referred to by one of the civil servants. I
wasn't in the testing meeting he refers to. A meeting where we understand there
was a suggestion that Mr. Hancock couldn't follow the advice of the chief
medical officer for England because there wasn't the testing capacity to do so.
Now, do you accept that that's a possible, that that is possible, despite what
the Telegraph wrote? No, of course, we've never made a secret of the fact that
we have a partial account of some of the decision making that went on. We've got
the health secretary's own messages on the issue and the issue in particular,
you're mentioning here, Sarah, this idea of Professor Chris Whitty saying that
he would recommend testing for all going into nursing homes and the decision
then being taken that actually just those who were coming from hospital should
be mandatory tested and not those coming from the community is a decision that
Mr. Hancock appears to have made at the last minute and it is double checked
with his own age. You can see that narrative playing out. You can also see the
direction of the government's decision making in the guidance that was
published. Okay, so you stand by this word rejected on the front page, that he
actually rejected it wasn't just that he couldn't fulfill it. He, your argument
is... He says, he says that would muddy the waters. That's the phrase that he
uses. So, I mean, his justification for his decision making is up to him, isn't
it? He says he was told last night that this was going to be in the paper. Was
he given any chance to fill in the gaps to give a response to this? Well, he's
given a response to this. So... He said he's going to speak at the public
inquiry. What I wonder is when did the Telegraph go to him and say, we're
running this, you have a right of reply? I think we gave him the right of reply
as we always would when we're about to publish a story. So what, late last
night? Well, it went online at 10.45. So what, it wasn't actually party to that.
So I'm just wondering, when did you go to the former health secretary to say,
this is what we're going to publish? I don't know, because I wasn't the person
who went to the former health secretary to say this is what we're going to
publish. Did you, did you have, I wonder, I mean, the story arises because
Isabel Oakeshott was given all these WhatsApp messages when she wrote the book
with him, his pandemic diaries. She signed an NDA. She decided to break that.
She could now be sued. He's said, and he has suggested actually, what you've
written is libelous. But do you think, would you have done what she did? Well, I
think that's probably a question for Isabel and why she's done it. She's written
extensively about why she did. And she has written that, so she's given her
explanation. I support Isabel's decision making wholeheartedly. In the interest
of openness, transparency and accountability, she felt that she was sitting on a
huge amount of information that the public had a right to know. We can question
Mr. Hancock's decision making when it came to deciding to hand over the entire
contents of his own WhatsApp messages to a journalist and the potential pitfalls
of that. Equally, we can hand over any private information to Isabel Oakeshott.
Sarah, I'm not a minister, so that's a bit of an odd question. No journalist
would hand over their entire â I mean, journalists tend to not hand over their
entire phones to other journalists. You mean journalists don't trust other
journalists? Well, I trust other journalists to try and tell the truth. I think
that's what we're trying to get to here. Find your line of inquiry slightly odd
as a fellow journalist, to be perfectly honest. Well, I suppose it's just, I
mean, it's one of the things that come out of it as to why she has decided to do
this. She's decided to do it in the public interest. That's the point that she's
made in The Telegraph. That's the point that's been made in The Telegraph
Leader. We had an environment back in 2020, and I think listeners to this will
understand that government ministers faced unprecedented times and decision
making had to be expedited. But it's perfectly legitimate to question how the
decisions were made, to ask whether the normal protocols went dangerously out of
the window as people made public health policy that affected the lives and
liberties of the entire country. It's perfectly right and correct, I would
suggest, to apply a degree of journalistic scrutiny to that. OK. Well, Camilla
Tomliney, thank you so much for talking to us, Associate Editor at The
Telegraph. Well, let's turn now to what is being claimed in the story. That, as
we heard there, Matt Hancock rejected Chris Whitty's advice to test all of those
going into care homes. Could he have followed the scientist's advice and tested
all those, everyone going in, or at that point in the middle of April, was there
not enough testing capacity? Now, the Care Minister, Helen Whateley, was called
to answer an urgent question about this in the House of Commons within the past
hour, and she said decisions about tests were dictated by the limited capacity
at the time. The importance of testing was never in doubt, and there was full
agreement on that in every part of government, from the Chief Medical Officer to
the Health Secretary to the Prime Minister. But in a situation where we had the
capacity to test at most a few thousand each day, tough decisions about
prioritisation had to be made, decisions that were taken on the best public
health advice available. Well, she also said that advice was given and decisions
were made through conversations and meetings on forums other than WhatsApp. I
can say to her, for instance, that a meeting to discuss the implementation of
the advice on testing was not referenced in the WhatsApp messages that she is
talking about. But, for instance, there is an email following exactly this
exchange that she's referring to that says, we can press ahead straight away
with hospitals testing patients who are going to care homes, and we should
aspire to as soon as capacity allows, and when we've worked out an operational
way of delivering this, that everyone going into a care home from the community
could be tested. Well, Professor Alan McNally is Director of Birmingham
University's Microbiology and Infection Institute. He helped set up the Milton
Keynes Lighthouse Testing Lab. It was the first of the lighthouse labs, the mega
labs that were set up to provide PCR testing. Good afternoon, Professor McNally.
Good afternoon. Now, the day that we're talking about when this message was sent
from the then Health Secretary, Matt Hancock, about testing was, I think it was
the 14th of April in 2020. If you cast your mind back to what the situation was
then, what can you tell us about testing at that time? On that given date was a
period in time where we had been in Milton Keynes for a few weeks, and we
basically were at the stage where we were ready to really ramp up operations,
and I actually remember it was the April 15th and 16th where at the Milton
Keynes Lab, we switched on all of the systems that would allow us to automate
the testing and ramp up into the tens of thousands of tests per day. So it's
true that on the 14th of April, the testing capacity was limited, so in the
Milton Keynes Lab we did a couple of thousand tests that day. But we were very,
very much in the middle of the ramp up that within a couple of weeks would have
seen us deliver just at Milton Keynes, somewhere in the region of 30 to 40,000
tests per day. Okay, and so what the argument is that it's not fair to say what
the capacity is on the day that decision or that conversation was held, because
it was what, known that it was going to be ramped up? Yes, absolutely. We were
all working towards the 100,000 tests per day target, and there were daily
meetings between senior people at the Milton Keynes Lab and senior officials at
the Department of Health to update on progress towards automation, towards the
targets we had been set, and at no stage did anything happen in the laboratory
where we thought we might have to tell the Department of Health and Social Care
that we might have to move our targets, the targeted date where we went fully
automated and went 24 hours, seven days a week operation. That was very clearly
a shared plan with shared timelines that were all on target. So if in the middle
of April the Chief Medical Officer for England advises that all people going
into care homes should be tested, you are saying that within, what, a week or so
that could have been done? I think, again, I guess as someone who was doing the
testing, and I was never in a position to dictate how the tests should be used
and how the testing capacity should be used, what I would say is that I would
find it very difficult for anyone to say that they were not aware of the fact
that by the end of April, testing capacity would have exponentially increased
from where it was on the 14th of April. Although, just to be clear, what we
know, and it's clear again in these messages that are in the Telegraph, the
testing capacity at the end of April, that target was for 100,000, but that was
100,000 tests being sent out, not processed? Yes, but I can tell you that on the
28th of April was the date that in Milton Keynes we went to 24 hours a day,
seven days operation with shifts, and on the 28th of April, just in Milton
Keynes, we delivered 30,000 tests that day. My understanding is that on that day
there were around about 70,000 tests performed and results reported, so actually
the discrepancy between those two values is not enormous. Okay, so there was
testing capacity, the question then, I suppose one would naturally then ask is,
it's who you prioritise for those tests? Exactly, and this is something that I
was, on programmes like your own and many others, this was something that I was
trying to advocate throughout, was the 100,000 tests a day target was fine and
admirable and it was good because it pushed the labs to really speed up the
processes with which they were automating testing, but 100,000 tests a day is
only useful if you think about where they're best deployed, and again I guess
that came down to policy, and that came down to policy makers deciding on how
the 100,000 tests per day were going to be used. Right, Professor Alan McNally,
thank you very much. Well, let's consider now what we knew about the virus and
how it spread at the time. Peter Openshaw is Professor of Experimental Medicine
at Imperial College London, former member of Nervtag, the group that advises the
government on new and emerging threats from respiratory viruses and was often on
our airwaves. Professor Openshaw, welcome back to the programme. Hello. When you
read these WhatsApp messages from the then Health Secretary, does it, I suppose
first of all it reminds you of the time, but it reminds us all of a time when we
knew much less, I suppose. Yes, I think it's difficult looking back to remember
just how many uncertainties there were. The scientific information was pouring
in from every quarter during that period, and we really didn't know many things
that we now take for granted. I think, you know, there is obviously a pretty
widespread consensus amongst most scientists that masks, for example, are pretty
highly effective if used properly, the right sort of masks and properly worn,
but at the time there was complete uncertainty about whether masks would be
useful in a community setting, and there was a great shortage of supplies. And I
think the discussion you've just had about the ramping up of testing, I think,
showed what a fantastic national effort that was to try to provide enough
testing to be useful in testing people going into care homes. It was, we really
were on the knife edge of many decisions, and I didn't envy the politicians in
having to make those decisions on quite complex sets of evidence. I mean, we
knew that it was the elderly who were particularly affected then, didn't we? I
mean, that was something we knew quite early on. Yes, that came out very, very
clearly that the major risk factor for severe disease and death was being old,
and particularly being frail and old with multiple comorbidities. And the
decision at the time was to focus testing on hospitals. Was that, with what we
know now, was that, and what we knew at the time, was that the logical thing?
Yes, I think looking back at the papers that were being circulated at that time,
there was increasing awareness that there was quite a lot of transmission going
on in hospitals. Not only between patients, but also between staff and patients,
and that there was quite a lot of asymptomatic transmission, which was another
thing that we hadn't really known until this sort of stage of the pandemic. So I
think there was a lot of new information coming out, which was feeding into that
discussion. And I can see why, if priorities had to be set, that the priority
was on testing people going out from hospital into care homes, because that was
clearly high risk in that background of a lot of transmission in hospitals
occurring. Okay, so what, do you remember though having concerns about care
homes, or when you see the sequencing of the messaging at the time, does it make
sense to you? It does make absolute sense. I think there was a great deal of
concern about care homes, them being a very high risk environment, and also what
would happen in that sort of environment if the virus was spreading within care
homes and within staff. You talk about the huge amount of information that was
coming out, new information all the time. We have a picture, one of the
astonishing things about this story in the Telegraph, is the picture of
government that emerges of how much is on WhatsApp, an awful lot of, you know,
fast moving, obviously fast moving narrative provided by it. What did you make
of the way it operated at the time? Did you think, because you know, we've had
warnings of course that we need to be better prepared if we're facing, for
example, bird flu. Was there something that you remember from your dealings with
government that you thought this is not how it should operate? I think that the
way in which the committees were operating was extremely well organized and
correct. The very experienced civil servants were really doing an extraordinary
job in getting all the papers ready, in getting a good discussion going, and
then in summarizing those discussions and feeding them to ministers. I think
it's important to emphasize that we as scientists were not then at all included
in discussions that went on between politicians, we were not on their WhatsApp
groups and so on. That was happening completely separately from the scientific
advice. Professor Peter Openshaw, thank you very much. Now then, at least 36
people have died in Greece after a train carrying hundreds of passengers
collided with a freight train. Police say the local station master has been
charged with manslaughter by negligence. Helena Smith is the Guardian's
correspondent in Greece. And Helena, good afternoon. Good afternoon. What is the
latest information on what they think caused this crash? Well, the arrested
local station master is citing technical failure. The focus has definitely been
on the impoverished infrastructure on which the Greek railway network is based.
It's also focused on staff shortages and apparently an inoperative automatic
signaling structure at the site of the crash. Probably the worst thing that
we've just heard and has just come through is that the death toll will rise.
It's expected to rise above 40, which the state broadcaster is currently putting
it at precisely because there are so many missing. There are between 50 and 60
passengers that to date have not been accounted for, Sarah. Right, so it could
rise by a very large amount. That's right. It could almost double. Are they
still searching for survivors? They are. They are. So many hours after the
crash, the head-on collision took place just before midnight on Tuesday, Greek
time. They are amid the smouldering wreckage and debris at the site, still
looking for possible survivors trapped in the wreckage. It's quite
extraordinary. But from what you're saying, although this station master has
been charged, there's still a suggestion that it was down to a technical issue.
There is. The inquiry has only just been launched. He has given written and
verbal testimony and police are independently conducting their own inquiry. And
a lot of criticism is very generally being leveled at the state, as I said, the
impoverished state of the Greek railway network, which was shorn of staff in the
long-running debt crisis that the country suffered when international lenders,
namely the European Union, demanded that there be several cuts in staff,
primarily of public sector utilities like the rail network. Helena. Helena
Smith, thank you very much. A project launches today which will see self-driving
buses carrying passengers in Sunderland. From March next year, you'll be able to
board a service between the bus station, the university and Sunderland Royal
Hospital, which will operate without the need for a driver. It's one of a number
of projects which will see autonomous vehicles operating on the roads of the UK.
The BBC's North of England reporter, Roan Bridge, has been to see what it looks
like. So you just step on? Yeah. Come on inside. I'm being driven around in an
electric shuttle bus on a nondescript industrial estate in Coventry, which is
the home of the automotive technology company, Arrigo. Although there's a driver
in the cab, the shuttle bus is actually driving itself. I'm Richard Fairchild.
I'm the director of UK projects for Arrigo. So the vehicle uses a suite of
different kinds of sensors, LiDAR sensors which fire laser beams out to find the
distance between any objects in the vehicle. Also cameras, so you can decide
what an object is, because you need to know the difference between a postbox
which isn't going to move or a cyclist which might be moving faster than a
pedestrian. So we use all those different sensors and we use algorithms to work
out where the vehicle is in space, what's around it and if it's safe to proceed.
Although I'm riding it on an industrial estate, from March next year it'll carry
passengers on a mile-long route between Sunderland City Centre, the university
campus and the Sunderland Royal Hospital. It's one of seven schemes that are
sharing Â£81 million of government and industry funding to develop self-driving
vehicles. For the pilot, the vehicles on public roads will either have a safety
driver or someone monitoring the vehicle remotely who can take over. The bus
giant Stagecoach is involved in three of the seven projects, including a full-
size bus that will operate in Edinburgh. Stephen Russell from Stagecoach East
Scotland says a computer-driven ride should be a safer one. They can see 360
degrees at one time, they should have faster reactions, they don't get tired,
distracted and they're designed to be risk-averse. So it's this idea of better,
more consistent driving that you will get from the computer. The sales pitch
coming from the tech suppliers was very much you might be able to remove the
operating costs from the bus driver. But going out, talking to members of the
public, talking to our staff, we realised that there's a variety of things that
our staff members will do on board, that we still need that human element to our
service. While those behind the project say it's actually safer than a human
driver, for some of those on the streets of Sunderland, the idea of a bus
driving itself creates a level of anxiety. Although there's lasers and all the
other things that are involved in it, I think it's more of a case of the strange
feeling maybe, probably getting on a bus and you think, well, there's nobody
really in control, although you know there is. I mean, would you be happy to
ride on one? Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, definitely. I wouldn't put my mind up if there
weren't a CF up there. You've got to be CF, you know what I mean? It wouldn't
bother me about getting on it. I'm an autonomous driving automobile, nobody else
behind the wheel. The race to provide self-driving vehicles is a global one,
with potential riches for those who succeed. This is an advert, for example, for
the company Cruise, which is now piloting self-driving taxis in San Francisco.
Mike Biddles, the executive director for Net Zero at Innovate UK, the
government's innovation agency, he has oversight of the UK projects. He says
over time the technology will have an impact on what the workforce looks like.
So if you're a bus or a taxi driver, should you be worried? As we look two
decades in the future and our vision for what the transport would look like by
2050, the nature of these jobs and the opportunities will be different. This is
going to be an opportunity that could add tens of billions to the economy and
tens of thousands of jobs. Some of that will look different and actually that's
part of the reason that we need to explore these projects to understand how we
can build those skills for the future. The projects in Sunderland, Edinburgh and
elsewhere are some of the first public deployments for a self-driving industry
still in its infancy. But the technology is moving at a pace and these pilots
mean people will soon be able to get their own taste of what the future of
transport might look like. Rowan Bridge reporting there. Now on the same day
we've been talking about the government's response to the pandemic, debate over
the origins of Covid-19 has resurfaced. The FBI, the United States Domestic
Intelligence and Security Service, has weighed in saying that the virus most
likely came from a Chinese government-controlled lab. Here's their director,
Christopher Wray, on Fox News. The FBI has for quite some time now assessed that
the origins of the pandemic are most likely a potential lab incident in Wuhan.
So here you're talking about a potential leak from a Chinese government-
controlled lab that killed millions of Americans and that's precisely what that
capability was designed for. The White House has said that there's no consensus
across the US government about the origin of the virus because different
agencies draw different conclusions to the FBI's. Many scientists point out that
there is no evidence that it leaked from a lab but they think instead that it
jumped from animals to humans. John Sudworth is our North America correspondent.
He's been working on an upcoming investigative podcast series for Radio 4 and
BBC Sounds looking at this question and John, we should start probably with this
FBI, the significance of why they're saying what they're saying and what they're
saying now. Yes, well it had already been reported of course, Sarah, that the
FBI had concluded that Covid may have leaked accidentally from a Chinese lab. We
knew that already. It was known as a result of the intelligence review ordered
by President Biden during the early months of his administration. But what's
changing, I think, first of all in the past few days, the US Energy Department
has added its voice in support of that theory, bringing the number of US
agencies now supporting the idea of a lab leak with at least a low level of
confidence to two, while four agencies are reported to remain convinced that
Covid emerged not in a Wuhan lab but by natural transmission in a Wuhan animal
market. What it shows, Sarah, I think is first of all just how little is known
about this question but also how divided the US political and intelligence
establishments are over this issue. There's certainly renewed interest and it's
in that context that we now have these comments from Christopher Wray going
public with the FBI's view and although he's offered no new evidence, he says
it's classified of course, it is a significant intervention in part of course
because of those words he chose to use there, the idea that this lab leak may
have caused the deaths of millions of Americans. Indeed, you've been looking at
this question for the past three years. I mean it is an awful long time when
there is still so much uncertainty. Well, you know, over the first year or more
of the pandemic when I was in China, the idea of a lab leak was, if you'll
remember, largely dismissed by scientists and journalists as a conspiracy
theory, in part of course because it was being promoted by the then President
Donald Trump. Although whilst in China I never felt that there was strong
evidence for either theory of origin, lab or market, I did feel there were big
questions to be asked about the swiftness and the certainty with which the lab
leak theory had been dismissed. After all, labs in Wuhan had been studying and
collecting and experimenting with coronaviruses for years and that's what our
new upcoming podcast will examine, not just the politics surrounding this
question but the science itself, which is now deeply divided, riven between
those scientists like the Dutch virologist Marion Koopmans from Erasmus
University and a member of the WHO inquiry team that went to China who still
believe in a zoonotic or animal origin. It's really important to understand the
process of disease emergence and, you know, whether that's a lab accident or a
zoonotic spillover or we need to understand these processes to prevent them from
happening in the future. For me the zoonotic origin is still, you know, by far
the most likely. On the other hand, Sarah, of course, we'll be hearing from
scientists who believe there is still nothing but uncertainty on this question
and as for China, of course, it has repeatedly dismissed any suggestion that the
virus came from China in any form at all as a lie. Well, we look forward to your
podcast, John Sudworth, thank you. The singer-songwriter Joni Mitchell will be
awarded the Gershwin Prize tonight by the US Library of Congress. Only the third
woman to receive it. It's for enhancing cultural understanding. Annie Lennox
will be among the stars paying tribute in a concert. Cat Lister's a journalist
and arts writer who talked to me about Joni Mitchell. Rose and flowers of angel
hair. The most magical thing about Joni Mitchell is that you can never quite
grasp hold of her. She's almost unknowable and what actually pulls you into her
world is that you can't quite grasp into her music and her melodies and her
lyricism is the fact that you so desperately want to know more about her. Okay,
so the albums, the first album you'd reach for is what? I mean, for me, it's got
to be Blue and I know that sounds very, very obvious. It's number one in my
heart for a reason. She's a master of melody, of rhythm, of lyricism and when
that all comes together, it's like this beautiful pearl. Do you think that she
is underrated? I wouldn't say that she is now. I think things have certainly
changed. I would say, I mean, I'm approaching 40 now. When I was younger, I did
lament the fact that she perhaps wasn't celebrated in a similar way and what I
mean by that is she wasn't always very visible to me. So, you know, on the front
cover of various music monthlies, you know, you would always see Bob Dylan and
Neil Young fairly regularly. It was quite unusual to see her. You pull out Blue,
what else would you flag up that to know Joni Mitchell people should listen to?
As I matured and got a little bit older, I was pulled towards some of her later
albums. So, Hegira for me in later years has been something that I've really
been pulled toward. Hegira, loosely translated, is a journey, an exodus. And for
me, it's this wide open freeway that really sort of tapped into her yearning for
movement. And don't forget that Joni Mitchell had polio as a child. She really
struggled with that in her early years. So, she's winning this award tonight and
a tribute concert with some serious heavyweights there, among them the likes of
Annie Lennox. I think she's only the third woman ever to be have been granted
this award. So, it is a sort of recognition of all that you're talking about.
Yes, absolutely. Absolutely. It's a long time coming, you know, and perhaps with
the health problems that she's been experiencing over the last five years or so,
we've found this new appreciation for her. Cat Mitchell on the brilliance of
Joni Mitchell. Cat Lister, that is, of course. That's it from us. PM is at five
with Evan, as usual. I'm Sarah Montagu, and that's The World at 145. Studio
direction was by Antonio Fernandes. The editor was Scott Adam. We'll head to
Ambridge in a quarter of an hour. But first, a breath of fresh mountain air on
Radio 4 as we follow some of Britain's biggest birds of prey on their epic
autumn migration. Emily Knight presents Flight of the Ospreys. Britain's ospreys
are staging a remarkable comeback. Persecution drove them to the verge of
extinction. But today there are over 300 breeding pairs of these enormous birds
of prey. Stretching from their stronghold in the Scottish Highlands, right down
to the south coast of England, where Paul Morton has helped bring them back to
Pool Harbour. We started our reintroduction in 2017 in an attempt to try and re-
establish the south coast breeding population. And this year, for the first time
in what, 200 years, we've now had nesting ospreys here in the local vicinity of
the harbour, which is just incredible. For Paul, the osprey is a powerful symbol
of hope. Proof that we can bring back the wildlife we've wiped out, from Britain
and beyond. So our osprey reintroduction is actually just one piece of the
jigsaw. You know, on the Isle of Wight you've got the white-tailed sea eagle
reintroduction, you've got cranes being reintroduced up on the Somerset Levels,
white storks at the Nepper State, beavers are going to be reintroduced in Pool
Harbour soon, there are huge rewilding projects taking place around the country,
and all of this is to replenish what man got rid of in the first place. Paul's
ospreys, and the rest of Britain's thriving population, are now carrying that
message of hope on the Great Migration to their winter hunting grounds in West
Africa. Many, though, won't make it back alive for the British summer. A team of
conservationists is travelling alongside the birds to find out why. The flight
of the osprey team is led by the biologist, adventurer and founder of the
charity Conservation Without Borders, Sasha Dench. With climate change, there's
obviously increasing variability in weather conditions. A lot of the wetlands
that they use are being challenged by over-extraction or extra-extraction of
water. The growth of the Sahara Desert is one of the major challenges for the
birds. They've got a big stretch they have to fly, and then in various countries
there is shooting of birds. It's the 11th of August, and Sasha and her team are
following the migrating ospreys across the Channel, taking the ferry from Poole
to France. They're driving south in a convoy of battered Land Rovers, down to
the point where the River Loire meets the Atlantic Ocean. The journey from
Shorebrook to the Loire Valley took us about four hours, but the welcome was
incredible. We were welcomed by a group called Acrola, who manage a small
ringing station on the estuary. So my name is Eugene Archer. I've been living
here in France for 15 years. Eugene, how did you first hear about the flight of
the osprey expedition, and what made you get in touch? I think I saw it on
social media, probably on Twitter, and because I knew that you'd already done
the flight with the swans, and when you spoke about this new project to follow
ospreys, I suddenly thought, well, one of the obvious stopoversites for ospreys
is here on the Loire estuary. As far as I know, we've never had any proof that
Scottish birds are coming through here, but it seems logical that birds that are
migrating from the north to south and following a straight line are probably
passing, certainly very close. And you do get quite a number fishing and hunting
along the river, don't you? We do, because this section of the river is very
tidal. There's also a lot of mullet out here, which the ospreys seem to like a
lot, and we regularly see them. Just when we're ringing here, we'll see birds
sort of flying up and down the river at a distance. They come through here from
about the middle of August through to maybe the last ones here at the end of
September. Despite sharing the foreshore with an oil refinery, this carefully
managed site on the north bank of the Loire estuary is an attractive refuelling
spot for migrating birds of all kinds, including the critically endangered
aquatic warbler, which joins the ospreys on the annual journey to West Africa.
Local volunteers are busy trapping and ringing birds to help keep track of their
numbers and their migration patterns. Certainly in springtime, there has always
been maybe 10 centimetres of water here, and that's provided ideal breeding
conditions for birds, such as red shank and black-winged stilt, amongst others.
But summer 2022 hasn't been comfortable for migrating birds tracking along
France's Atlantic coast. A series of heat waves peaked in the nearby city of
Nantes at a record-breaking 42 degrees centigrade in mid-July. This year,
although the birds arrived as normal in springtime and started nesting, the
water disappeared very, very quickly, so they abandoned all nesting attempts
here this year. We suspect that because it's so dry, there's no insect life
here, so the birds that arrive expecting to be able to spend a few days here
feeding up and fattening up before the next leg of their migration south,
there's nothing for them to eat. Standing here, there's a few obvious signs of
stress on the area. Very dry grasses, and just behind us, there is an area of
dry, cracked mud that ought to be a wetland right now. In previous years, this
area has retained water throughout the summer, just a little bit, but enough to
make it much more interesting for birds. But this year, for the last two months,
the whole area has been completely dry, and as we've seen this morning, you can
put your hand down into the cracks, it's that bad. Have you ever seen that
before here? No, this year in particular, I think, in a lot of places in Europe,
with the heat waves that we've been having, and here we've been having heat
waves since the end of May. And what are you putting that down to? It's got to
be climate change. Yes, the summers are nice, and we have long periods when it's
dry and sunny blue skies, but we get, you know, maybe once a week we'll have a
few hours of rain, and we haven't had any rain here for weeks and weeks. Places
like this are of huge importance for migratory species, and we're talking from
birds the size of sedge warblers, which are going to be going to Africa, to
waders, to ospreys. They all depend on this whole ecosystem, the estuary, the
reed beds, the plant communities, the insect communities, they're all
interlinked, they all need kind of one another to survive. This year with the
drought conditions, we've noticed that there are hardly any insects around here.
This should be a hassle, being hassled by mosquitoes. By mosquitoes, yes, and
when we were sitting having dinner last night, we weren't being bitten by
mosquitoes, and normally that's not the case if you're sitting having dinner at
nine o'clock in the evening, normally you would wear long-sleeved shirt and long
trousers, because otherwise you'd just get bitten. And it's nice not to be being
annoyed, but actually here you think of mosquitoes as bird food rather than an
irritation. Well, this is the thing, it's good for us as humans not to be
bitten. On the other hand, from the bird's point of view, it's devastating
because this whole area, even at the worst of times, would have had little pools
of water here and there where there would have been mosquito larvae, but they're
not here. So the next stop was the Gironde estuary, it's the largest estuary in
Western Europe. If you look at a map and you're imagining from an ospreys point
of view, you're wanting to migrate down into Africa, this is the perfect stop en
route. We were also there to look at solutions, and we were welcomed there by
Raphael Mousseau. We're on a site which is pretty unique in France. You have to
imagine the scene here in 1999, this was an area growing cereal crops over
almost 200 hectares. Every summer there was maize, sunflower or wheat. So this
site, which is a polder reclaimed from the water of the estuary, is being
restored, brought back to its natural state after a storm. In fact, there were
two major storms during the winter of 1999 to 2000, which weakened and broke the
dike, allowing the estuary water, which is very high at the time of the storm,
to come onto the land. And according to the owner, it was very quickly clear
that it would be difficult to repair the dike and restart crop growing. The
owner proposed to the state coastal conservation service that they buy this
land, and the idea was to let nature re-establish itself in this area. And so
today we've regained 200 hectares of wetland. As the waters of the estuary come
up and down regularly, we also have fish which come to feed in this restored
wetland. So it's a wonderful place to regularly see the osprey on migration.
They come to feed on the fish typical of the estuary, species such as mullet. We
were allowed to fly a drone up over this area, and shockingly, with the drone in
the air at about 30 metres, the helicopter suddenly turns up flying really low.
And whilst one of my team said, oh, it looked like it was spraying something, my
response was, oh, it can't possibly be spraying something you wouldn't spray on
a protected area. And that evening we went back and spoke to Raphael, who
mentioned that yes, actually, there is a programme of mosquito control for local
tourism, which I was completely shocked by. I can't believe in this day and age
you'd do that. And in the middle of the migration season, you're basically
killing the food chain for the small birds which are migrating through the re-
beds. It's also the food for fish that the osprey are eating. So it is one of
the things that we will pick up and do our best to at least start conversations
about. Sometimes it takes somebody to come in with fresh eyes and have a look at
a system and go, actually, that bit, that doesn't make any sense. From the
Gironde estuary, we headed south through the country, which has been badly hit
by wildfire. So one of our vehicles came across still smouldering fires. They're
mostly under control now with the help of, I think they say there was a thousand
firefighters from across Europe came in to help, biggest fires that they have
seen here. And we've ended up at a site called the Marais d'Ox. It's a big
ancient wetland site where breeding ospreys were reintroduced. So my name is
Florent. So I am a kind of ranger, a mix of ranger and wildlife biologist at the
nature reserve of the Marais d'Ox. Yeah, so the place is the huge wetland. It's
around 1,000 hectares. When the weather is clear, you can see the mountains and
the ocean is five kilometres just off. So this is a very nice place, yeah. Just
as in Britain, the osprey was wiped out here in the early years of the 20th
century. They returned to breed in central France in 1984, but the numbers
remain low. Florent and his team are releasing Scottish chicks here to help
found an osprey population along the French-Spanish border. Whilst some of
Sasha's flight of the osprey team count birds on the wetlands, the rest squeeze
into a wooden tower where 38 relocated chicks have been raised, fledged and then
launched themselves into the wide world. You can open the doors at the front
from here, from this side. Yeah, the door is connected with a line here. Florent
and his colleague Paul try to keep human interaction with the chicks to a
minimum. They feed the young birds with larger and larger chunks of fish until,
just before they start their migration, their hunting instincts take control.
Young osprey are not supposed to be able to fish by themselves because they are
too young and they don't know how to do it. But here we observed the opposite.
We observed many young osprey being able to fish by themselves with success
before the migration. So it was really interesting because it means that they
will be able to do it quickly. When you translocate the chicks here, there are
no parents. They're just orphans. They grow up. I am the father and Paul is the
mother. We are the kind of parents, so we have to put some food. But they grow
up very, very fast. It's incredible. When you observe them every day, it's
totally crazy. Florent's young ospreys have flown south already and he doesn't
expect many to return. He estimates he's seen just eight or nine of the 38
released chicks come back to France. When they disappear, you never know if they
will come back because their journey south is very critical and the mortality
rate is very high for ospreys. It's 75% for the two first years. So when you can
see the birds come back here, it's a very big emotion. In the next episode of
Flight of the Ospreys, Sasha and the team are going to fly to France to see the
birds and to see the birds. The birds are the biggest challenge so far. The
ospreys have a choice to make. They can choose to pass the Pyrenees by going out
to sea and across the water and others head up straight into the mountains.
Flight of the Ospreys was produced by Emily Knight and Alistair Cross. The
journey continues at the same time tomorrow. Off to Ambridge after the news and
does Chelsea know what she's volunteering herself for? We find out in The
Archers here on BBC Radio 4. But first, it's nearly time.