TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-04H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Outlook is next. This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio station.
Coming up on Outlook today, Chirag Bari was working in the engine room of a
supertanker when frantic instructions started coming in from the captain. We
were running around in the engine room. To be very frank, we were absolutely
stressed because you can't see what is happening outside. The ship was being
hijacked by pirates. So we were only monitoring what's happening in front of us
with the parameters going up and down and we can imagine that things what is
happening. Chirag and the crew spent months trapped on board. And as the weeks
rolled on, the pirates became more aggressive. They used to come and say that
tomorrow it's end day for you, we're going to kill you, the company is not
paying money, so we're going to do this or do that with you. We knew that the
next number is us, definitely today, tomorrow. With that fear, we were living
every moment. Despite the terror they felt, the engineers had work to do. Fuel
was running out and the ship was in trouble. Chirag's story after the latest BBC
News. BBC News, hello, I'm Gareth Barlow. The United States has denounced
comments by Israel's far-right finance minister, Betzel Smotrich, who had called
for the Palestinian village of Huwara to be wiped out by the state of Israel.
The village in the occupied West Bank was the scene of a rampage by Jewish
settlers on Sunday. David Willis is our North America correspondent. The White
House very much hoping to calm the situation, hence the State Department's
repudiation of Betzel Smotrich's comments as irresponsible, repugnant,
disgusting. Mr Smotrich is one of Benjamin Netanyahu's ultra-nationalist, ultra-
orthodox allies who've secured top positions in this new government. He's a
firebrand settler leader who's now in charge of much of the Israeli government's
policy in regards to the West Bank. The Israeli Prime Minister, Benjamin
Netanyahu, has accused anti-government protesters unhappy at his judicial
reforms of crossing a red line. He said anarchy could not be tolerated. Mr
Netanyahu spoke after people again took to the streets in Tel Aviv, blocking
some streets. The Greek Prime Minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, says a committee of
experts will investigate the causes of Tuesday night's rail disaster that saw
two trains collide, killing at least 43 people. Dozens are seriously injured.
Our correspondent in Greece, Nick Beek, reports. Prime Minister Kyriakos
Mitsotakis has angered many Greeks with his swift assessments given at the scene
of the country's worst-ever rail disaster that it can be blamed on tragic human
error. A 59-year-old station master has been charged with manslaughter by
negligence, but there were repeated warnings over many years about the safety of
the rail network. Outside one of the hospitals where the bodies of victims have
been brought hangs a banner claiming that any systemic failings will be covered
up in the official investigation now underway. Foreign ministers from the G20
group of major economies are meeting shortly in the Indian capital Delhi, with
the divisions over Ukraine likely to dominate the agenda. India, which holds the
presidency of the G20, has taken a neutral stance on the conflict. Leila Nassi
reports. Tensions between G20 nations over the war in Ukraine were clearly on
show before foreign ministers had even taken their seats around a shared table.
The UK's foreign secretary, James Cleverly, said he would call out Russia, while
Germany said it would firmly oppose any propaganda from Moscow. Russia's foreign
minister, Sergey Lavrov, meanwhile, who has already met his Indian counterpart
in private, is expected to strongly criticise the West, according to the Russian
embassy in Delhi. The schedule for today's meeting includes sessions on food
security, development cooperation, terrorism and humanitarian assistance, a
reflection of India's effort to focus discussions on the needs of poorer
nations. You're listening to the World News from the BBC. In Iran, more than 100
girls have been admitted to hospital with symptoms of poisoning after another
spate of suspected gas attacks on girls' schools there. The BBC's Persian
service says more than 26 schools in cities, including the capital Tehran, were
targeted in just one day, with the authorities struggling to contain the crisis.
More than half of Argentina was left without power for several hours on
Wednesday, after a fire affected the national electricity grid. The blaze struck
high-tension power lines, where Grant reports. An estimated 20 million
Argentinians have been affected by the blackout at its height, and daily life
has been brought to a halt in some regions, with classes suspended and
businesses shuttered. While living without air conditioning or refrigeration is
fraying the nerves of many residents, the biggest complications are in the major
cities. An estimated 150,000 people are still without power in the Buenos Aires
metropolitan area. The energy ministry is confident of restoring power soon, but
the political cost to the government of President Alberto Fernandez could be
more lasting. Researchers on Easter Island have found a previously undiscovered
moai, one of the Pacific Island's distinctive stone statues, in a dry lake bed.
It was found by a team visiting the area around the Ranuraku volcano, where
several of the monolithic human figures were damaged in a fire last year.
Archaeologists say they hope there may be more of the statues at the site, which
was underwater until recently. The moai were made by the Parapu-Nui people, a
Polynesian tribe who originally lived on the island. And ornithologists are
celebrating the sighting of a dusky tetrako, a yellow-throated songbird native
to Madagascar, which was feared to have become extinct. The bird had not been
seen since 1999, but three have been sighted in recent weeks near rivers in the
biodiverse rainforests of northeast Madagascar. Its natural habitat has largely
been converted into vanilla-producing farms. Bibi Singhis. Hello and welcome to
Outlook, the programme that takes you around the world to meet some pretty
extraordinary people. I'm India Rackson. Today we're headed to the coast of
Somalia and we're travelling there with merchant ship engineer Chirag Bari. As a
child I never imagined that I'd become a seafarer because I always thought that
I would either become a doctor or join a corporate and all that stuff, you know.
Chirag grew up near Delhi in India, a long, long way from the sea. But as a
teenager he kept seeing newspaper adverts for careers in the merchant navy on
board commercial container ships and tankers. And he got the bug. I think it was
a bit about the romantic side of the things, about life on a ship. You'd be
wearing your uniform, wearing the applets, the caps and you'll be some kind of
an authority. You will be different from the common man. Chirag really took to
life at sea. In 2003 he qualified as a marine engineer, looking after the
complex engine rooms on ships carrying goods from all around the world. You
know, till that time I have never been able to go out of the country, okay. So
that was very, very exciting for me. Where did you want to go? I went to
Australia to be very frank. Did you? On my first trip, we were just waiting when
the ship will come, at the jetty, when the ship was taking birth. And I saw, oh,
what a huge ship it is. Because I never saw that it was about 200 plus meters
long. And I said, wow, I'll be on this particular ship. And as soon as I took
the first step on the gangway, I was like, God, this is my opportunity to
perform. Give me good luck. When I talk to Chirag, it's instantly clear how much
he loves machines. He kind of thrived under the pressure of life inside the
pumping heart of colossal ships. But no training, no manual could have prepared
him for the day that his ship was violently hijacked by pirates. An event that
would test him to the limit and change the course of his life. In April 2010,
seven years into his career, Chirag took a job as second engineer on a chemical
tanker sailing from Vietnam to India. When Chirag and the crew got to India, the
ship reloaded and it was due to set off again, this time to Belgium. But while
they waited, word started to circulate that the route would pass through the
Gulf of Aden. If the vessel is going to go to, you know, via Gulf of Aden, I'll
be the first crew to sign off from the vessel and I won't sail. Okay, so this is
the discussions we started on board ship. The Gulf of Aden is a stretch of water
that separates the Horn of Africa and the Arabian Peninsula. And back then, if
you worked at sea, and you heard that name, it's likely that one word would come
to mind. Pirates. It was known as a hot spot for hijacking. I discussed
initially with my family about it at home and they said, don't take any kind of
risk, just come back home, get on a new vessel or something, other vessel and
then look out for other job. But then it didn't work in that way, is what I
thought about. Because what happened was that when we discussed, there were
about five or six people who decided to leave the vessel and I was one of them
who wrote the letters for them for the company. So I drafted those sign off
letters for everyone, including for mine, but I didn't send mine. Because the
company offered me that we are going to promote you if you stay back. I then
rethought about my decision and I thought, I'm getting an opportunity to get a
promotion on board. And I was waiting for that moment, actually. So I think I
decided it's an opportunity now. I should grab it. Let's take that particular
risk of four days. You know, hardly any vessels get hijacked or kidnapped. And
we were on a very good vessel. The company is really absolutely brilliant. You
know, it's a German company, this and that. So you know, all that things were
there in my mind. So I changed my plans. It's interesting, your instinct was, no
way, this is going to the Gulf of Aden. No, no, no. Yes. It was well known
amongst all of you that the Gulf of Aden was extremely dangerous. And and to
your family, what did your mother say about it? When I discussed that with my
mother, she was very much against it, that I should not be going into Gulf of
Aden. She persuaded me a lot of times that I should be coming back home. I do
not know why I didn't listen to her this time. I should have. You normally
listen to your mum. I think every child listens to their mother. But I think
that's destiny for me. And I think that's the reason that I'm sitting here in
front of you talking to you today. Amazing that you had that letter written to
leave that ship and you didn't. Yeah, I had that letter written. And then I
didn't post it. Can you imagine? So in May, the ship sets off. You're an
engineer on the ship. How were you spending your days? So basically, in an
engine room, my role is to look after the machineries and operations and all
that. It's about three to four stories. You know, you have all these main
engines, you have generators, you have different kinds of machineries, which
keeps the ship floating and going ahead. And what does it feel like in that
room? I imagine it's very, I mean, busy and loud. It's absolutely busy. And
especially when we are in the tropical areas, they work under those temperatures
of 45-50 degrees. So sometimes it's extremely humid. When your water is like
drenching out from your boiler suits, sometimes we have to change it two, three
times because of the extreme sweating and noise. Obviously, we have to use our
earmuffs. We have to wear the helmet always. And then you have the safety shoes
and all the gloves. It's again, you know, a huge task itself. But we are trained
to do that, you know. Sounds extremely intense. Yeah, you have to be mentally
prepared. Do you get any nice downtime on the ship? Do you enjoy it? Absolutely.
When we are sailing, I think it's a good time. Especially I used to love long
sailing, because that really helps to connect with our friends, colleagues on
board ship, because in the evening after dinner, we can sit down, we can play
some cards, we can exchange some conversations with our friends about their life
and about their families, or even watch a movie together with our colleagues. So
it used to be fun after work and then so that you can relax and regenerate for
the next morning. So then, as the ship sailed across the Arabian Sea from India,
and it starts to approach the Horn of Africa, which is along the east side of
the continent, sort of jutting out from Ethiopia, Somalia. What happens? How
does the kind of atmosphere on board the ship change? I think it was extremely
tense and stressful, because we all were quite feared from our inside that we
are going in a very dangerous area. And we were just hoping and praying that we
should pass through it safely. People were praying to their gods and their
family that nothing should happen to us. So we started preparing the vessel, put
on the razor wires along the railings. All around the ship, so it's like a
barbed wire. Barbed wires, yeah, yeah, yeah. And then we had this hot water
hoses that we put up on the sides of the railings. And that comes with a good
amount of pressure. But despite the ship's defences and the prayers of the crew,
four days into their journey on the 8th of May, Chirag was woken in the early
hours with the news they'd all been dreading. Out in the dark, a small boat had
been spotted, and it was following them. Their ship started making tactical
manoeuvres, zigzagging sharply to try to shake the boat off. For a time, it
looked like it had worked. But the next afternoon, the boat reappeared on their
radar. That particular boat was quite closer. They are just five, six miles away
from us, and they're coming at very high speed. So obviously, we again put back
everything on very, very high alert and harsh manoeuvring. Your ship is running
at full speed. And then, because in the engine room, you can't see what is
happening outside. So we were only monitoring what's happening in front of us
with the parameters going up and down. And we can imagine that things, what is
happening on the top. We were running around on the engine room. To be very
frank, we were absolutely stressed because we were trying that our machinery
should not stop by overrunning or overloading them. So you can't, I mean, you're
in the engine room, you can't see what's going on. Everyone else is standing on
the bridge watching this boat at double the speed that your ship is travelling,
fast approaching. At what point did you realise that pirates had made it on
board the ship? So I received another call in the engine room, and I just heard
one of the officers on the deck, he was trying to scream, please come on the
bridge immediately. The pirates are on board. That was a sentence he just said
and hang the phone. And I looked at my colleague who was there with me. And I
said, I think they are just playing with us. And you thought it was a joke? The
initial thing was that I thought it's just a joke. Because you know, at the back
of the mind, you thought, how can the pirates come on board? You know, you can't
imagine. Like, even if they come, we have all these barbed wires, as well as we
have removed the ladders, which were going from the bottom deck to the upper
deck. But you do eventually go up to the bridge, don't you? We received another
call after five minutes, the officer was extremely panicking that, why the hell
you haven't come here? Just come immediately. And I felt the fear, I could hear
the fear in his voice. And I told my colleague that, okay, let's go up. Let's
see what is happening on the bridge. And the bridge is that that's the highest
part of the ship, that's the highest part of the ship. Where the steering
happens, where the captain is most of the time. That's correct. As soon as we
were approaching the bridge door, we heard people were screaming, some absurd
noises were coming that somebody's shouting. What happened when you opened the
door? The pirate opened the door. And he was pointing a gun, which I later
discovered was AK-47, pointing that on us. And with that moment, I was extremely
shocked. Everything became a blackout for me. I kept my hands up and I just
followed. And I don't still remember what happened exactly for the next couple
of minutes. Then I find myself sitting in front of the entire crew members on a
very small space. 22 of us were sitting there. The pirates are only six of them.
And then I started observing them, how they look like from the bottom to the
top. Because you know, you think that pirates, they will come with some uniforms
or with some proper professionals, you know. But here people are wearing torn
t-shirts, lungi, it's kind of a cloth that you tie up around your waist, and
some slippers. That's it. Or even some of them were only wearing a vest. And I
said, are these pirates? Well, this is the moment that you had persuaded
yourself wouldn't happen. What did you think? When did you start kind of playing
out what might happen? What were you picturing? I think I was only wishing that
my end has come. Today's the last day for me. Pirates were holding guns on us.
They started firing in the air as well. We were sitting in front of everyone.
And if they click, obviously, the first bullet will be on me. I started thinking
about, my family told me many times that I should sign off. I didn't become a
good child. I didn't obey my mother. Why did you take that risk? And I started
cursing myself for the entire situation. It was quickly very clear that the six
pirates wanted ransom money from the ship's owners. They forced the captain to
begin a course towards Somalia. While one by one, the crew were taken to their
cabins at gunpoint and made to hand over all their possessions, even their spare
clothes. After a few days, the ship dropped anchor about three miles off the
coast. At that time, around 2010, Somalia was a particularly turbulent place.
After the military regime was overthrown in the early 90s, the country had
collapsed into anarchy. With no one patrolling the coastline, there was a big
increase in illegal fishing by foreign trawlers, which put lots of local
fishermen out of business. Just one of the reasons that piracy exploded in the
area. Chirag and his colleagues hoped that the whole ordeal would be over in a
couple of days. But things were only just getting started. Within the next half
an hour, 45 minutes, we saw a few boats coming in and we saw 50 to 60 pirates
boarding the vessel with all guns and different kinds of weapons and everything.
And they were all very, very happy and extremely proud of getting a chemical
tanker, which has fully loaded cargo and a lot of other things. It was a day for
them to celebrate. A couple of them were able to speak in English. They were
trying to interact with the crew members. We were extremely curious about when
are we going to go home? We were just asking this question. What's happening?
Have you started talking to the company? Has he received any response? Our
company is extremely good and they would definitely be able to deal with these
things. We had no idea that this is a long drawn process and discussions have
not even started. But these 50 to 60 pirates, they again started robbing the
ship. And we saw them taking away whatever the valuables were left behind, some
t-shirts or trousers, you know, they started removing the curtains from the
windows, the televisions, the microwaves, even the cutleries, the plates,
spoons. We were robbed again and again, again and again. There's a lot of
pirates on board at this point. Did you get to know any of them? What did you
find out about their lives? As the days passed, we started speaking to some of
these pirates and hearing their stories. The elders have gone through a huge lot
of trauma, which I think none of us can really imagine. They told us there was
so much distress in Somalia in the last decades that they had no food to eat.
They had nothing to survive. One of the pirates mentioned to us that he used to
be an English teacher in a school in Somalia. And then we asked him what he's
doing on ship with the guns. And then he shared his story that he used to live
in this particular village. This pirate clan, they are now basically ruling this
entire village. And the villagers were given two options. Either you follow
their instructions and do whatever been told, or you face the bullet. There were
some quite young people on board as well, weren't there? They were a very, very
young group of pirates who were there on board as well. And these pirates were
extremely violent. Most of them were, I think, highly illiterate. And the
younger ones have seen only the blood since they have taken birth. It's all
because the civil war is going on in Somalia. And I believe you even learned a
bit of Somali, even a Somali song. Is that right? We have to survive. We have to
adapt ourselves to them, to their culture, to their likings, to their feelings.
In order to get some kind of interactions with them and communications with
them, we started learning a few words so that we can impress them. And they used
to sing a song many times when they used to be very, very happy. And we learned
a small phrase of that song from them. And we used to start singing with them
sometimes so that they feel like, you know, that we are part of them. We are not
a threat to them. So that it helps us to ease some of the, you know, tensions,
which normally they used to come and say that tomorrow it's end day for you.
We're going to kill you. The company is not paying money. So we're going to do
this or do that with you. But the days turned into weeks and the pirates weren't
getting what they wanted. And things did become more tense. In fact, they turned
really nasty. A warning that some of you might find the following descriptions
upsetting. So we were running out of fuel oil. We were running our generators to
keep the lightings on the entire day and night. And once we started
communicating to them that within the next five to six days, the fuel will get
over. That's the main time that they started worrying about from where are we
going to get fuel. If the ship has gone into a blackout, it's an easier source
for other pirates gang to come on ship and to overpower them. So they were very,
very afraid about getting the ship under blackout conditions. And so they
started releasing their frustrations. They thought that the engine room crew are
creating problems for them, that we are hiding fuel somewhere. We are not
disclosing it. But we said we are serious about it. We don't have fuel. But it
was very difficult to communicate with them. So they started torturing the
master and the chief engineer because they thought that they know everything. So
they blindfolded them and they started firing up near the ears. Firing their
guns near the ears. Firing their guns, yeah, which actually terrified them. And
then again, assaulting them physically. On one particular day, they mercilessly
beat the master and the chief engineer. And we were hearing their screams. They
were calling for help. None of us was able to do anything for them. They put the
chief engineer in the sea, upside down, his face in the water for a few minutes.
And they pulled him up again. They again threatened him a lot. It was absolutely
scary and frightening. Also, the master was taken into the meat room at minus 17
to minus 18 degrees. He was hanged from the hook from where the meat has been
hanged with his hands folded over there. And they put ice bars inside his
undergarments. So that kind of tortures, screams. We knew that the next number
is us, the engineer, because we were on the senior levels and definitely today,
tomorrow. With that fear, we were living every moment. It really just sounds
like you must have been constantly terrified. And it's such like a high level of
anxiety and stress that you were dealing with every day. And you were also still
having to work night and day fixing problems on the ship, looking after the
engine room in this, what must have been overwhelming state of fear. So the days
were becoming extremely difficult for us because the engines are there to run at
certain levels. When you don't do the maintenance in time, when you do not treat
them nicely, they will start behaving like that ways. So we were not able to do
the maintenance properly. We didn't have the spare stores to look after the
machinery. So they started giving problems to us. And also these pirates, they
brought in the fuel from other ship which were hijacked. That fuel didn't match
the criteria of our fuels, which was used in engine room. But we have to use it
because the pirates will not listen to that. And that created a lot of stress.
And that created night and day we were working tirelessly. And the pirates also
at one point, they became convinced that some of the technical equipment in the
engine room was being used to send messages to the shipping company or the Navy
to sort of communicate. What happened to you because of this? So in the middle
of August end, the pirates thought that the company is not coming up to their
demands. They thought that something is going wrong and people are communicating
with the company that they are all okay. They are all fine and company should
not pay any money to the pirates. They came to engine room because we have a lot
of screens in front of us. We have a telephone, which is basically an intercom
phone, which is not connected to outside world. But the pirates thought that we
are using this particular phone to communicate with the outside world. They
pulled up an iron rod. They started beating us. Whatever that used to come in
their hands, they used to just throw at us or they used to beat us up
mercilessly. And then they used to kick us upside down. They used to spit on our
faces. There was a time in the middle of that thing that we pleaded to the
pirates, if you want to kill us, please kill us. Because we were very afraid. We
were like, we have lost all the hopes at that moment. A few weeks later, Chirag
and his colleague were tortured so badly by being tied into stress positions and
beaten, that he suffered terrible damage to his back. When you would go to bed
at night, after all of these horrendous things that were happening on board the
ship to you, to other people, and you close your eyes, how did you get through
the night? What did you think of? Sometimes we were in extreme pains because of
the tortures. Sometimes the pirates are extremely harsh and they will come
sometimes in the night. They will start kicking us and they will tell us that we
are going to kill you tomorrow morning. Be ready. Okay. And that fear will not
allow us to sleep or to think anything else apart from that what's going to
happen with me tomorrow morning. Some days we were very, very emotional because
it's been taking months and we have no idea of how many days it used to be
there. Some days were a bit relaxing that the pirates have not tortured any of
the crew members from the last week, 10 days. So we feel like the atmosphere is
normal. And that's the moment that we were thinking about our families, our
plannings for future, the days we spent together. When I was a kid, how my
parents looked after me, and you know, each and every thing, whatever you can
remember right from the start of your life and looking at the window from the
cabin and looking at the sky sometimes and talking to the stars. We're taking a
quick break for the news, but we'll be back with Chirag in part two to hear how
the crew's release was finally negotiated and how his life would take on a whole
new purpose when he made it back home. I'll be hearing from scientists trying to
unravel a condition with around 200 symptoms. Long COVID is a health crisis. And
finding out what the latest research on some sufferers is showing. When we
exercise participants and we walk them up and down just for six minutes and we
do blood tests at the end, their blood looks like they've run the London
Marathon. Depression, psychosis, sleep disturbances. Are mostly reported by
women. The long haul of long COVID. Tuesday at 9.30 and 20 GMT. Next on Outlook,
engineer Chirag Bari's ship has been released by pirates after seven gruelling
months of ransom negotiations. But now the crew is stuck in the perilous waters
off the Somali coast with no fuel and no protection. Till the pirates were
there, we know that they are there and nobody else will come on ship, the other
gangs. But now we had this particular problem that any gang can come and again
hijack it. So we were still very much in the danger. That's after the news. BBC
News with Gareth Barlow. The United States has denounced comments by Israel's
far-right finance minister, Betzal Smodrich, calling for the Palestinian village
of Huwara to be wiped out as repugnant and disgusting. A Palestinian was killed
when Jewish settlers there rampaged on Sunday in an apparent revenge for the
killing of two Israeli brothers. Greece's prime minister says a team of experts
will investigate the country's worst ever rail disaster, which has killed at
least 43 people. He said human error was probably to blame. But rail workers say
the network's been suffering from neglect and technical faults. They'll strike
nationwide on Thursday. More than half of Argentina was without power for
several hours after a wildfire hit the electricity grid amid a heatwave. Supply
is now slowly resuming. Foreign ministers from the G20 major economies are
meeting in the Indian capital, Delhi. At their talks, due to commence about now,
divisions over the war in Ukraine are likely to loom large. With North Korea in
the midst of a serious food crisis, its leader Kim Jong-un has said it's vital
for farms to meet their grain production goals. The World Food Programme
believes 40 per cent of North Koreans are undernourished. Researchers on Easter
Island have found a previously undiscovered moai, one of the island's
distinctive stone statues, in a dry lake bed. It's hoped there may be more
statues at the same site, which was until recently underwater. Ornithologists
say that a rare songbird, the dusky tetrica, has been sighted in Madagascar for
the first time in 24 years. There had been fears it was extinct. An analysis
shows that last year's NASA mission to change the course of an asteroid by
smashing into it with a small spacecraft was surprisingly successful. The
findings point to this as a way of deflecting future asteroids heading
dangerously towards Earth. Live from London, that's the latest BBC News. Welcome
back to Outlook. I'm India Axson and we're continuing with the story of Chirag
Bari, an Indian marine engineer whose ship was hijacked by pirates off the coast
of Somalia in May 2010. Behind the scenes, the ship's owners were moving through
a painfully slow ransom negotiation process with the pirate's leader. But life
on board was frightening and unpredictable. The pirates had begun torturing the
crew and were particularly violent to the engineers who were struggling to keep
the ship functioning. In the early months, Chirag was sometimes ordered to phone
his family back in India as part of the pirates' tactics. I was allowed to call
my family's only at the instructions of the pirates. If they want to put some
pressure on a particular family, they would allow us to call our families to do
that. What was it like hearing their voices? It was a very, very emotional
moment. You know, I was just apologising on the phone. You were apologising.
Yeah. I'm so sorry for putting you all in these conditions. And we will come
back. Keep the pressure on, on the company. Keep praying for us. And please look
after yourself. I think that was just two, three lines we used to convey. Did it
help hearing their voices? Or was it more painful? Absolutely. They gave me a
lot of strength on the other side as well, that we are doing our self best. Look
after yourself. Don't argue with the pirates. Don't do anything. Just stay calm.
You know, that kind of positive messaging. And then at one point, the pirate
showed you a newspaper article, and there was a picture of your parents and
they'd been interviewed about what was happening to you. What was it like to
kind of have that in your hands to see their faces and to read what they were
going through? So the pirates, they gave me a printout, which was there on the
internet, an article that my family has approached the Indian government to act
faster and help us in the release of these crew members on the ship. And these
pirates brought that on board and they saw me that, oh, your family is out in
the media. You are the one who has to now put pressure on your family. And I was
just looking at that photograph. Okay, they have gone to the media. That's fine.
That's any family would do that under pressure. But I was so relaxed to see a
photograph of my parents. You know, I felt very blessed. You start learning the
value of your relationships at that moment of time. You know, when you are in a
crisis, you until then you will not understand the relationships, how your
family supported you. So I think that was a moment to learn about as well. Did
you think about your mum a lot? Because obviously, she was the one who really
begged you not to go. Yeah, every moment I remember my mother, she was the
backbone of our family. My father has not been doing well for some years at that
stage as well. But my mother, you know, she was a strength to the entire family,
keeping everybody together. And a strength to you in those moments, it sounds
like. Absolutely. Absolutely. And then seven months in, which is just a, it's
easy to say, but that is such a huge amount of time, isn't it? Seven months. We
lost our hopes, like, you know, that how many months and years do we have to
stay here? Sometimes my fellow colleague will give me a kind of emotional, you
know, that no, no, no, don't worry, we'll go home. And we used to cry together
in our times, you know, and sometimes he used to be very down and we used to
come up and say, no, no, we will go home. Yeah, it must have been like that. I
can imagine must have been like that every single day. The only thought is when
are we going home and are we going home? Are we really going home or not? And
then seven months in, a financial deal was finally reached with the shipping
company. The pirates told us that we have reached a deal for a certain amount
and the money is going to be arranged in the next 15 days. So after 15 days, you
are going and then we can see the pirates were very, very happy. They were
relaxed and they didn't torture us after that. And they eased up a little bit in
their relationships with us. So you start to see these signs, things are maybe
relaxing a little, your release might actually be happening. And something
that's often used in a hostage situation is something called a proof of life
question, which is a question that only you could really know the answer to. So
that's in places that negotiators can be really certain that the people's lives
they're negotiating for, that people are still alive. And these proof of life
questions came from your family. What did they ask? The first question was,
where was the last holidays we went together with my mother? So I could
definitely collect those memories. And the second question was, what do I call
my niece? Because she used to be, she's my favourite one. So she's very close to
me and I had given her a nickname. So that filled in a lot of tears in my eyes
by filling those answers. What was the nickname? I called her Lado. What does it
mean? It's like sweet girl. It must have been so strange having those questions.
You've been so distant from your family for so long and that suddenly brings
them so close to you. It's almost like you're communicating with them.
Absolutely. That brings a lot of hopes for them that, you know, I'm in the right
frame of mind and I recognise everything. So tell me about the day that the
money was finally dropped because by now there are hundreds of pirates on board
and it must have been really, really tense. We could sense a feel like, you
know, as the number of pirates were growing, we thought that the money is going
to come very, very fast now. Many of them we have never seen. About 100 plus
were from the village and they were there to take their share from the money. On
the day itself, in the early morning, we were asked to stand on the side of the
ship so that the proof of life can be taken by the chopper which flew in and
they initially took photographs. This flight then went away and after I think
15-20 minutes, they would have sent these photographs back to the office. The
office would have counted everybody and seen our pictures and everything and
they ensured that all of them are alive. And then the money was dropped at the
side of the vessel in two buoyant material bags with a parachute on that and
there was a separate cabin altogether marked in the ship where the accountant
among the pirates was sitting with his machines and everything to count the
money. Amazing they had an accountant on board to deal with all that money. So
in the evening, some of the pirates started leaving the vessel and we were not
sure when are they gonna release us. We had no clue. We were still not being
able to contact the company to understand what's happening and when are we gonna
be officially released. Next morning around eight or nine o'clock, the last
pirate boat with this negotiator who dealt the deal with the company, he went
down with the other four or five pirates and he said, now your vessel is
released. He handed over a note to us with the number written and he said, if
any pirate gang comes on your ship, just give this number to them so that they
can call at this number and you will not be again captured. Oh, amazing. Well,
they sort of like left you a parting gift of support. There was nothing left on
ship to be robbed of now. But we were very, very worried about our vessel
because we had no fuel at that time and we do not know what is going to happen
at the next minute once all of them had went away. So when the final pirate
stepped off the ship, did you feel relieved or was it just too overwhelming
thinking about what happens next? The next step was to ensure that we are safer
because until the pirates were there, we know that they are there and nobody
else will come on ship, the other gangs. But now we had this particular problem
that any gang can come and again hijack it. So we were not contacting the
families as of now because we were still in the very much in the danger zone.
And then what happened? How did you get home? After that, the company sent a
boat with the fuel and everything over there and arm guards and these arm guards
came on the ship. The fuel came on the ship as well. And through that, we were
able to rectify a lot of machinery and ensure that we take the ship through our
own power to the next port because we realized that it's our moral
responsibility as engineers to ensure that our machineries are able to perform.
So all the same crew stayed on the ship and you sailed home? Yeah, we sailed to
Salalah, which was the nearest port. Salalah is in Oman. It took about seven
days for us because the vessel was very slow steaming. What was the moment,
Chirag, where you were like, okay, this is over, this is finally over? When we
reached Salalah and when these investigators came on board, the company
officials as well as the law enforcement investigators from Germany, they
boarded the vessel. That was the moment we thought now we're in safe hands. You
did eventually fly back to Delhi. What was it like seeing your family at the
airport? My brother-in-law came to pick me up basically at the airport. It was
obviously a very, very emotional moment for me seeing him after eight months. I
was not sure why he came to pick me because he lives quite far from my place. I
was like, why the other family members haven't come to pick me? At the airport,
I asked him, where is my mother? And that was the moment when I came to know
that actually my mother had passed away five months back on the 28th of August.
And I had no information. I reached home on the 7th of January 2011. So between
this period, we didn't have any contact with the families. And I was not
informed. And you'd been thinking of her pretty much every day on that ship.
Obviously. As a son, I was like, once I go back, I'll take my mother to this
place. I'll take my mother to that place. We'll spend a lot of time together.
I'll not come back to ship. Whatever she will tell, I'll do that. You know, a
lot of plans I made to make her life more better. But I think the things were
not on my side. And I thought that, why did I came back? I was pretty okay in
Somalia. I can live with that, but not without my mother. So yeah, I was not
able to believe. This is the truth. This is the reality. What news to be given
on landing after eight months of fear and torture? There were very, very
difficult moments afterwards to adjust without her, without seeing her in the
home. I really miss her. Yeah, I bet you do. I'm sure you do. And obviously,
when you returned, you returned to this really, really sad news of your mother.
You also had to go through a pretty big recovery process, right? There was the
damage to your back. But what about the emotional trauma as well? How did that
start the recovery? I think it took a lot of time because I had a number of
trauma and physical assault during the captivity. Because of that, my back had a
severe pain and I could not move my neck at all. I used to scream when I used to
lie down. So that things were there, as well as I was feeling a bit more afraid
in the nights, feel like something bad is coming definitely on me. I was afraid
of me. So a lot of things were happening in the mind as well. And I was like
totally clueless on how my future will look like what I'm going to do without my
mother. And obviously, as my career, when you have that kind of setback, entire
things have fallen apart. Well, your career did start to change quite quickly.
How did you come to start volunteering with other survivors of piracy and the
families of the victims too? When I came back, I was watching a lot of
television. I used to be very angry whenever I used to hear news about some of
the vessels have been again taken, hijacked. And then I used to see some of the
families, they used to come on the television channels with their folded hands,
crying a lot, appealing to different authorities to help them in getting their
people back. So my main thing was that no other mother, no other family should
have to face this kind of scenario what I personally have underwent at that
particular moment. And that used to give me a bit of encouragement to do
something for them. Maybe try and find out their contacts, give them a call and
give them a support that I also was in captivity, I have come back. So your son
will also come back. Just look after yourself, just stay calm. And then to see
that where I can refer them, who can give them more support. The issues that I
used to listen from them, which I could have never imagined because you know, we
were paid nicely. And so we didn't have to face that particular problem of that
we are not paid and we have sufferings around the financial aspect. But when I
was dealing with these families, they were not being paid for months and years
altogether. The children were not going to schools, they don't have the money to
buy milk and biscuits even. That moved me a lot. But at least I can be there, I
can try to do something to make them survive this particular period. Do you
think when it all sort of started for you, when you started reaching out to
people, do you think it was part of a way for you to start healing, to start
kind of coming to terms with what happened to you and also to your family, to
your mum? I think the best part was that at the end of the day, I used to feel
that I've used my experience and my sufferings in some ways to help someone else
who is in more need right now. And that helped me get going that you need to do
more. At first, this was something Chirag just did by himself, reaching out to
individual families through social media. But his volunteer work grew and he was
asked to attend a conference in London to talk about what more could be done to
help seafarers and their families when they're affected by piracy. By March
2012, it had become a full-time job. And Chirag now looks after the South Asia
region for the International Seafarers Welfare and Assistance Network. You did
make one final journey on a ship, didn't you? Even though you were starting to
move into like helping seafarers and helping their families on a more kind of
professional basis. You sat your final exams to become a lead engineer and you
did one last job. Why was that so important to you? I have to go back. I have to
prove to everyone and also to myself that you are Chirag, you are fit. You can
do the job as you were doing before. And luckily, I was able to get a ship. I
spent a couple of months on that ship, leading the engine room and I was
absolutely fit and fine. I have no problems at all. And I felt that I can do
more contracts like that. It was sort of important for you then to kind of put
it to bed almost that you could still do it if you wanted to, that you were
choosing not to. Absolutely. That's a willingness. If you have the willingness,
if you have the confidence in yourself, I think things can be smoother again,
can be better again for you. Chirag, what happened to you on that ship in that
eight months clearly changed your life. You don't work in engine rooms anymore
at sea. You provide lots of assistance to seafarers all over the world. You do
piracy awareness training. You've been the person to organise those proof of
life questions that you yourself had to answer. Do you think your mum would
appreciate all of the work you're doing now? I really hope so. I really hope so.
It sounds like she really could have done with somebody like you. And that's the
ultimate aim for me that I can be there for some families so that they can be
there when their kin comes back. They can enjoy that particular moment, which I
miss. They can reunite with their loved ones. They can fulfil their dreams, what
they would have thought about. It's, I'm very pleased that some of the families
are able to do that with our assistance. And that's very fulfilling for me. My
thanks to Chirag Bari speaking to me from Delhi. Three of the pirates who were
involved in the 2010 hijacking of Chirag's ship were later captured and two are
still in prison today. Thanks so much for joining us on Outlook. We'll be back
at the same time tomorrow. I'm India Rackson. The producer today was Rebecca
Vincent. We'll see you soon. BBC World Service and now Witness History with me
Anushka Matanda-Dowdy. Today I'm taking you back to 2006 and to the opening of a
brand new art gallery, but not the kind with a cafe and a gift shop. Oh no, grab
your goggles and come with me on an underwater adventure in Grenada, because
this exhibition is eight metres below sea level. So I installed all the
sculptures in an area called Molinare Bay, which was off the west coast of
Grenada. It had very unusual topography. It had a series of underwater ravines
and channels. It had these beautiful areas of white sand surrounded by sort of
little coral enclaves. That's Jason DeCaries-Taylor, the artist responsible for
the world's first submarine gallery. He was a trained sculptor turned scuba
diving instructor who had always fancied the idea of placing his art underwater,
but hadn't quite got around to it. But that all changed in September 2004 when
Hurricane Ivan hit. For eight hours, the islands were pounded with 120 miles per
hour winds, which left most trees leafless, bent or broken. Numerous buildings
were flattened, and between 80 to 90 percent of those left standing were without
roofs or heavily damaged. When a hurricane hits an underwater area, it basically
lifts everything off the sea floor, so rocks, boulders, stones, and then it kind
of scours the surface of the seabed with it. And so any fragile corals, sea
fans, sponges, all get completely scraped off and ground down. The once vivid
landscape of the underwater world had had its vibrance scraped away and replaced
with a coral graveyard. But because of the amount of destruction on land, little
attention was given to subaquatic spaces. Jason worried that as Grenada started
to rebuild, the few remaining reefs would be vulnerable to an influx of scuba
divers. I mean the main reasons I decided to put sculptures underwater were
first I wanted to divert tourists away from fragile pristine areas. I also
wanted to create a habitat, an artificial reef for marine creatures to live in,
for corals and sponges etc to grow on. But I also wanted to explore it from an
artist's point of view and tell stories about humans and nature and how we're
actually intrinsically connected. Jason had his grand plan to distract divers,
so he decided to build the sculpture park opposite Flamingo Bay. It was a
kaleidoscopic mix of pink, green, orange and blue aquatic life. How was he ever
going to attract divers away from that? Well, instead of placing ocean-themed
art in the Caribbean Sea, he decided to submerge life-size human cement models.
Yeah, that ought to do it. Now all he needed to do was build them. So it starts
off with a live cast. So I cover people in a type of alginate dental solution
and plaster of Paris, make an impression of their bodies and then with that,
from that resulting mould, I fill that with a type of marine cement and that's
the actual piece that gets installed underwater. So he needed models, but
recruiting willing subjects was harder than he thought. It was a hard sale, you
know, I'd have to sort of say to someone, you need to come back to my studio,
get covered in Vaseline, I'm going to slap loads of stuff on you, might pull out
some of your hairs, but you will be immortalised underwater. And so they'll be
like, well, that's a lot to take in. After Jason had convinced enough people to
get coated in plaster, it was time to start building the watery wonderland. But
when it actually came to submerging the sculptures, Jason was out of his depth.
We didn't have cranes or any kind of lifting devices. So most of it was done by
hand, lowering sculptures off the side of the boat or floating them out from the
shore. Even the boat he was using was far from ideal. It was inflatable and came
neatly folded inside a small rucksack. But even that didn't stop him. You'd have
to hand pump the boat up and then sort of carry it over the rocks to get it into
the sea. So when you added in scuba gear and lifting bags, you know, it was
quite an effort to get it in the sea. Jason hand placed 75 sculptures in
Molinère Bay. Some were human heads nestled into the side of seaweed covered
rock, or a man hunched over his desk, fingers poised on the typewriter, old
fashioned Grenadian newspapers scattered on his desk. But simply securing the
art underwater wasn't enough. The real mission had always been environmental
regeneration. And it didn't take long to see it was a success. So the sculptures
changed very quickly. After a couple of days, I started to see, you know, thin
film of green turf algae that would grow on the faces. That was quickly followed
by these beautiful purple sponges and blue sponges. Then there was little
juvenile corals. I started to get patches of fire coral, which is this
beautiful, bright orange sort of furry coral that sends off little fingers in
different directions. And then also the fish started to move in. Parrotfish
started to eat some of the algae on the surface. There were little fire worms
that would actually eat the fire coral and crawl across the faces and scrawl
little lines as they walked across. One of my favorite moments was seeing a
sculpture that was actually on the seabed. And when I went down to look at it, I
saw a pair of eyes, you know, staring out from this gap. And when I looked
under, it was this amazing octopus that sort of made a home and it made a little
entrance with shells around. And as it came out, it sort of curled a tentacle
around one of the faces of the pieces. And yeah, it was incredible. After two
years of inflatable boats, unwilling models and questionable equipment, the
exhibition was finally open to the public. You know, some people were, you know,
super fascinated and loved the way they'd started to colonize and grow and
change and loved how the sort of sunlight dappled in between all the different
figures. Others sort of found it eerie and slightly scary and a little bit
intimidating. But after a few years, Jason's work started to gain global
attention and was even named one of National Geographic magazine's 25 Wonders of
the World. He hasn't stopped submerging his sculptures ever since and has now
installed over 1,100 pieces of living art in the world's oceans, rivers and
lakes. We worked in a sort of city fjord that was quite polluted, very sort of
brown water. But actually, when you put your head beneath the water, from
underwater looking to the sky, you know, the light turned it all this beautiful
golden brown green color. So like golden clouds hovering over your head, tiny
shrimps, little banded shrimps started appearing, white calcareous worms. And
that was just sort of on a kind of macro scale. And then when you sort of panned
out, there was thousands of mussels that lived on them, started to see seagulls
going underwater that were eating the mussels that were growing. And then the
sort of the highlight for me was at the end, as I went to leave, we saw some
seals and they were the sort of the apex predators of the whole chain of life.
And for me, that was sort of, you know, really, you know, humbling and inspiring
thing that, you know, didn't take a very big intervention to sort of begin this
whole web of life. And you could see how quickly nature rejuvenates, it changes,
it evolves. And how resilient it is. Jason DeCaries-Taylor talking to me,
Anoushka Matanda-Dowdy, for that edition of Witness History. The food chain is
in 30 minutes. Humans have been feeding birds for millennia, dropping scraps for
our opportunistic feathered friends. More recently, buying food for them,
spending billions of dollars on seed mixes. So why do we do it? I'm Ruth
Alexander, and I'll be exploring what it is about the act of feeding that gives
us so much.