TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-19-19H40M.MP3
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 What is chocolate concrete? Chocolate concrete, I don't know if it's just a northern dish that we have in Doncaster,
but it is made with white flour, plain flour, not any of this self-raising stuff. It's not like a brownie, it's not
magic, it's not posh. It's cheap to make, so obviously for school dinners it's great. Butter, proper butter, nope, don't
do it with margarine. If you're a vegan, you can't have it, I'm sorry. And granulated sugar, none of the caster sugar.
And can you lob it at a boxer in a ring if you need to? Or a poet? No, you can't, I'll tell you why, because if you did
that, that would be absolute sacrilege because it's just so good that you've got to eat it all and then get back in the
queue, pretend you've not had any. If you were to compare both concretes, chocolate concrete is a good type. Like if the
Matthew were like, give this guy some concrete shoes, I'd be like chocolate concrete please. Anybody else want to give
us their thoughts then on this? My approach here would be to lie on the floor, screaming, crying, defecating, let's be
honest. And I can do that much more easily for a minute than for 24 hours. So I'm going to take the boxing. 24 hours of
defecating. There's your chocolate concrete. OK. Well, Zoe and Dan, you need to get ready to pass judgment, just
judgment. And if they can't agree, then I get the deciding vote. Well, that's my show, isn't it? But before we decide
the audience's destiny, let's hear from our ultimate choice expert, who in this case is party planner Polly Betton. You
can sell absolutely anything if you package it the right way. So I could probably put either of those scenarios together
in such a way that people would actually buy tickets for it if it came down to it. I think that the boxing would still
come out on top because you could sell that in as a sort of lightning fast, high adrenaline experience. And also, you
know, a little bit of a sort of testing your bravery, I suppose. I think that would probably sell better than what would
end up being essentially quite an arty farty immersive poetry reading 24 hours. Unless you had a free sponsored bar and
somewhere nice to have a lie down. You'd have to make it quite involved for that to realistically outsell the boxing.
The way she was like, it sounds fun. That's someone who's never been punched in the face before. Great experience. Are
you guys ready to make your choice then? Yes, I'm going to go with the boxing because, you know, we can buy your teeth
back from the tooth fairy after the 60 seconds is up. Zoe, that's my wife. I'll give it to you for free. Dane, which one
are you going for? I think I'm also going to go for the boxing. Most recently, boxing has become so lucrative. YouTube
stars have boxing matches and they're making more from pay-per-view than actual boxers. That's how elusive it is to
watch people that annoy you get punched in the face. And I think that's definitely the way to go. And I also feel like
the bragging rights that you go back to your in-laws with, you're bulletproof from then on out. Well, I think you should
put more salt in that gravy. Have you been in the ring with a heavyweight boxer before, Matt? So we're going with the
heavyweight boxer then for a minute. There we have it. The panel has spoken. The verdict is in. Who's happy with that in
the audience? Give us a cheer if you are. Does anyone think they called that wrong? One person at the front is on a
seventh roll there. Still scribbling away their sonnet. Brilliant. So our audience is off to redeem their gift voucher
for a minute in the ring with a heavyweight boxer. Still, count yourself lucky. They'd run out of the most horrifying
experience. 20 seconds with Jeremy Clarkson. So that brings us to the end of the show. Thanks once again to our
panellists, Zoe Lyons and Dane Baptiste. And to our wonderful audience here in London, I've been Steph McGovern and this
has been The Ultimate Choice. Good night. The Ultimate Choice was presented by Steph McGovern with guests, Zoe Lyons and
Dane Baptiste. It was written and devised by John Harvey and Joseph Mapogo with additional material from Laura Major.
The producer was John Harvey and it's a Naked production for BBC Radio 4. And Steph will be back with more confounding
conundrums at the same time next week. Now on Radio 4, our serialised story, The Circus, continues. A bar in North
Belfast has been refurbished and relaunched with an inaugural talent show and a massive cash prize for the winner. It's
inspiring the locals to brush up on some old skills, including this week an enterprising spiritualist who believes he
can communicate with the dead. Today's story is read by Michael Patrick. Heavenly bodies. I'm here to do the big man's
work. And if I can bring more people into our Father's fold by sharing my gifts, then I am complete. I want to ensure
eternal happiness for as many of the people as I can. I tell my followers, as long as you're with me, your future is
safe as houses. I tell them a happy afterlife is guaranteed. I tell them, you're already angels. You just haven't died
yet. It brings great comfort to most when I tell them that and to those it doesn't, I say, ask yourself why. There's one
reason only. You haven't purchased real estate in the afterlife. My loyal and dedicated followers are on their way to
being heavenly homeowners, a name which I am in the process of trademarking. And I've already designed the T-shirts for.
I know, I never stop. But those spirits, they just won't let me sleep. The chatty wee chipmunks. So I have to put my
mind on God's work or the evil one will have his way with me. My wee investors in the afterlife. They are God's favoured
ones because I have a dedicated line to heaven and I talk to God himself about each and every one of them. Daily. And
there's not many who have that power or have their permanent slot in God's day planner. I've actually started my own
hotline to heaven so those who subscribe to my social media channels can talk to God themselves. Behind a paywall. Out
of necessity. So when they call, they get me on the other end. Not because I think I'm God. Hold on, no way. I like to
think of myself as God's switchboard operator. I put people through to him. Some even heard God talk back to them. Which
I find highly unlikely as God doesn't talk to just anyone. No, it would be delusional to think that he would.
Unfortunately it is power for the course for some reason to attract that sort in my calling. Although I do hate that
phrase. It's a job. A profession. And as I tell my congregation, like any other job, it needs a wage. I mean who works
for nothing? No one. Anyway, attracting the unhinged. It's just what happens when you're close to God. And I think
that's the work of him downstairs. He's like a union leader trying to get the workers to strike. I tell mine, right, to
follow me is to secure your place with G to the O to the D. It's like putting a down payment on a home for your future.
And property in heaven is always going up in price. There's never been a property crash in the hereafter. Problem is,
the older you get, the less time you have to pay for that beachfront property in the sky. So you need to get paying that
mortgage off ASAP. I mean, God forbid you die. And you've only saved enough for a house on a rough estate or, God even
more forbid, a pokey wee flat on a tower block. People have come to me and they've said, Malcolm, I've no money this
month. If I pay you, I won't be able to pay my real mortgage. I tell them, don't start me on a real mortgage. You think
this short time on earth is real? You think this is the real life? I tell them, we're only being tested for the real
life. The afterlife is the real life and the eternal one. Don't forget. I tell them, if you have to sacrifice now for
everlasting luxury, then that's what you do. Unless you're a fool. Are you a fool? I ask them. There's only one pension
plan you need to be paying into. And that's God's pension plan. And right now, it's on offer at Â£99 a month. I will have
to put that up soon. I'll have to put the energy crisis and interest rates going up. I say, God's inflation is good
inflation. It gets you higher and higher and that is, as we all know, closer to Him upstairs. The clue is in the up.
It's high heaven after all. Some people don't like what I have to say. They don't like me because they don't like the
truth. Jesus didn't get anywhere by telling people what they wanted to hear. He told them what they needed to hear.
Vilified by everyone. The church, the state, the people. So, when the haters come at me, saying their church condemns me
and what I do, I say, thank you. I say, then you hate Jesus and me both. There are those that say that I shouldn't
compare myself to Jesus. And I laugh. I tell them, if God didn't want me to compare myself to Jesus, why would He have
made me so like Him? I tell them, I don't think I'm Jesus Himself. No, God forbid. No. And I apologise not to them, but
to God. If I ever misspoke to suggest that I am Jesus, I'm not Jesus. No. I'm like Him. Yes, that's plain for all who
have eyes to see. I tell them, think of me like Jesus' brother. Like Him, but with His own place in the family. Some
might even prefer Him to His brother, but that's not for me to say. It is exhausting being me. And I'm not even joking.
I'm taking care of everyone, always putting myself last. I finally got myself an assistant after being coaxed by all and
everyone. Even God Himself had a word with me. He berated me for working my fingers to the bone. He says, Malcolm, even
I had a day of rest. So I finally relented and I got Sam. I mean, you can hardly say no to God Himself. I mean, the
arrogance. She's doing it for free, Sam. God love her. Well, not for free, but I am giving her a discount on her monthly
subscription. I mean, working for me equals everlasting life. Well, as long as you stay working for me, I can't say what
would happen if you stopped. It's a no-brainer for her, though. Sadly, there are some people with no brains in this
world, but thankfully not Sam. It's amazing what's happening to her right in front of my eyes. I've actually seen it
happen before, so it's not me imagining it. But people actually get smarter when they spend time with me. They start to
think like me, start to say things I would say. It is incredible. Like, just being around me elevates people to a higher
place. Sam's not quite there yet, and God bless her, she is dull. I was thinking, I'm sure God has His reason for making
her that way. And what do you know? God did. Last night, when we were walking up the Westland Road, I was finding it so
hard to listen to her. Through no fault of my own, like, Sam's a wee dote, honest she is. But she has a sleeping tablet.
She starts talking, and I want to sleep. And I thought, Sam equals sleeping tablet. They could use her as an anaesthetic
in operating theatres. Now, I knew that was too big to start off with, so when we got back to the flat, we made a
podcast for insomniacs. I wrote the words, obviously, but I got Sam to record the vocals. I listened to it myself, and I
went to sleep within seconds. So I'm rolling the Sleep podcast out tonight on my Facebook Live reading session. I need
to find a name for it, but I'm not worried. I've sent the spirits a voice note, and they will get back to me later. When
I think of it, we could wean people off those harmful sleeping tablets if we can make it a success. What do I mean if?
If! Listen to me. That's him downstairs whispering in my ear, of course it'll be a success. And think of the future,
removing the need for those toxic drugs and gases they use for operations, using my words, my prayers, like a form of
spiritual hypnotism, not the Derren Brown end of peer show kind. Last night it struck me. This could single-handedly
save the NHS, an idea like this. Sam and I were on our way to the circus. One of my spiritual children, Rachel, had told
me all about the local talent show. She's going to be a magician's assistant, bless. Now, my first reaction was, I'd
never be involved in something that grossly commercial. Me, using my gifts for entertainment, for money. But when I
heard the amount, ten thousand pounds, I had to stop. Think of the amount of God's work I could do with a sum of money
like that. But I was still struggling. It wasn't until I passed the golf course. I saw how busy it was. There must have
been something on in the clubhouse, a christening, a wedding, a charity event, maybe. But I thought about the new club,
the circus. And I thought about the coincidences I told Rachel to look out for, and she found everywhere. And I thought,
stop neglecting yourself. You need to look out for your own coincidences. If I made it work for her, gave her the
answers and opened her eyes, why wouldn't I do it for myself? Surely God and the universe would present for me. I looked
at the golf clubhouse. It was a club. And the talent show was in a club. And then Sam reminded me that golf was played
with a club. I mean, it was pretty obvious, wasn't it? But still, I had resistance. We continued our stroll up to the
circus. I realised it crossed that invisible border where the Protestant road had become Catholic. I passed the New
Barbers and on the Cliftonville Circus, and that's when everything just went into a whole other realm. Now, this is a
weird one even for me, but I heard a rumbling, like an earthquake was brewing below. I felt it come up from the deep up
and through me. You know, normally things descend upon me, so this was something else. And there was water rushing
underneath. Run with me, it said. So I did. I ran Old Park Road, car horns blaring. I ran across Alliance Avenue and
then down its left side. It was behind the houses, the fourth house down. The gates were open. So I ran up the drive,
along the side wall and across the back garden to the hedges. There, behind, was a small stream. The water, it had
something to tell me, but it wasn't for me. It was for whoever lived in this house. It was their parents who had passed.
They must travel on the water and leave this place. I walked back across the grass to the window at the back of the
house. I saw a room empty of furniture, except for a mattress on the floor. Sam had caught up with me. She was talking
to the next door neighbour at the gate. Who lives here? I asked. You're James One, he said. The one running the talent
show. I had my sign from God. I should take part in the talent show. And I had a message for James. The Circus was
written by Paul McVeigh and the reader was Michael Patrick. It was produced in Belfast by Michael Shannon and the story
continues at the same time next Sunday. More or less is next in a couple of minutes and amongst the statistics being
sorted this week, Tim Harford will be investigating how much nurses in the UK are paid compared with their European
counterparts. That's coming up after the news here on BBC Radio 4. I could not imagine that I would stay here for such a
long time. Olga is one of the thousands of Ukrainians offered sanctuary in British homes after the outbreak of war.
Every day I listen to news from Ukraine and I hope to hear some good news. A year on and facing an uncertain future
here, she's going on a search for answers to the question, where next? I am happy to be more independent now. I'm ready.
Ukrainians in Britain, where next? This Tuesday morning at 11 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Only a...