TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-14H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Every step of the way. Watch on BBC iPlayer. On FM, on Longwave, on digital and
on BBC Sounds, this is BBC Radio 4. Hello and welcome to The World at One with
me, Sarah Montagu. The Home Secretary sets out new laws to stop the channel
crossings. Unless we act today, the problem will be worse tomorrow. And the
problem is already unsustainable. We'll consider whether it will work and
whether it complies with international law. Also on the programme, President
Zelensky vows to continue to defend the nearly surrounded city of Bahkhmut.
We'll hear what's at stake. We find out more about the charity report which says
black people are seven times more likely to die than white people after police
restraint in England and Wales. When Adrian was in the van, Adrian says to the
officer, I can't breathe. So he says, you can breathe because you're talking.
And that was Adrian's last word. We'll hear from a mother whose son died in
custody. And... We're putting extra feed out to sheep. We're getting the water
troughs lagged and protected from the frost, which is expected tonight. It's
just all hands to pumps and getting everything ready. The UK braces for snow
ahead of the coldest night of the year so far. We'll hear from a farmer on how
to cope with the unseasonal chill. The BBC News is read by Jane Steele. The Home
Secretary, Suella Brotherman, has set out plans to deter people from crossing
the English Channel to claim asylum in the UK. She told MPs the asylum system
had become overwhelmed and there was an urgent need for reform. Under the
illegal migration bill, migrants entering the UK in small boats would be removed
and blocked from returning or seeking citizenship. Refugee groups have dismissed
the plans as a fantasy. Our political correspondent, Jonathan Blake, reports. No
ifs, no buts, the Home Secretary told MPs. Anyone entering this country
illegally would be detained and swiftly removed. New laws would, she said,
enable illegal migrants to be held without bail or judicial review within the
first 28 days. The Home Secretary would have a legal duty to remove those deemed
illegal entrants and significantly narrow the number of challenges and appeals
that could be made. There would also be an annual cap set by Parliament on the
number of refugees the UK would accept, Ms Brotherman said. Ministers say they
can't be certain their plans are compatible with the European Convention on
Human Rights, but insist they will continue to uphold international law. Labour
say the plans are unworkable. A man has gone on trial at Manchester Crown Court
accused of the murder of Olivia Pratt-Cawbell, the nine-year-old girl shot dead
in her home in Liverpool last August. The jury was told that Thomas Cashman,
who's 34 and from Liverpool, had been armed with two guns and in ruthless
pursuit of his intended victim, a convicted burglar. From Manchester Crown
Court, Roanbridge reports. David McLachlan, KC for the prosecution, told the
jury that Thomas Cashman had meant business and it wasn't good business. The
court heard that he fired three shots at Joseph Nee, who was walking near to
where Olivia Pratt-Cawbell lived, hitting him once. He then tried to shoot him
again, but the gun failed to go off and Mr Nee was able to escape. He made a
dash towards the home of Olivia Pratt-Cawbell, the jury heard, after her mother
had opened her front door to see what was happening. The prosecution says Thomas
Cashman then fired a bullet through the front door and through Ms Cawbell's
wrist to fatally injure Olivia. Thomas Cashman denies murder, attempted murder,
wounding with intent and two firearms charges. The United Nations says it
expects the cost of repairing the damage from last month's earthquake in Turkey
and northern Syria to be more than $100 billion or Â£83 billion. That's much
higher than initial estimates. The 7.8 magnitude quake has killed at least
52,000 people and left more than 1.5 million homeless. Imogen Fuchs reports from
Geneva. The earthquakes in Turkey and Syria took just minutes to cause
devastation that will take billions of dollars and years to repair. UN aid
agencies warn that lack of investment in rebuilding will disrupt livelihoods and
education, leading to unemployment, poverty and child labour. But a first UN
appeal for immediate emergency aid to the earthquake regions is less than 10%
funded. UN officials hope for more money at the donor conference next week, but
it could be difficult. Multiple crises, from Ukraine to Afghanistan to Yemen or
Ethiopia, are competing for cash and nearly all aid operations are short of
money. European football's governing body UEFA has announced a refund scheme for
Liverpool fans who were involved in chaotic scenes at last year's Champions
League final in Paris. Liverpool fans were initially blamed for the disorder,
but an independent report published last month found UEFA was primarily
responsible for the problems. Joe Wilson reports. The final at the Stade de
France was delayed by more than half an hour. French police used tear gas
outside the stadium and many Liverpool supporters gave deeply troubling
testimony of their experiences. An independent report said UEFA bore primary
responsibility for what went wrong. And now the governing body says its refund
plan will cover all of Liverpool's ticket allocation for the game. That's more
than 19,000 supporters. Real Madrid fans and neutral supporters can also apply
for refunds if they were in the most affected areas of the ground. The Spirit of
Shankly fans group and the Liverpool Disabled Supporters Association welcomed
what they called the unprecedented move, while stressing that it didn't exempt
UEFA from criticism. A review of the UK's scientific research capability
commissioned by the government has found there are serious and long-standing
problems. The report's author, the Nobel Prize winner Sir Paul Nurse, says there
needs to be a revolution in how research is conducted for the Prime Minister to
achieve his goal of making the UK a science superpower. The Department for
Science has welcomed the assessment and said it would consider it carefully
before responding in full. Here's our science correspondent Pallab Ghosh. Sir
Paul's conclusions may come as a surprise, following as they do a commitment by
government to substantially increase research funding and the recent
establishment of a new department specifically dedicated to science, innovation
and technology. But a new funding assessment has found that even after the
funding boost, the UK spends less on research as a proportion of its GDP than
the average of other OECD high-income countries. The new assessment finds that
the UK ranks 27th in a list of 38 nations in terms of government research spend.
Sir Paul also claims that ministers are keener on announcing shiny new
institutes than having a stable, long-term plan for science. And he also says
that the number of government research institutes had dramatically shrunk to
only a third of what it was 30 years ago. Tickets for the grand final of this
year's Eurovision Song Contest in Liverpool have sold out just half an hour
after they went on sale today at noon. Ticketmasters' dedicated website crashed
shortly before 12 as fans tried to queue early for the event's nine shows,
including the televised final on the 13th of May. Jane, thanks very much. The
Prime Minister has promised that the legislation his government has just
unveiled this lunchtime will take back control of our borders once and for all.
The Home Secretary, Suella Braverman, admitted that it would push the boundaries
of international law. In the last hour, she explained to MPs in the Commons how
the new law would work. They will not stop coming here until the world knows
that if you enter Britain illegally, you will be detained and swiftly removed.
You will be moved back to your country, if it's safe, or to a safe country, a
safe third country like Rwanda. And that is precisely what this Bill will do.
That is how we will stop the boats. Mr Speaker, this Bill enables detention of
illegal arrivals without bail or judicial review within the first 28 days of
detention, until they can be removed. It puts a duty on the Home Secretary to
remove illegal entrants and will radically narrow the number of challenges and
appeals that can suspend removal. Only those under 18, medically unfit to fly,
or at a real risk of serious and irreversible harm, an exceedingly high bar in
the country we are removing them to, will be able to delay their removal. Any
other claims will be heard remotely after removal. The Home Secretary spoke
about the potential legal ramifications. Our approach is robust and novel, which
is why we can't make a definitive statement of compatibility under section 191B
of the Human Rights Act. Of course, the UK will always seek to uphold
international law, and I am confident that this Bill is compatible with
international obligations. And when we stop the boats, Mr Speaker, the Bill will
introduce an annual cap, to be determined by Parliament on the number of
refugees the UK will settle via safe and legal routes. This will ensure an
orderly system, a considering local authority capacity for housing, public
services and support. So to conclude, Mr Speaker, the British people are
famously a fair and patient people. But their sense of fair play has been tested
beyond its limits, and they've seen the country taken for a ride. Their patience
has run out. The law-abiding patriotic majority have said, enough is enough.
This cannot and will not continue. Well, the Shadow Home Secretary, Yvette
Cooper, wasn't impressed. Today's statement is Groundhog Day. The Home Secretary
has said, anyone who arrives illegally will be deemed inadmissible and either
returned to the country they arrived from or a safe third country. Only that
wasn't this Home Secretary. It was the last one. And that wasn't this Bill. It
was the last one, passed only a year ago, which did not work. As part of last
year's Bill, the Home Office considered 18,000 people as inadmissible for the
asylum system because they had travelled through safe third countries. But
because they had no return agreements in place, just 21 of them were returned.
That is 0.1%. The other 99.9% just carried on, often in hotels, at an extra cost
of Â£500 million. And it didn't deter anyone. Even more boats arrived. So what is
different this time? Yvette Cooper there, Shadow Home Secretary. Well, Jonathan
Blake is BBC's political correspondent. Joshua Rosenberg is leading legal
commentator, presents Radio 4's Law in Action. Jonathan Blake, first of all,
there are high stakes attached to this. We heard, at least from the Shadow Home
Secretary there, given the history. But also it is a promise of the Prime
Minister that it is one of his priorities to get on top of this. It is. In
January, Rishi Sunak set out his five priorities. And one of those, as you say,
was to pass new laws to stop the small boats, as he put it. And you can hear in
the uncompromising tone that Suella Bravman took there in her statement, that
the government is trying to sound like it is talking tough and to come up with
what she described as robust and novel solutions to this problem. She
acknowledged the asylum system is overwhelmed and talked about the urgent and
obvious need for reform. And the government's put forward what it clearly thinks
is going to be a legal mechanism or an approach which will allow it to take new
powers, to, as you heard Suella Bravman outlining there, detain people and
deport them with a period of 28 days where there won't be able to be any
judicial review or bail. So that's at the heart of this. But as for exactly how
it's going to work, where those people are going to be detained, how the
government plans to deport them and remove those people to safe countries, when,
as we've seen, the attempts to do that so far with the Rwanda scheme have failed
to get off the ground, is unclear at this point. And I think if you heard what
the Home Secretary was talking about with a cap that will be introduced later on
with the number of refugees the UK would accept and attempts that the government
has made and signalled that it wants to have agreements with other countries in
terms of resettlement routes and other data sharing agreements, then this is
part of an overall plan rather than the quick fix and a solution to the problem
in and of itself. But there are lots of questions which are still unanswered
here. But yes, I think the Prime Minister and the government keen to be seen at
the very least to be coming forward with ideas to tackle what has so far proved
to be a problem that's all but impossible to solve. Jonathan, thank you very
much. Let's turn to Joshua now. Joshua Rosenberg. Joshua, the government has
certain legal obligations to refugees as far as human rights are concerned. And
there is a new legal obligation on the Home Secretary in this bill that she
must, she at the moment, must deport anybody who arrives illegally. So that is
by any route without approval in advance. How do you square those two? What's
the interplay of those competing legal obligations? Obviously, the government
has obligations under the 1951 Refugee Convention not to send a refugee back to
a country where they face serious threats. But I think the most interesting part
of this bill is what lawyers would call an ouster clause, a clause that seeks to
oust the jurisdiction of the courts. Now, we've not seen the bill. Governments
tend not to publish the bills while the Secretary of State is still on her feet
because that makes it too easy for the opposition. But judging by what she said,
she said that it would not be possible for somebody who is arrested under these
provisions to get bail or judicial review within the first 28 days after the
arrest. Now, normally, somebody can go to court, seek judicial review of a
decision immediately, and the courts will deal with this. How the courts would
deal with a provision which is intended to oust their jurisdiction, their power
to overturn a decision of the Home Secretary that may be false. They may have
got the wrong person. They may have got the wrong name. They may be they've
picked somebody up off the street. Who knows how the courts will deal with that?
We wait to see. OK, so the way that the government envisages it working is that
if somebody arrives in a small boat or in fact, they could arrive in the back of
a lorry or at an airport. But if they arrive, they would be put in, locked up
because they have arrived illegally. And for a month, for 28 days, they have no
legal recourse whatsoever. Well, that's what the Home Secretary says. As I say,
we'll have to see what the bill explains. But that's what she seems to be
saying. And as I say, it's not the sort of thing that the courts will like. I'm
talking about the domestic courts. But there's also the possibility of the human
rights court looming. And a very interesting thing in what she said was that the
government is unhappy with what happened last summer when there were challenges
in the domestic courts which were rejected. And then people who were facing
flights to Rwanda made what the government describes as a late night application
to the European Court of Human Rights under 30 rule 39 of its rules. It can
indicate what it calls interim measures, effectively an injunction stopping this
going ahead. And now the government was concerned about that. It didn't do
anything about the injunction, the interim measures relating to the flights to
Rwanda last summer. But what we heard from the Home Secretary is that there have
been discussions in Strasbourg. They don't like the procedure. They don't like
the fact that there's no appeal. There's no right to be heard. And they want to
challenge that too. OK. Joshua Rosenberg, thank you very much. And Jonathan
Blake earlier. Let's turn now to Tamsin Baxter, Executive Director of External
Affairs at the Refugee Council. Tamsin, good afternoon. Good afternoon. How do
you see this playing out? Is there inevitably a legal, well, it's going to face
up to a legal challenge and it will be decided in the courts? Yeah, I mean,
you're absolutely right. I think the courts are definitely going to look into
this, look into this matter. We signed the 1951 Refugee Convention. Every prime
minister since that since that decree has agreed to offer protection to people
who are seeking it, fleeing war, conflict and violence. And let's not forget,
there's two really important parts of being a party to the Refugee Convention.
Number one is the right to a fair hearing on UK soil. And the announcements
today in Westminster would shatter that obligation. And secondly, that the UK
plays a role in sharing the responsibility for harbouring safe passage to
refugees, playing a role on the international stage in the same way we did when
the war in Ukraine broke out. So it's a really concerning announcement, which
will, which one is highly likely to not work and to cause untold human misery to
refugees and people seeking asylum in this country. OK, so just to be clear, as
on behalf of the Refugee Council, if somebody comes to you, in fact, it's from
today, that you would take on their case and challenge this in the courts? So
Refugee Council right now is not looking to launch a legal challenge. What we're
looking to do is support the tens of thousands of refugees and people seeking
asylum that we work with through our services. So right now, our first priority
is to support people who will be feeling scared, traumatised and really anxious
about today's announcements. OK, what do you mean not looking to? If from today,
if anybody comes to you and they are affected by this, will you say, look, we'll
challenge it in the courts on your behalf? Right now, we are supporting our
staff and our clients with what is brand new legislation that hasn't yet passed
through Parliament. So for us, it's about really understanding what this looks
like in practice. I mean, let's not forget there are 160,000 people awaiting a
claim on their decision in our asylum system, watching their life go by in a
limbo in hotels. This legislation will affect them. And what's more than that,
what we're not clear on through this legislation is where are these people going
to go to? Ultimately, we don't have returns agreements with other safe third
countries to return them to. So where will Afghans fleeing the Taliban be
returned to? Where will Syrians fleeing bombs and bloodshed in Syria be returned
to? Let's not forget we're talking about real people who have escaped trauma,
torture, violence and war. It isn't clear to me how this is ever going to work
in practice. Tamsin Baxter, thank you. Well, let me turn to Damian Green,
Conservative MP for Ashford in Kent, which, of course, is a part of the country
affected very much by the small boats issue. He also served as immigration
minister under David Cameron. Good afternoon. Good afternoon. Can you see how
this could work? Yes. And I think I support the bill. I think it's very
important to try and stop what is effectively people trafficking across the
channel. Obviously, we'll have to explore the practicalities. But I certainly
think I mean, to pick up the last point that actually we do have agreements on
safe routes for people coming from Afghanistan and Syria, just as we do with the
Ukraine. So actually, though, those are not the problem areas. I think one of
the things that reassures me about this is the desire to expand those schemes to
apply to other parts of the world that we're genuine refugees. May well be
coming from. But we know and it's unfortunately it's all that you can never get
into this debate with with people like the Refugee Council who do great work.
But but they will not acknowledge that a lot of people are coming from safe
countries. We know a third of the people coming across the channel from Albania.
But one of the difficulties with this approach, surely, is that if somebody did
come from Afghanistan and had a very strong case, and we know that I mean, I
think it's something like we've got it here, 64 percent of asylum applications
are approved. So if somebody did come from Afghanistan, yes, they might have had
a route that they could have taken separately. But they happen to end up in
Calais and come across on a small boat. Where do they get sent back to? Well,
they they I mean, they go to Rwanda with there is a conceivably. Yes, there is.
And are you uncomfortable at all about them being detained for 28 days without
any recourse to the law? Irrespective of what they have been through previously,
they will want to without any recourse to the law. I mean, they won't be allowed
to challenge that because Parliament will have passed an act and people have to
obey the law in this country. So so that seems to me, as long as Parliament's
passed the act, once this act is through, then then that's fair enough. When you
say they don't have any recourse to the law, they know they will be kept in
civilized conditions. So as we do, we already have immigration detention
centers. So we know how they operate. But as Joshua Rosenberg made made the
point that there are cases where things go wrong, where the wrong person is
picked up, where and there is no opportunity to challenge your detention. I just
wonder if you're if you're entirely really, I just wonder if you're comfortable
about the way that it on the face of it, it will operate. I think that the
practicalities of any asylum system are that you need a degree of law
enforcement, because there are people who will try and exploit the generosity of
the British people towards genuine refugees, which we've seen a lot in recent
years, to exploit the system. And we're seeing that hugely at the moment with
with people coming across the channel. So you do need an element of law
enforcement. If the courts intervene to prevent it operating as the Home
Secretary set out today, what then? Because this has been set up as a priority
for one of the prime minister's priority, a promise, he says. What should happen
then? Well, I mean, that's that's very hypothetical. I think the the trick is to
write legislation that doesn't then fail in the courts. And and everyone is
obviously very aware of the number of challenges we've had to individual cases
of deportation, either from domestic law or from the European court. And as I
understand it, this legislation, which obviously I haven't had time to study in
detail yet, is designed very much with that in mind so that it will it will be
the law of the land. And therefore the courts will enforce it rather than try
and pick it apart. And are you such a supporter of this law that if for any
reason it is stopped in the courts, you would say, look, time for the UK to get
out of the European Convention on Human Rights? No, I think we should stay in
the Convention on Human Rights. And and I've been told that this this law is
entirely compatible with it. So and that seems to me extremely desirable. Quick,
quick thought on the cap. There will be a new cap to decide how many people can
come here. How do you decide that? Is that based on the need from the rest of
the world or from the demand for immigration from this country? I think it
should be decided on asylum grounds rather than general immigration grounds. And
as the other point has been made, there are at the moment 100 million displaced
people around the world. We clearly can't have 100 million people coming to this
country. So it will be decided as a balance between how many trouble spots are
in the world from which people are fleeing and what the capacity of this country
is to absorb them so they can have a decent life when they come here. Damian
Green, thank you very much. Coming up on the programme. It's going to be a cold
night tonight. In some sheltered glens, the temperature could fall away to minus
13 or minus 15, making it the coldest night of this year so far. Winter isn't
over yet. A farmer will tell us what he's doing to prepare. Do get in touch on
social media, hashtag BBC WATO. Our email address is worldatone at bbc.co.uk.
There is some very grim footage online of an unarmed Ukrainian prisoner of war
smoking a cigarette who says glory to Ukraine before he is shot. President
Zelensky has vowed to find the Russian soldiers who killed him. The soldier was
last seen near the eastern city of Bakhmut at the beginning of February. Russia
has been trying to take Bakhmut for months. At the weekend it was suggested that
it was close to overwhelming the city and Ukraine would probably be withdrawing
its troops. But President Zelensky has since said they will continue to defend
the city and troops will be reinforced. Now it is very hard to speak to anyone
in Bakhmut. Our signal is weak, people are wary that their cause could be
detected by Russian military. But we have been able to receive two text messages
from Ukrainians trapped in Bakhmut which we voiced out. I am scared. A lot of
people have been evacuated. Everyone who could leave already left. The rest are
hiding in basements. You could see dead bodies on the streets. The city is badly
destroyed. The battles are fierce. Russian army and Wagner groups are winning. I
am very scared when I look at our city. Recently there were battles again
somewhere near me. The shots were so loud and close. Most of our population has
already left. But there are people who have nowhere to go and have remained in
the city, living in terrible conditions and danger. Our armed forces are
fighting but they are very exhausted and outnumbered. Many have died or been
wounded. Michael Clarke, former Director General of RUSI, the UK's leading
defence and security think tank. Professor Clarke, good afternoon. Yes, hello.
What is your understanding of what is going on? I know there's lots of
conflicting reports but also why it is being so hard fought over this city? It's
a bit like Sverodonetsk back in July. There's no enormous strategic value in
Bakhmut. In fact there's less in this case than there was in any others. But for
seven months now the Wagner Group, the private military company, the mercenaries
who are fighting for the Kremlin under Prigozhin, this man who runs the Wagner
Group, they made Bakhmut a target in order to show that the Wagner Group can
take ground when the rest of the Russian army were losing ground. And so it's
become a big symbolic issue. And the Ukrainians were finding it reasonably easy
to defend Bakhmut in the early couple of months. They found it harder because
more and more troops have been pushed into it, particularly a lot of these
convicts which the Wagner Group were recruiting, up to 50,000 convicts it is
said. I think that might be a bit of an overestimate but certainly up to 50,000.
And they were pushing these people in just with â using personnel to take
ground, which they've done. And they've almost surrounded Bakhmut. And the
Ukrainians are in this situation now where they've got to decide do they live
with the symbolic problem of having given it up and Zelensky, President Zelensky
clearly doesn't want to do that or do they still lose more of their own troops
defending it. Okay. Do you think it's inevitable that it will fall to Russia?
It's not inevitable but I think it's most likely. It's not that the Russians are
going to get through the whole of the city itself. They're only in the eastern
third. But when they can surround it, particularly to the southwest, it's the
H32 highway I think it is to the southwest, only a dirt road really. Once that
gets cut off, then the Ukrainians will find that they can't allow themselves to
be surrounded. There will come a point at which they have to pull out. And we
thought that point would have arrived last week. It hasn't and the Ukrainians
have conducted some counterattacks. So maybe they can keep it open. But once
they can't keep it open, then they will have to get out. We meantime had the
head of the Wagner group saying that they've been betrayed because they're not
getting the ammunition they need in the city. Well, it's true that they've been
short of ammunition. And Prygozhin, head of the Wagner group, this is part of
his feud with Gerasimov, the chief of the general staff, and Shokgu, the defense
minister. And essentially this is the Wagner group versus the official Russian
army vying for facilities, vying for the supplies. And he's saying that the
Russians are short of ammunition all across the front, particularly artillery
shells. And what he's saying is that they are keeping us deliberately short of
ammunition because they don't want us to succeed. And the fact that he's saying
this on a daily basis in public, it's on telegram channels, shows what a problem
there is within the Russian forces, that they've got a sort of a warlord in
Prygozhin openly criticizing and allowing his men to be quite obscene in their
abuse that they heap on Gerasimov and Shokgu. Professor Michael Clarke, thank
you very much. There was a shocking headline last month that we thought was
worth returning to and taking some time to look at. It's that black people are
seven times more likely to die than white people after police restraint in
England and Wales. It came from the charity Inquest, which had analyzed official
data. And yet they say, also say, Inquest also say, that no officer has ever
been found to have acted in a racist or discriminatory way. It's also worth
saying that in over 30 years, only one officer has ever been convicted of
manslaughter for using force on duty. Now, Adrian MacDonald, a father of two,
died in the back of a police van in Staffordshire in 2014. And his mother,
Germaine Phillips, told me what happened. What I know what's happened is because
I've seen the video footage, I've been to the inquest, I've been to the
misconduct, and I've read what they've written about Adrian. I've seen the
report. On the 22nd of December, 2014, Adrian went to a party with his friends.
Adrian came a bit disturbed. He had a mental breakdown. I found out that he had
a bit of cocaine in his system. The people that were having the party rang the
police and said to the police that this black man entered the house. So they had
two officers came. Before they even got out of the car, they draw the tasers.
They said they were talking to Adrian. Adrian at times knew that there were
police officers, although he was paranoid in the room. He's barricading himself
in the room. They said that they didn't feel Adrian was a threat or they didn't
feel that their life was in danger. That's what they wrote in their statement. A
sergeant came and then the sergeant requested a police dog. And Adrian got even
more paranoid because the dog was barking and he was really frightened. The
officers sent the dog in and they were outside of the room. So the dog is biting
Adrian up in the room. The dog is not in control. So the dog handler had to
force himself to get into the room. So he tasered Adrian. The dog's biting
Adrian. Adrian's on the floor. Now, Germaine, I know that they got him into the
van and there was footage from the van too, which shows him clearly in
difficulties. Yes. He couldn't walk down the stairs. He had to go down the
stairs on his bottom with his hand tied behind his back. They actually dragged
Adrian into the van. Adrian didn't know where he was. And then they left him.
One of the officers was supposed to be watching Adrian, but the door was locked.
When Adrian was in the van, Adrian says to the officer, I can't breathe. So he
says, you can't breathe because you're talking. So he says, deep breath, deep
breath. And that was Adrian's last word. The sergeant and the inspector were at
the facility of the van. They left from the van when the officer says that he
couldn't, that Adrian's saying that he couldn't breathe. And he's gone quiet.
They left. The sergeant and the inspector left and went to check on his...
That's what he said in the misconduct. He went to check on his dog and his
officer. And we should explain, Germaine, that two officers were found guilty of
misconduct over Adrian's death, but they were then later cleared of all charges.
They were found guilty of not giving Adrian the help that he deserved, the care,
because they didn't call for an ambulance straight away. They left him in the
van. Did you think immediately that race was a factor? Of course race played a
part. Race played a big part. As a mother, I never tried to use race unless I
see race. And at first, when they came to tell me, remember, I had to ring them.
Although Adrian's passport was in his car, his driving license was in his car,
he had some other documents in his car. So they knew who Adrian was, they knew
Adrian's address and everything. They never came to tell me that Adrian died.
When the liaison officers eventually came to my house, all they were bothered
about was Adrian was a crazy man. He hit the dog over his head. The dog was
unconscious and it's written in black and white. I've got all the reports here.
Now, Germaine, the Home Office has always said that the data that they have
doesn't suggest that black men are more likely to die in custody or after
there's been force used by the police. And they say that actually there isn't
enough data to show. But you are in no doubt. I mean, you said that the police
arrived, having been told there was a big black man, and that they approached it
in a certain way. Yes. You think what? That there was a racist approach? Of
course there was a racist approach. From day one, there was a racist approach.
You, a professional person, somebody that's supposed to be helping somebody, you
see somebody is disturbed, why would you choose to send a dog in? Now, the
Inquest report has looked at all the data and said black people are seven times
more likely to die than white people after coming into, after any contact with
the police where force has been used. The fact that there is now that figure,
how did you feel when you saw that? Because presumably you have for years been
saying this is an issue and you've not been believed. You know what? I felt
sick. And in another way, I felt happy because it was somebody that identified
what families have been seeing. Do you think things are going to change? I mean,
we've had so much, there's been so much happened since your son died, not least
the death of George Floyd. To be honest, I don't think things will ever change.
The only way things will change is when the government will accept what the
families and loved ones have been saying. You know something? But how would you
feel when it's all white majority? For the misconduct, all white, and they were
all ex-police. They were laughing and creating. I had no representation, none
whatsoever. We all do things wrong. If they came to me and says, look, Sergeant
whatever did this and he didn't realise, you know, but you know what? I would
accept that. But it's the fact that they didn't even want to say sorry. Adrian
isn't here to defend himself. And I have seen the video footage I had as a
mother to watch from the start to the finish and listen to the lies that they've
told. As a mother, I'm still grieving and I will never stop grieving because
Adrian needs justice. And these officers need to be accountable. And the
government needs to open up now and listen to what the families are saying. And
they need to reopen these cases. Germaine Phillips talking to me this morning.
Well, we contacted Staffordshire Police for their response to what was said. And
they told us the inquest into the death of Adrian concluded he died as a result
of the effects of cocaine and the stress of the incident. The role officers
played in the detention of Adrian was thoroughly examined at the inquest. The
jury concluded the officers acted appropriately based on the information they
received that a man had gained access to a flat and was causing damage to
property. Sadly, this information was false. This meant the officers did not
have a true picture of the incident they were attending, but the jury found the
force used was appropriate in the circumstances. That's the statement from
Staffordshire Police. You also heard some comments there about the Police
Federation and the chair of Staffordshire Police Federation has said the
circumstances of this tragic incident were fully investigated and examined over
a four year period. Our colleagues were found to have acted appropriately and in
accordance with the duties and responsibilities upon which society asks of them.
Now, Adrian's case featured in the charity inquest report and their director,
Debra Cole, told me about its findings and how it disproportionately affects
black men. This is official data that's never been made public before and it
shows that they are seven times more likely to die following the use of
restraint by police. And yet, the processes of investigation that follow, that's
the independent investigation by the police watchdog, the IOPC, the inquest
process and other legal processes, do not properly consider the potential role
that racism plays in the treatment of the person who's died. And I need to
contextualise that because this is about the patterns that we see, the evidence,
very disturbing racial stereotyping of black men that equates them with
dangerousness and criminality. In particular, we see the immediate resort to the
use of force, particularly on those in mental health crisis, rather than the de-
escalation attempting to calm the situation down. But before we get into that
challenge that you present there, that this is stereotyping, we should say that
the Home Office says that they acknowledge there are racial disparities across
the criminal justice system, which they say reflect wider social disparities,
but they say that the data does not suggest black men are more likely to die in
custody in cases where use of force or restraint is present and the numbers are
too small to draw any conclusion. How do you explain the difference? What you've
come up with, seven times more likely, and them saying in 2021, no difference.
One of the problems is the way in which the Home Office rely on the in-custody
data. And one of the concerns and one of the things we've outlined in our report
is the fact that there are two categorizations of data, one in custody and one
following police contact. When you look at those figures together, that is where
we have got the particular disproportionality, because deaths following the use
of restraint tend not to happen in custody, in the police setting. They tend to
happen in the street. So the stark racial disproportionality evidenced in our
data, I think, is highly significant. And it does beg the question about why it
is that this issue is not being adequately scrutinized by the post-death
investigation processes. Why do you think it isn't then? Why do I think? The
suggestion that actually, if they look properly at the figures, they would see
what you're seeing. Because I think there is a problem of acknowledging that
racism is institutional and is institutionalized in police culture and practice.
And I think at a time when we are hearing daily accounts of problems of misogyny
within the police force, we have to acknowledge as well that racism is a real
issue. And at the end of the day, these are the deaths of people at the hands of
police officers. And we need to make sure that the investigation processes
subject those deaths to proper, effective scrutiny. That's Deborah Cole's
inquest director. Now, we contacted the Home Office. They also sent us a
statement. I'll just read out part of it. They say we expect the police to take
a zero tolerance approach to racism. Nobody should experience force because of
their race. Force by police must be lawful, proportionate and necessary. And
they also point out that part two of the Angiolini inquiry, which is looking at
the Sarah Everard case, will examine policing culture to ensure improvements are
made where necessary. Well, we may already be well into March with plenty of
signs of spring on the way, winter those not letting go yet. Forecasters say
that Arctic air will bring the coldest temperatures of the year so far. That
could mean up to 40 centimetres of snow in the southern highlands. Well, in the
middle of the highlands is Grantown-on-Spey and Robert McDonald is a farmer
there. And he joins us. Robert, what's the weather like at the moment? How are
you set there? We're sitting on two or three inches of snow. The temperature is
sitting about zero. But it's a lovely sunny day. You would hardly know what's
right in the corner. Right. And when you say what's around the corner, what have
you been warned is coming? Well, we've been told to expect temperatures down to
about minus 13 tomorrow morning and anything up to 40 centimetres of snow. So
it's fairly concerning. Now, you have animals to look after. What does that mean
for how you how you look after them? Well, what we're doing is we've spent the
morning taking the sheep into areas where there's shelter and where there's
trees. And it will keep them out of the worst of the worst of the snow and the
wind. And then the cattle, cattle are mainly inside at this time of year. So
we've just been making sure that we don't get extra lagging on the pipes because
the water, water, water freezing is the biggest problem that we face when
they're inside. And we've well, we've picked up a trick from our Canadian
cousins of putting salted water bottles with salted water into the into the
water troughs to keep that water unfrozen. So it's just it's just extra work
that we could basically do without this time of year because we're busy calving
at this time. Well, I was wondering, calving, it's a bit early for lambing,
isn't it? Yeah, we don't start lambing until next month, thankfully. We'll try
and wait for hopefully it'll be better weather. How unusual is it to have
weather like this now? Well, up here, it's not that unusual. We had a blast like
similar to this in December where the temperatures got down to minus 18. And
it's it's it tends to be the first 12 to 24 hours are really difficult until
you've kind of got the hang of it and you've got everything fed. But it's it's I
mean, the welfare of the stocks are our main priority and getting them making
sure that they're fed and that they've got fresh water coming to them. That's
that's the biggest concern. OK, do you go out in the morning with your sort of
heart in your mouth as you're worried about your stock? Well, you do a bit. As
long as you're prepared and as long as their bellies are full, they do tend to
be OK. Because they're quite, they have got sense. They'll find the shelter spot
and the warmest spot to curry into at night. Robert, Robert MacDonald, thank you
very much and good luck tonight. Just a reminder of one main headline. The
government set out fresh plans in Parliament to try to stop migrants crossing
the channel in small boats. Labour has dismissed the illegal migration bill as a
government by gimmick. And we'll have more in PM at five. I'm Sarah Montagu and
that's the world at one forty five. Studio direction was by Alana Bowles. The
editor was Scott Adam. Now on BBC Radio 4, we join Emily Knight for Flight of
the Ospreys. Today, we follow the migrating birds as they cross the wide Sahara.
Pulled south by the lure of a warm West African winter, Britain's Ospreys have
left behind the hills of North Wales and the forests of the Scottish Highlands.
You could not get a more treeless place. Travelling with them all the way is a
team of biologists and filmmakers. They're visiting Osprey nesting sites and
meeting up with local ornithologists along the route, investigating why so few
of these birds will make it back home to Britain. We went in there with knowing
that desert storms, sand storms are common. It is hard. It's really hard
environment. We couldn't imagine an Osprey wanting to stop there. It's late
October and the conservation convoy led by United Nations ambassador for
migratory species, Sasha Dench, is heading south through Morocco, en route to
the Sahara Desert. As the team drove on, it was getting drier. It was flatter.
It was hotter. But this was a landscape that none of us had seen before. So it
was actually quite exciting. It was one of the things we'd come for. But I think
actually whilst it is hard, it's still absolutely stunning. The priority for
almost every migrating bird is to get past the Sahara as quickly and as
efficiently as possible. That's why Sasha was so intrigued when she got a call
from a fellow Osprey fan in Norway. My name is Rune Ã, I'm a Norwegian scientist
in birds of prey and I work on Ospreys, satellite tracking Ospreys. Rune has
spent the last 10 years researching the migration routes of his local Ospreys.
He's attached satellite trackers to 11 of them, but they've suffered a pretty
traumatic rate of attrition. The most problem is shooting, illegal shooting. So
we have lost one in France, we have lost one in Nigeria, one in Burkina Faso and
probably one in Ivory Coast. Two of the trackers just stopped working. Two of
the Ospreys, they navigated wrong, so they ended up in the desert without any
food, any water. And one ended up somewhere in Burkina Faso, we don't know what
happened to it. And one in Mali. And that tracker is still working, but we can
see it's laying behind two bushes. The problem is that that's a jihadist area,
so we cannot obtain that tracker. So that's 10 Norwegian Ospreys down and just
one left. A female Osprey by the name of Mrs Rauer. Rune has been tracking her
for four complete migrations and he's become rather attached. She's an Osprey
with a lot of spirit. She's one of the birds that's been recorded actually
rejecting a mate a couple of years into being a partner, which everybody thought
was a bit unusual and then found actually that the mate then became obviously
quite ill. So clearly she rejected a mate that was ill and then eventually was
killed by an owl of some kind. I guess she's an old Osprey because she is kind
of narrow when she's flying up and down to Western Sahara. If you see on younger
Ospreys, they kind of have a broad migration route, but this one is really,
really narrow. So we think she's really experienced. According to the data from
her satellite tag, Mrs Rauer flew straight from the wetlands of France to one of
the most inhospitable spots on earth. When Rune saw the land route that Sasha
and the team would be taking, he asked them to track her down. First of all,
what we were given was basically a few points on a map. She spends her time on a
section of the Sahara right near the coast. She seems to be fishing on a bay and
then going in to feed and potentially to roost at night. So we basically sent
the team an aerial image from Google Earth of the region and asked them to go
out and find a series of bushes at this particular point and try and see if they
could find Mrs Rauer, what she's doing, where she's going, any threats in the
area, etc. So that was the mission. First of all, what did the area look like?
It was just solid desert, very few features. It was all just sand and rocks and
very little greenery, no water in sight. Yeah, it was quite a desolate place. It
was really off-road, like Matt said. It was like all the desert, but there were
some pistes, what they call off-road tracks. So we decided to convoy two
vehicles and head into the piste with the GPS and not really knowing where we're
going except for the compass, like, oh, it's a bit this way, a bit that way. And
in the middle of the flat plain was this mound of sand that we could see that
roughly correlated with where the GPS point would be. We got out the cars and as
we were walking across to the mound, we saw a bird fly off the mound that
resembled an osprey and I think Charlotte actually managed to get some footage
of it. We went to climb the mound to see what else we could find as a true
detective, bird detective. So we went up there. We ended up finding quite a lot
of different bones, like mammal bones. Then we also found a lot of fish
skeletons, like quite a few of them, actually. The predominant fish bones look
to be monkfish. And in lots of sites, monkfish are a fish associated with deeper
waters. But actually they can be found in very shallow water. If they're not
fished out, it's likely that there is so little fishing pressure that there are
actually monkfish in shallow water. Mrs Rower, wise old bird that she is, seems
to have settled on the perfect wintering ground. It's dry and it's desolate, but
she's got the pick of the finest monkfish to feast on. So whilst the team was
celebrating the fact that they had gone there, they had found this bird. A
couple of people had been left on the main road with the main vehicle and whilst
they were waiting, a police vehicle turned up and said that it was actually
still, whilst it's not marked along the roads, there are still live landmines,
they fear, around the area. This stretch of the Sahara is what the United
Nations call a non-self-governing territory. For decades, it's been tussled over
by Morocco and the Polisario movement. That makes it a peaceful spot for Mrs
Rower, but a dangerous one for off-road conservationists. The Zoologist message
said, make sure you follow your tracks back, there are a lot of landmines in the
area. And then that's when we were so hyped up and we'd been running all up and
down that mountain, we decided to found the bird and then, you know, like, oh,
oh, danger. Mel, Matt and Charlotte made it back safely with their footage and
Rune in Norway was very pleased to hear that the last of his tagged ospreys was
enjoying desert life. I'm really excited that at least somebody has seen her
area because on Google Maps, it's only sand, just sand everywhere and it's kind
of amazing that she can survive in such areas. She appears to be really, really
strong, so hopefully we can have her for many, many years. Hugging the coast
road, just like most of the young ospreys, Sasha and her team cross Mauritania
and into Senegal and the beautiful colonial-era capital of Saint-Louis. The city
is built on prime osprey country, where the Senegal River meets the Atlantic,
creating a dynamic and fertile network of sandbanks and lagoons. The team spot
140 ospreys in just two hours, with the help of local ornithologist Jean-Marie
Dupas. Jean-Marie is a French expat who's lived in Senegal for well over 30
years, very passionate about birds, started in particular to be interested in
the osprey when he realised the importance of the Senegal and the Gambia regions
for the osprey. I explained to Europeans that we started this. We lost three
quarters of our bird species long before there was a decline in Africa. We don't
want the same mistakes here. We don't want to lose wetlands like we've done in
France. We shouldn't turn everything into large-scale farmland, where we've
removed all the areas for birds and biodiversity. I'm not saying the Africans
are doing it badly. I'm just saying that for the last 30, 40 years, the
Europeans have provided a bad example. We're here at the edge of the Nianing
Lagoon in Senegal. This is where osprey come to spend the winter. Unfortunately,
it's entirely polluted by plastic, like many Senegalese wetlands. He took us to
a site called Mbodi, where there is always a Scottish bird, and they call it
Blue 195. Basically, it's got quite a large lagoon area to himself. It's got
some trees. It's quite close to the coast. It's got some shallow areas, but he's
surrounded by plastic. There is plastic in the water. There's plastic on the
little islands. This osprey is obviously regularly eating fish, which are living
surrounded by plastic. So what is the plastic load is slowly picking up. All
through the African section of this journey, fishermen have been a vital part of
the story. In Morocco, they followed the osprey to find the best catch. In
Mauritania, only locals are permitted to fish along great stretches of the
migration route, leaving enough food for the ospreys. But Senegalese fishermen
and the ospreys face a threat that's common to the rest of West Africa. Foreign
boats taking the fish. One of my friends took me to sea for the first time
because one of the fishermen didn't turn up, and he asked me to come with him. I
was just 14 or 15 years old, and when I became a fisherman, for years I noticed
what I called injustice, because I saw collisions between industrial fishing and
small-scale fishing. No one ever reacted. Even if we complained to the state,
they didn't take action. I was asked to go and speak to a man called Karim. We
sat down and I said, so yeah, I've come to ask questions about fishing, local
fishing. And he said, well, I started a fishing revolution, the first fishing
revolution back in the 80s, to which I responded, well, revolution is a pretty
big word. I'm talking about industrial boats, huge fishing boats from Europe and
Asia, Spanish boats, Korean boats, Chinese boats. There are so many in Senegal.
These boats depleted the Senegalese resources. That didn't seem to bother them.
They destroyed equipment, and there are so many fatalities each year because of
these boats. There were regular collisions between the big boats and the smaller
boats, and he says that each year between 70 and 80, or sometimes more,
Senegalese fishermen were killed. I just thought, you can't colonize me here in
my own country. You can't come to my country, steal my resources, kill me,
destroy my equipment and take my fish to Europe. So I called the fishermen and
said, listen, guys, the state's not going to solve this. We must do it ourselves
in our own way. An eye for an eye. One night, sat around, managed to get
together about 100 different fishermen who all agreed that they had to do
something about this. And the only thing they could think of was to go out to
sea, completely surround one of the big fishing boats and then climbed on board.
The captain thought that they were going to start a conversation, but in fact,
they kidnapped him. And he's explaining this was a kind of an eye for an eye, a
tooth for a tooth. If they were going to kill our fishermen, we had to
demonstrate that we might be prepared to do the same. He just said, look, did
you really have a plan to kill him? And they said, no, but we needed people to
think we would, and we needed to make an international incident. And that was
the only thing we did. We had no power. Nobody would listen to us. Even in
Senegalese law, the lives of Senegalese fishermen meant nothing compared to the
lives of foreigners. Within 24 hours, I was being seen as a hero. Others said I
was sick or mad. It was after that that I was called the fisherman's advocate.
It's challenging to think that the fate of the Osprey could be connected to
issues that are as complicated as competition between nations for the rights to
fish in far-flung places like Senegal and where it's small-time fishermen that
are at the front line of conservation. The waters of West Africa are plagued by
foreign fishing vessels. Around 200 boats subsidised by the European Union buy
licences to fish, while other boats from China, Turkey and Morocco dodge the
inadequate patrols and fish illegally. But legal or illegal, they're doing the
same thing, extracting high-value fish for foreign tables and low-value catches
for fishmeal production. Both massively reduce the catch available for local
subsistence fishermen and migrating birds like the Osprey. But it's linked. It's
directly linked. Birds can't live without fish. If fish disappear, we all
disappear because we won't have anything to eat. The Senegalese are dependent on
fish, but it's even worse for the birds. Birds can't eat vegetables. If the fish
disappear, so do the birds. In next week's episode, we catch up with the latest
adventures of Glenn, one of our tagged Scottish Ospreys, last spotted in the Bay
of Biscay, hitching a ride on a cargo ship. Glenn has been an amazing bird so
far. He's become a bit of a star because he's jumped from ship to ship out in
the Bay of Biscay. So he's done really well up until this point, but we've now
lost contact with the tracker. I just worry, has he been predated or has he
injured himself? It's a bit of a nail-biting wait. Flight of the Ospreys was
produced by Emily Knight and Alistair Cross and the journey continues tomorrow
at the same time here on BBC Radio 4. There are childish squabbles in Ambridge
in a couple of minutes. The Archers is after the news. Best Loves Porgy