TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-06-15H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 cousin regime changer and that's available now on BBC sounds BBC news at two
o'clock the former metropolitan police officer who killed Sarah Everard has been
sentenced to a further 19 months imprisonment for exposing himself on three
occasions one of the offences took place days before Wayne Cousins murdered the
33 year old he's currently serving a whole life term our correspondent Helena
Wilkinson is at the old bailey she says police were given Cousins car
registration following the third incident but no action was taken the judge in
her sentencing remarks said the fact that no police came to find him Cousins or
his black car to question him about these incidents can only have served to
confirm and strengthen in the defendant's mind a dangerous belief in his
invincibility in his power sexually to dominate and abuse women without being
stopped the government has suggested that it's planned new laws to deter small
boat crossings will not require the uk to withdraw from the european convention
on human rights the legislation would see illegal migrants removed and banned
from applying for british citizenship refugee charities have criticized the
plans police have said that a 14 year old ukrainian girl has died after being
found unconscious on a beach in south devon officers were called to reports of a
missing teenager from the dorlish area on saturday police in south wales looking
for five people have found three dead and two seriously injured in a suspected
road accident the group were found two days after they went missing following a
night out a car was discovered in the saint melons area of kardiff in the early
hours of this morning the un has estimated that at least one and a half million
people are now sheltering in tents in turkey a month after the earthquakes that
hit the country and neighboring syria more than 50 000 people died in the
disaster england's men's cricketers have lost the third and final one day
international in bangladesh they bowled the host out for 246 in chittagong and
could only reach 196 in reply to lose by 50 runs england have still won the
series 2-1 bbc news this is bbc radio 4 in a quarter of an hour we have a brand
new drama series set in the not too distant future and at the confluence of
artificial intelligence big technology data manipulation and democracy a new
five-part series galapagos starts at 2 15 but now ben wants to blow away the
cobwebs in the arches so why don't we head over to hayden wood someone likes the
idea i just want to walk off some of that lunch i feel like all i've done this
weekend is eat the food at jennifer's wake was amazing wasn't it funny to think
that lamb pie was actually cooked by her yeah although i wouldn't put it past
gran to do something similar oh sorry i did my first late shift at the laurels
last night oh how was it yeah okay well good actually i'm doing some more
evenings next week you got your birthday off though yeah well at the moment i do
but i only get the shifts a few days in advance so that could all change well
fingers crossed it'll be good to do something don't worry about a gift though
it's your 21st yeah i know but we've had this conversation as if i wouldn't get
you a present nothing extravagant then i know how tough the egg business is
right now yeah i keep shopping around for the best price feed but i'm still
losing money you're gonna stick with it though an avian flu hasn't helped just
hoping for some better economic weather isn't everyone in the meantime i'm
focusing on trying to attract more customers anyway what are we gonna do for
your birthday we know it's not gonna be a party at the stables not this year
anyway it's your bachelor pad you can throw a party there anytime i guess don't
suppose you've thought about moving back in to the stables is that not the plan
uh actually josh i don't think i'm quite ready okay i'd rather stay here at
brookfield for the time being you know close to mum and dad makes sense it also
means i can help manage the b&b and everything else well yeah we're only halfway
through carving and there's still most of the lambing to come you don't mind
then no of course not sounds like a good idea thanks mate but if you're staying
put i should probably start looking for a new house mate perhaps even get a
third person for the box room of course would that be okay i didn't even think
about it all this time you've been paying my rent as long as i'm not disturbing
you brian no no come in if you're sure yeah you'll have to excuse the mess
though yeah i see what you mean i know it looks like a parcel depot in here but
i'm making good progress i think adam and xander at home yeah adam's dropping
xander off at alice's for the afternoon that's nice uh he said he might call in
on his way back i thought friday went really well let's say we got through it it
wasn't easy kind of you to bring me lunch yeah i just thought you might like to
share the beef stew and dumplings i made yeah it looks delicious thank you i
mean you can have it later if you've already eaten actually i've i've been
rather preoccupied with this lot to think about food so what all these boxes and
bags are jenny's clothes mostly handbags pairs of shoes i see some of it's from
her wardrobe then there's stuff she she never unpacked after the move from home
farm right well it just doesn't seem much point hanging onto it at all i mean
it's much better it goes to a good cause and sit around here gathering dust
don't people usually say to wait like a year or so before it's only clothing i'm
not waiting a year it's nonsense this needs sorting so why not now i know i
don't need it oh others might though you mean yeah adam kids but of course and
the children are welcome take whatever they want and they'll need to do it
pretty sharpish can't have everything cluttering up in here can't have
everything cluttering up the sitting room like this well listen brian hello oh
we're in here adam perhaps i'd better have a quick word before he sees all this
i hope you don't mind both in and me dropping in no it's fine adam oh goodness
as i said to him excuse the mess because i want to get this lot sorted by friday
otherwise i'll miss the collection for the w i bring them by right i've been
going at it since this morning can you believe no your mom certainly liked her
clothes didn't she so uh those piles you're getting rid of and that box of shoes
too and the pile you're keeping that's what well once i started to go through
them they didn't seem much logic and keeping one blouse over another she had so
many clothes adam i'm pretty certain i i've never seen her wear half of them
right we should think about making a move adam i only stopped in to drop the
stew off so you're telling me you have no recollection of her wearing this well
obviously that was her smart winter coat or this jacket what's your point adam
they're only clothes for heaven's sake don't you think it's a little soon it had
to be done at some point honestly honestly the sooner these jobs are ticked off
the better we'll all feel really because that's pretty far from how i feel right
now come on ben don't let it ruin the walk how could i have been so stupid
though you're not stupid selfish then you've had a lot going on i probably
should have said something earlier it's me who should have said something josh i
just wasn't thinking forget it no i'll pay you back no you don't have to do that
but you're out of pocket listen auntie shula gave me a rent reduction i don't
believe you you just said something before look i've dealt with it stop covering
for me will you i've caused enough trouble already what do you mean look at all
this stuff with the electric charging station ben there's people in the village
accusing mum and dad of only caring about making money and if i hadn't messed up
they'd never have needed to sell the field that's not on you it's more trouble
that i've caused josh listen i've lumbered you all with stuff you don't deserve
mum and dad will handle it ben and so will i i just need to find a new house
mate as soon as that's all sorted we're all good okay ben look he's already said
he wasn't going to donate anything without checking with you lot first oh yes he
says that now he can see i'm annoyed adam he is trying and to be fair to him if
this is what he feels he needs to do then like isn't that okay right i've got
two bags for life you can fill them in and there'll be more in the shed if you
need do you think you'll need more well it's hard to say i've only just started
looking through the piles you've made uh you know you need to at least fold the
clothes before you donate them i was going to look at this adam what is it the
hat jennifer wore to our wedding of course huh remember i thought it might be
too much well not everyone not everyone could pull it off she did though yeah
jenny certainly did but you were happy to throw it out look i thought someone
else would get some use out of it we can take it adam i just wish you'd talk to
us before deciding to get rid of all mum's things having to pick my way through
these piles it's all so rushed what if i missed something well i'm sorry but i'm
the one living here after all and as i said to me and it was my intention to ask
you all if you wanted anything debbie and rory too there's been hamper
opportunity for you all to choose there's clearly been some miscommunication
that's one way of putting i have a suggestion though well brian you said you've
already put aside what you want to keep you're just a few bits you're things
with sentimental value so why don't we take everything else off your hands what
do you mean well we could move it all to our place then we can get everyone to
come over to ours and they can look through in their own time and the items no
one wants will donate yeah yeah that sounds good then there's the solution well
if you're sure we can take it with us now if that's all right with you brian
whatever you want i'll start loading up the car do you want to go back to the
house no perhaps if i just stay here with best for a bit take your time i'm
sorry i got stressed out what about the things the support worker showed you you
mean didn't she give you some techniques for moments like this yeah i've been
doing the breathing stuff anything else i'm supposed to identify things that
help to ground me okay like naming five things i can see go on uh well bass the
river uh there's a heron over there nightingale farm all the blackthorn and
flower that's five then it's four things i can hear let's listen then best
panting the water are they sparrows we can hear uh yeah i thought i heard a song
thrush me too what's after that three things i can touch so best the grass the
style uh i was gonna say you right give me a hand then thanks josh i do feel
better yeah yeah and i want you to know i'll help you find another house mate
i'm not making it your responsibility yeah i know we can both start putting the
word out well all right we'll sort it together okay yeah thanks for being so
understanding what would you expect i don't know knowing you you might have
demanded some sort of vacancy tax me well now you mention it that would be
classic you get off me considering it's mostly closed these boxes were a ton
there's so many of them oh let's just put them down here for now yeah why don't
we bring the rest of the stuff in later what you mean when our backs have
recovered yeah come on let's sit down for a bit i mean i know this was my idea
but these boxes are gonna fill the place zander will love it yeah he'll pretend
it's a big fort he can play in definitely i can see him climbing all over them
well don't worry i'll go through everything as soon as i can just in a more
delicate way than brian was doing yeah we can do it together oh thanks oh that
was quite a shock ian i know walking in to find mom's stuff strewn across their
sitting room well to be fair brian wasn't expecting us that's not really the
point though i'd have thought he'd be more sensitive he didn't mean to upset you
adam you heard him totally convinced he wasn't doing anything wrong well as far
as he's concerned he's not mom always looked after her clothes took such pride
in her appearance she'd hate to have seen them all over the floor like that i
think for brian this is practical rather than him being careless yeah she's
never behaved in the same way honestly it took all my strength not to lose it
with him just try not to take it too personally with grief everyone moves at a
different pace this is just brian's way of handling it so what you you think
i've been too hard on him listen we're all still reeling from losing jennifer
the situation was bound to trigger different responses i suppose so i just can't
believe she's gone me neither if i'm honest i found the funeral quite surreal i
can understand that mum was always at the very center of family gatherings
hosting everything making sure everyone was attended to on friday i kept
expecting her to appear with a tray handing out canapes or go round topping up
everyone's drinks exactly i miss her ian i know love we all do i appreciate that
brian might have taken a practical attitude to mom's stuff but but for me seeing
things that she'll never wear again it's a lot of course it is i'm not saying i
want to keep it all i i i just need to be the one to let it go look see this
dress doesn't even look worn you're right jennifer always did keep everything in
pristine condition here hang on what's that stare under the hangers as mom's
writing for the children what does that mean it's something for us for her
children it must do what is it oh see for yourself so and this evening in
ambridge adam kate and alice have a childish squabble over the past we'll find
out more about that at seven o'clock on bbc iplayer from the wilds of county
carry to the caledonian pine forest from the yorkshire moors to the reed beds of
suffolk hmm from an ant's nest in gloucestershire to beneath the waves in
shetland our magical wildlife revealed close to home wild isles with david
attenborough starts next sunday night on bbc iplayer now on radio 4 galapagos a
new thriller about the power of artificial intelligence and data-fueled tech by
andrew day and simon scardufield zimbabwe 2025 the ambitious pr agent briny is
going to do whatever it takes to win a powerful new client and what shall i call
this the galapagos tapes don't cry for me whales what shall i call this the
galapagos tapes don't cry okay it's gonna be the truth just in case at some
point that's what i need to fall back on so here goes chapter one zimbabwe 2025
it didn't feel like anything major was about to happen more like the opposite i
wanted to be at the center of everything and i was right out on like the
furthest edge you can imagine standing in i swear literally the middle of
flipping nowhere it was a little gold mine a gold mine sounds good but it's well
it's a hole in the ground basically with a big ugly fence around it and
surrounded by puddles and tents and stuff deserted apart from some scruffy
security guards no actual mining going on which was not my fault but definitely
my problem well i didn't see any protesters you wandered off don't really want
to be seen near this car looks bad it's a beautiful car exactly bad optics
optics wrong message whoa wait i didn't know they had guns tentacles that way
there behind the hut no don't shoot yes shoot the baby what warthogs briony
warthogs they dug under the wire and set off the alarm we drove two hours to see
some warthogs the manager thought it was protesters i could have spent this
morning working on strategy something to tell this sydney guy who's flying in
tomorrow the director of global global what he'll ask what you're doing to stop
the protests so the mine can reopen there aren't any protesters now so why can't
you reopen they appear suddenly they are well organized the leader bonfez
karikoga is very well educated can we capture a protester no a warthog for what
purpose pr titus a picture online of one of your workers cradling an orphan baby
warthog that got through a hole made by protesters and was rescued by one of the
mine workers the mine workers who are desperate to get back to work so they can
feed their families but the selfishness of the politically motivated protesters
is preventing them maybe we just talk about the wickers without the warthog i
think that was the last one we could have done with a live one hey bring it here
get the baby one oh not not much left of it okay no one cares about warthogs no
hello excuse me what is your favorite animal what the amusing bird in lion king
brilliant okay uh ask him what wild animal needs protecting he is shauna i know
what he'll say what pangolin they are revered in shauna culture what's the pack
right doesn't matter can we get hold of one uh they are protected but people
traffic them great get wait wait wait this is in the belly territory isn't it
the individual also respects the pangolin for us he is good luck perfect get one
in a picture a baby one pangolin rescued by mining company staff makes fish
eagle mining relations let's get back to town hey the car is this way in the
pickup what's the use of a pangolin if people believe that the senior management
is externalizing funds senior management like you yes pocketing all the cash yes
i mean no those allegations are lies we need to make the public understand you
can't wipe public memory clean okay one you can't really prove innocence two
even if you can the association sticks in people's minds three god it's hot uh
three maybe some of the managers not you perhaps did have their hands in the
till then what stop denying the allegations but they're not true that's
irrelevant every time you deny their story you repeat it my job is to create a
stronger story than theirs and fill the space with good stories about you
stories nothing but stories is that kind of my specialty so so don't knock it
you have three new messages message one briany it's max i don't have anything
for you on this sydney guy just a few emails from him get omar to go below the
radar and find something you might have been there a couple of days so you know
act like you've got some sort of a plan clients like you sydney won't be an
exception message two listen briny i'm going to this spa hotel thing for two
days so yeah no more calls please message three hello i hope you you want them
java now please i hope you're enjoying the heat and not heating whatever they've
got you doing this time listen there's something i need to talk to you about so
if you could please hey hey hey titus is everyone okay it's them these are the
protesters what our protesters that's bornface cargo talking to the guy who's
yes oh okay this needs careful handling mining company vehicle forces protesters
truck off-road protester that's not what happened it became i know i know hey
this man needs medical treatment take him to the hospital that truck is stuck in
the ditch you see that you came too fast around the bend in the middle of the
road you nearly killed us all so you won't help him get treatment shouldn't we
call an ambulance they wouldn't take the job these roads are too bad we can't
just leave him titus i won't authorize the use of the vehicle to transport enemy
of the company so we leave him here think of how that looks stories are your
specialty spin it there's an old saying in pr never try to spin a turd because
that's when the shit hits the fan i'll wait in the truck with the shotgun loaded
oh god mr caragorga i'm brainy brioni williams you've done your homework we'll
help this man uh how can you guys get him in the pickup we'll drop him at the
hospital he won't trust you what we all know how your company treats africa it's
not my company i'm a consultant and you just asked us to take him i will have to
come in the vehicle with him i'll explain to this injured gentleman i mean him
no harm does he understand english he writes books in english he was my tutor at
the university of science and technology sod it just fine get him in the back
and you can hold his hand all the way to bulawayo hello i hope you see one name
drop on that please i hope you're enjoying the heat and not heating whatever
they've got you doing this time listen there's something i need to talk to you
about so if you could give me a bell when you got a minute so yeah when you come
yeah that's really not now sorry sis omar if you're cool and comfortable right
now enjoy it listen some big cheese called sydney is flying into zim tomorrow
he's from a parent company apparently in all the emails he's just sydney ross
head of global i'd love anything you can get on him so i know what angle to take
when i see him tomorrow could you drive a bit slower oh my god oh you sick car
sick sick i'm gonna sit up in the back with you okay titus let's go again these
roads need work the heavy rain creates corrugations then the sun comes and makes
them rock hard zimbabwe needs cash investment course if fish eagle gives up on
the mine they won't you force them to stop digging the gold always gets out of
the ground before long it's like a law of nature everywhere oil gas copper keeps
coming whatever the government whatever the war somebody somewhere gets paid
enough and somehow it all happens but putin had oil found customers fat lot of
good it did him anyway he had a population to feed that takes money where does
the money really go where do you think it should go fish eagle could be building
schools medical centers patching up roads whatever you guys think is important
why would they do that all of a sudden well they might pay up if it meant they
could extract the gold without interference so they carry on as before but throw
a few sweeties to the natives the choice is do you paralyze this rare example of
an international zimbabwean business or do you win some concessions for your
people my people who are my people i don't know zimbabweans like you said or is
this a tribal thing like only the shona people are true zimbabweans not the
indabele who live around here briony you don't know anything about africa do you
teach me we've got another hour you'd be better off talking to the professor
how's he doing do you actually care or are you just smart enough to know
compassion to your enemies is good optics i'm more into getting things done not
seeing people as enemies without enemies how can you tell who your friends are
you have one new message briony this is titus i told you riding back to town
with bonafides would not be helpful he and his gang are now outside your hotel
no shit um i i think this is the perfect opportunity to read them a statement
you know what uh i'm sorry i'm not sure i'm not sure i'm not sure but i think
this is the perfect opportunity to read them a statement you know what maybe say
you have conducted a thorough investigation underline that there has been no
externalization of funds at fish eagle god you're actually serious oh hey gainer
finally sorry sorry i've been in the back of beyond dealing with with warthogs
warthogs what's that noise protesters hey is ewan okay ewan's fine you too i'll
call you tonight what time is it there same as you plus one okay i thought you
wanted to talk oh my the one and only my savior my listen listen don't go all
briny on me okay i'm going full briny on all fronts is the only way to
accelerate out of this shit show what have you got for me on this sydney guy so
he's not part of fish eagle oh nice wallpaper i like the crocodiles god we never
got as far as setting up house together it's a parent company called scarlet
crest and a group and they splinter off into a bunch of holding companies that
are just filing cabinets on an island somewhere god that's no good well can you
at least look into this protester bloke bona face caracoga he's all over socials
smart committed i need something to help us dump on him what about creating a
positive story that's always planning planning not going to plan it is one big
slow-mo face plant omar i'm in the back of beyond zero backup from london this
guy titus is a joke bona face will have him for breakfast and max doesn't give a
toss about any of it yeah well max is max yes he doesn't think it's a big client
or a high-profile job or or so it won't matter if you fail that is exactly wrong
if i fail here he'll take it as evidence i can't run a campaign on my own maybe
you can learn from the failure you're just saying that because it's what people
say yes exactly that's how us neurodiverse people get through life you're not
neurodiverse you're just a nerd briny williams are you gaslighting me and next
time try saying learn from experience not failure if it helps does it does it
help no it's bollocks but you have to say it all right well maybe try deep
breaths see that either they throw me off a roof or max does but this sydney guy
hasn't met you yet he'll put his faith in you people do yeah yeah that's why max
employs you he didn't take you on just look cute on the website no he wanted me
as his charming and persuasive sidekick and now he thinks i'm more like a grumpy
mistress that's why he gives me shit gigs like this so i fall on my ass and he
can kick me out the way you only think it's funny because you're not a woman
don't forget my brown face isn't on the website at all and i his bubbly welsh
accessory i'm all over it i'll prove myself or get fired trying i can't believe
so get me some intel off the dark web or the toilet walls or whatever something
i can tickle sydney's tummy with while i work out how to nix the protest and get
this mine open what are you doing i think it's pretty obvious i'm going over the
wall why are you doing that i have no side entrance and i need to avoid those
protesters be careful oh omar knowing you you were up all night looking for
intel but when you wake up listen i'm just about to do an ambush pre-meeting so
look out for anything oh you're awake what do you mean by an ambush pre-meeting
it's when you drop by to say hello don't talk business just chat and see if the
guy lets anything slip do you think that'll work it might work okay what else
have i got do you see my email uh oh hang on hey hey hey taxi yes hi hi flame
lily lodge thank you uh yeah yeah an email flame lily lodge yes i i don't get it
can you read the yes yes i just read it i don't understand you can't find any
information on sydney so there isn't any information on him in existence no
photo no bio he's digitally incognito that's hard to achieve what does that tell
us can't be sure but there is this other shell company it supposedly does
business with vizigal but i'm guessing that it's just moving cash uh family yes
it's called shape shift is everywhere without actually being this is flame lily
lodge is it i'd have walked if i'd okay whoa this place is way nicer than mine
so quiet in here whatever shape shift yeah sorry but you're not telling me what
it is you're telling me good morning madam can i help you i'm telling you that
max might be like very wrong yes i'm looking for sydney ross the hotel is not
it's fine joseph thank you this is briny williams thank you yes and you are
sydney hi oh hello you're still there there are no other guests i booked out all
the rooms it's just easier i don't think sydney ross is small fry i think you're
right omar okay bye i wasn't expecting the pleasure until later i wanted us to
get acquainted before before the actual meeting or why don't we just skip
straight to the actual meeting as you're here looks like you're just going for a
swim so i'll multitask come to the pool oh just use the bathroom and uh and yeah
see you by the pool come on come on have you found him her he's a her oh what's
she like you know those people who are really relaxed and really nice and really
scary sounds like most people to me right one question omar what's that thing
what thing that thing you're working on that you and max are always having whole
day meetings about there isn't a specific don't try and lie you're crap at it
you're not allowed to know i don't need details just no no way i don't think i
can bullshit this woman i can't tell her about galapagos about what nothing
that's the name no no no it's fine i can tell her the name without saying max
will kill you omar please i came here to put her on the back foot now i'm the
one who's on the back foot and the longer i'm in the toilet the more obvious it
is i'm doing all i can you're not you're withholding the one usp mayfair
interventions actually i've not had this conversation no no don't hang up on
titus i'm with sydney we're not meeting him until this after pangolin photo
later good an idea what we should so sydney hi this place is lovely real hidden
gem what about precious metal briny precious metal gold the gold that's sitting
in the ground because economic terrorists have intimidated the workers into
downing tools mind if i just dangle my feet in here you dangle and tell me what
you've achieved so far well yesterday fish eagle rescued a professor and
tomorrow we're going to rescue a pangolin and our social media systems will keep
them trending at least on a low level that's your whole strategy no no that's
the drip feed so anyone doing an internet search on fish eagle will see those
stories at the top of the page yes like you did with the punjab dam project for
example you know about that you made some very good moves thanks who should get
the credit mayfair interventions or briny williams both and tell me can mayfair
interventions or briny williams deactivate these protests yes with the same
tools counter-activism outdoor campaigning we are also lining up a number of
other digital interventions that are very interesting we are not interested in
what's interesting we're interested in what works i hear you yeah it would help
to know more about you as a client it would help us to know are you the best
they've got or are we a second tier client i'm the best they've got good then
either go home or get me galapagos galapagos you sound like you don't know what
it is no i do i do i just um yes i have to be i have to be i have to be really
careful because it's new and and secret and well amazing do you get pedicures i
i know i just look after them i suppose we really do like your work briny you've
got 24 hours to send me a three-word message saying you have galapagos if you
don't or if you send me any other message at all i'll block you and cancel the
contract and she swam off with this impeccable backstroke you misheard her she
said galapagos about three times have you called max thoughts no reply what is
galapagos oh my shit wow just oh i don't understand max must have told her about
it impossible i've been begging him to try this out on a real client somewhere
out of the way like zimbabwe so he can eat real data exactly so he gave sydney
he would have told me no no no no no no okay okay do your breathing thing now
tell me why it's so special it can't be a secret for me if the bloody client
knows about it tell me tell me how galapagos would help me on this job
hypothetically confidentially yeah yeah for example omar i am portraying fish
eagle mining as caring and connected to zimbabwean traditional values can
galapagos tell me whether pangolins will work better than warthogs galapagos
would find zimbabwean social media networks and the areas of highest and most
ethic rich activity people with lots of followers who are always freaking out
about something yeah right right these are your super spreading individuals and
your volatile congregations the people you can influence a lot very quickly then
galapagos works out what kind of stories will convince those specific people
that fish eagle mining is what was it connected to zimbabwean traditional values
and then it writes the stories it writes them yeah yeah and not like the
cardboard essays gpt4 used to churn out for students at uni it knows how to pass
the old robot test so we don't have to stand still while a human like you makes
up the stories we don't completely make them up but you have to guess what we'll
cut through then craft the story and then i have to trial them in real time yeah
galapagos does all of that for you end to end and models it you give it a photo
and some basic facts and terms hooray i'm still needed for something and off it
goes you can watch a story travel through cyberspace literally i've got these
graphics we get biofeedback from irises and smart watches when pulses race the
nodes on the graphic change color it's beautiful so you're watching you're
watching the people you want to influence telling each other the story that will
most influence them to do whatever you wanted them to do that's huge huge i'm
not being funny but why have mayfair interventions got it we're not huge because
of me i'm huge i'm one step ahead of silicon valley no wonder max wants to test
it are we are we sure he does listen i've got 24 hours 23 let me put the
information in now then max can okay it when he's done with his enema festival
and we press go better to wait sydney won't wait we'll lose her and and max is
going to fire me if we lose her because we weren't ready please can we we're
just gonna load data right nothing else just in case you're right which i doubt
oh hold on uh it's just titus i'm with you i'm gonna hint at the access codes
because i can't send them over an unsecured line oh this feels weird breathe oh
my the first two digits are your nephew's age plus five how do you even i forget
that i remember numbers all numbers hi gainer sorry we still haven't spoken
listen i'll probably be home soon especially if i get fired which i probably
will so i don't know maybe i could come to patel but from the airport oh hang on
hang on voicemail might be the boss briany it's sydney i'm flying out tonight
i've started talking to some other firms to replace you i like you personally
but i think your hands are tied if you do manage to untie them in the next few
hours call me on this number max is laboring under the illusion that we're small
he's small they all are and briany it's time you outgrew them good luck say that
again sydney briany it's time you outgrew them and again briany it's time you
outgrew them why have you logged back in to galapagos why i wanted to check the
form i you can't tell when people are lying i can see your cursor on your screen
oh okay well omar we've got to go through this just because you want to impress
a client what i'm not this is a major strategic move max will just do we even
need to tell max i'll get away from that button now oh no no no no you mustn't
have done that you just did mayfair interventions just intervened let's see what
happens i was so not ready for sydney how could i have been her face her voice
everything she said it was like she already knew my hopes and dreams like she'd
been beamed down from somewhere to show me my destiny what i didn't know that
night was that she was already writing my destiny briany it's time you outgrew
them you and i in galapagos briany was played by hannah daniel gainer by sarah
gregory and sydney by ashley haddad omar danny ashok titus john fumagena
boniface kel mcena and max ewan bailey the series was written by simon
scardafield and andrew day sound design by nigel lewis it was directed by emma
harding for bbc audio drama wales galapagos continues at the same time tomorrow
and this evening here on radio four we'll be putting present-day ai through its
paces chat gpt is the artificial intelligence technology that seems to be
everywhere it's an extraordinary phenomena it's burst on the scene i'm laura
lewington and i'm going to see what chat gpt can do this is going to happen we
need to learn how to use this technology effectively can it write good essays
suggest holidays or simply change our daily lives all of the ethical questions
that concern us when we think about using ai they're right at the center in the
use of gpt and can it even make a radio program find out in a documentary by
chat gpt this evening at eight o'clock on radio four and bbc sounds well it
might not feel much like it out there but fear not here on radio for spring is
in the air this is spring stories starting with an original short fiction by
kerry nidharty only works in the spring it started off with an ebay listing the
most life-changing experience i've had so far i'd been living on a friend's sofa
for a month following the most achy year of my life not achy in the way of bones
creaking from a too soft mattress or in the way of not having your own pillow or
even in the way of sleeping with a draft coming in on your neck achy in the way
of too many nights of worry too many lost jobs and lost hats and lost friends
and lost cameras and lost houses achy in the way of too many lost things just
achy in that kind of way the listing stood out for a number of reasons even now
on a gray day it can make me laugh till my belly hurts like so many good things
that ad has aged well like so many good things that ad will never be as good as
the night i found it it was new year's eve and i was scrolling my phone
promising myself this brand new year ahead would be so so different from the
rest and there it was all four lines of the purest poetry i've ever known all in
caps lock with not a full stop or comma to its name quare yoke one owner runs
like day i bought her only works in the spring accompanying the ad were two
pictures both uploaded the wrong way round and only just clear enough to see
some folk when i've told them the story were desperate to guess what it was i'd
found that night assuming i'd searched for something random purely out of
boredom or for the crack as they say where i'm from was it a tractor a head
strimmer a very unreliable car even though they knew i haven't got a garden
field or driving license to my name it's the last sentence that throws everyone
off of course the sentence that drew me in so close i knew i had to buy the
thing no matter what it took only works in the spring the story moves in a very
particular way now and takes a very unusual shape i would not hold it against
you if you were to think i'd made it all up but the funny thing is i'm not the
only one you can blame me for and i'm not the only one who's been saying this
and i'm not the only one who's been saying this but the funny thing is that
sometimes the truest of things make the wildest of stories there was nothing i
could do but click the buy it now button of course the seller got back to me
straight away in capital letters of course would you like to save on the i was
shocked that there was a question mark at the end of the first line but somehow
unshocked at the fact the seller lived in my hometown only a month ago i still
lived an ocean away but now for the first time in seven years i just so happened
to be living back where my account was registered even now this happening feels
like the most normal thing in the whole world i accepted straight away without
even a second thought i had nothing in my diary for another month at which point
the only concrete plan i had was leaving my friend's sofa when her partner was
due to move in i gave no indication i realized after i messaged what age i was
or even what i looked like porig663 responded both lines in capitals of course
we brown dog has three legs will be wearing tartan mask i barely managed an
hour's sleep that night for the first time in weeks it was not anxiety leaving
me tossing and turning in my friend's freezing room it took me a good while to
realize that the feeling at swim inside me was excitement the morning came all
dusky pinks and that exquisite light that belongs to the final breath of winter
rising above the river just outside my closest childhood friend's bed set was a
sliver of a frost moon so perfect i thought i was actually going to cry as she
threw our crusts up in the air for her old dog who refused to jump over and over
we met porig663 and me i knew it was him even from behind somehow he was
standing under a tall oak looking up at the middle branches a canary yellow
woolly hat covering his head from the drizzle he was indeed in a tartan mask
with a small three-legged dog who jumped all over me as soon as he saw me
porig663 arrived with my new purchase not wrapped up as i'd expected but right
there in his thin worn hands i hadn't thought to bring a bag with me not to
worry he told me in an accent much softer than the one i'd been expecting he had
the original box in a drawstring bag in his rucksack for me the thing was you
see he wanted to show me when he had me for a minute what he meant about how i
was to use it when i was to use it rather he had loaded the heavy black box with
film he pointed it up to the equally heavy sky and clicked tucking the white
strip that came out inside his sheepskin coat in under his armpits the heat
develops it girl but it won't work in this weather in this light you'll need to
wait for spring you see the day will come and you'll know and you'll know the
spring is here and then you can start using this beauty she'll work then she
only works in the spring you see he offered to keep it for me until i moved out
of my friend's cramped bed set given that i saw that he was right no picture
came out no matter how long it was under porrig's arm we talked that first day
as we did on all the other days we spent in that same park about small things
and big things alike his childhood the city we were both from had left and
returned to we talked of birds and trees light and old hymns we talked of my
paintings in his bingo we talked of the pandemic and how to cook a perfect
boiled egg we walked in wind and rain in early white winter light and one day
under a flurry of snowflakes like we dancing ghosts there were days i was sure
we were the only person the other spoke to i'd love to tell you that the next
bit happened on a different date than it really did on a date say that might
neatly slot in with the formula of the stories ins and outs so far i could tell
you it happened say on st bridget's day right where the hag gives up her ghost
to let the maiden take her place i could push it forward a week and a half tell
you it took place on the feast day of st gubnet i could tell you it happened say
on the very first day of march i'd say you'd even believe me if i told it a
certain way that the next bit happened on st patrick's day i'd have the postman
dressed in green i'd add a sprig of shamrock stolen from a pot in aldi to my
charity shop aaron jumper i could even get away with the vernal equinox at a
push i could give you a male blackbird hopping in the communal garden outside my
new living room window just as the buzzer went on my new front door right beside
a fresh clump of snow drops how about the morning before the clocks go back or
even the morning after because i know i couldn't get away with telling you there
was post on a sunday i'd love to lie to you even for the briefest of moments and
tell you the first post to my new home turned up on one of those days that might
make the story seem even more magical than it does but there is something in me
that understands that this is not the way that real life happens there is
something in me that knows that you know this too the truth is i was knee deep
in the filth left behind by the people who had rented the flat before me i had
popped the kettle on for the umpteenth time that morning convincing myself that
the steam took the chill off the place i was trying to muster the energy to go
for a walk but it had been so long since i'd been alone in a place that felt
like mine that i was relishing every moment of it all i was cleaning the only
flat i'd ever lived in that i didn't hate i was trying to untangle the rope of
the old clothes dryer in the kitchen to dry a woolen blanket i'd bought at a
church jumble sale a handful of days before from a woman who said she'd cried so
much when she saw her friends that day that her mascara ran like a pair of old
tights the truth of it is the package arrived on a random grey wednesday morning
in the second week of march it feels important in these uncertain times to tell
things the way they really are you see to hold things up to the sky and to just
let them be simply if we've learned anything these last years maybe it's how
important it is to speak of real and honest things in real and honest ways to
mark the passing of quiet ordinary days days that we realize when we look back
on them are perhaps the most beautiful days of our lives the address was written
in black ink and i don't think i need to tell you it was all in capitals he
hadn't needed to check with me first because it was him who'd managed to find me
this place convincing his younger brother shimmy to let it out to me even though
i had no references no deposit and hadn't even started yet in the museum she's
managed to secure a permanent contract shimmy in london of all places despite
every single thing the young ones have stacked against them at the minute shimmy
she's just like you shimmy she's a good wayne she just needs someone to give her
a break shimmy i can vouch for her shimmy i can vouch for her porrick had told
his wee brother on the phone the wee brother he'd half read like he'd half read
all seven of them i knew before i opened it what was inside of course a polaroid
sun 660 land camera purchased months earlier from a stranger who had over the
course of a cold hard winter become a friend the note inside read all in
capitals of course hope you are settled in shimmy's wee flat keep pointer right
in middle of white and black arrows the wee dog is wild proud of you indeed a
single instant photograph fell onto the table a snap from the coach trip to
dublin he told me about on the phone the week before his first time out of our
hometown for two years a photo of a plaque in mary and square i'd told him about
that you might chance upon yourself should you ever find yourself in dublin with
a wee robin and one line of text the photo cut out the first and last letters
but the plaque reads all in capitals i believe spring has come at last only
works in the spring was written by kerry need or tea and produced in bristol by
becky ripley a chance to test your music knowledge next with counterpoint on bbc
iplayer step right in perfect timing the east end is ever-changing what is this
scooter the order has entered the 1960s barely eight years late but the midwives
of nonata's house are forever constant you've a home here now and purpose and
people who love you call the midwife we will be with you every step of the way
watch on tv