TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-06-10H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Well, thank you both. Nick, Justine, thanks. Sail sharks won and won well at
the AJ Bell. That's where you should be, Nick. Bye-bye. BBC News at nine
o'clock. The government is set to announce plans to ban migrants who cross the
English Channel in small boats from ever returning to the UK. It's part of a set
of new laws which will be introduced to Parliament tomorrow. Refugees groups say
the idea is unworkable and will leave thousands of people in limbo. The Science
Minister, George Freeman, wouldn't discuss the detail of the new policy but said
the Home Secretary, Suella Brotherman, had made the principle behind it crystal
clear. If you come here illegally, it won't be possible. And that's what's
happening at the moment. 45,000 people have come from, many from Albania, a safe
country, through Europe and France, safe countries, to cross the Channel and
then disappear out into the UK. And we've got to get on top of it. So the
principle is, if you come here illegally to exploit our system, you will be
deported. Charities have accused the Home Office of overseeing a total waste of
public money after the cost of removing illegal immigrants was revealed to be
more than a typical first-class return flight to New York. The government spent
Â£12.7 million on charter flights for 1,500 people. The Home Office insists the
spending is justified. Elected mayors across the north of England are holding a
crisis meeting to discuss the number of train cancellations in their regions.
They say rail users face losing more than 20,000 services this year. The Duke
and Duchess of Sussex are believed to be considering whether to attend the
coronation after confirming they have had discussions with Buckingham Palace.
Prince Harry and his wife Meghan issued a statement saying they'd been emailed
about the event but did not confirm whether they plan to attend. And current and
former employees of Twitter have told the BBC the social media company is
failing to protect users from online abuse, state-sponsored disinformation and
child sexual exploitation. They blame mass sackings and changes brought in by
its new owner Elon Musk. Twitter hasn't responded to the claims. BBC News.
Profile is Radio 4's series offering an insight into the lives of prominent
public figures. You can find an extensive back catalogue including for example
editions on Elon Musk and indeed the Home Secretary Suella Braverman. Just
search for Profile on BBC Sounds to get started. Here on Radio 4 a high-profile
guest on Women's Hour later this morning. The activist and Nobel Prize laureate
Malala Yousafzai will be discussing her short documentary film Stranger at the
Gate, nominated in this coming weekend's Oscars. Nuala McGovern will be
presenting at the usual time of 10 o'clock. Now on Radio 4 here's Kirsty Warke
to start the week. Hello. 20 years ago this month George W. Bush and Tony Blair
signed off on a plan to topple the tyrant Saddam Hussein. A plan built on the
myth of weapons of mass destruction and the conviction of making the world a
safer place. The blood and thunder and mayhem that followed the short war all
but destroyed Iraq, birthed Islamic State and many would argue made the Middle
East a more unstable, more dangerous region. As Iraq unraveled without a post-
invasion plan at least 150,000 Iraqis lost their lives in the long conflict as
well as thousands of US and British soldiers. In a special edition of Start the
Week our three guests witnessed the conflict and chaos at very close quarters
and in very different ways. They are the Iraqi journalist Ghaith Abduhahad whose
new book A Stranger in Your Own City recounts his country's descent into violent
civil war post-invasion. Emma Skye, founding director of Yale's International
Leadership Centre, she joins us from New York. And the BBC security
correspondent Gordon Carrera who's presenting a new series Shock and War on
Radio 4 looking at the Iraq war and its legacy. Well 20 years ago what were you
doing in the run-up to the invasion and where were you Ghaith? I was in Baghdad,
I was in my apartment following the advance of the armies on the world service
and trying to chart their advance on an old map and until one day when a
neighbour knocks at the door and says the Americans are here I say yes I know
they're in Hella 100 kilometres to the south. No no they're here in the streets
and that's when I saw the Americans for the first time. At that stage of course
you were a young architect but you're also a deserter from Saddam's army. I mean
tell me about that. So I studied architecture and then rather than go serve in
the military I decided to desert and I didn't like the army, I still don't like
armies and I lived a life of hiding. So I was faking my own ID cards. In a way
there was a race between the American armies and the Iraqi security services on
who would find me first if I get caught in something. But I have to say
something I survived five years as a deserter not because I was brilliant but
because the regime was very weak, the security services were corrupt, falling
apart. Had I been a deserter in the 80s I would have been caught in a week. So
Emma you were a young 34 year old woman, you'd been 10 years in the Palestinian
territories. Where were you when the invasion started? So when the invasion
started I was in Manchester working for the British Council. I'd been in
Palestine for 10 years with the British Council and I was now back at
headquarters. So I was one of these very angry about the war, felt what can I
do, this is terrible, why are we going to war? And really I felt I needed to do
something, I wanted to do something. And that something was to volunteer? Well
yes the Foreign Office sent out an email around the civil service saying they
needed volunteers to go out to Iraq for three months to administer the country
before we handed it back to the Iraqis. And somebody forwarded that email to me
thinking I might be interested in it. And we're going to come back to what
happened to you not long after you arrived. But Gordon, pinpoint where you were.
Well I was a reporter for the Today programme at the time and just before the
war I'd been in northern Iraq, the Kurdish region, so outside of Saddam's
control. And I'd visited some of the front lines and been to Halabja where
Saddam had used chemical weapons in the 1980s. It was part of that kind of
whirlwind of post 9-11 reporting where the intensity of events, I mean it's hard
to recall just how fast moving things felt. But then by the time the war
actually started I was in Washington. So let's see how we got to that point. In
your series you go back and you talk to many of the key players and some of them
haven't spoken before about the run-up to the invasion and you do start with the
American hawks. I mean why were they so keen to where are they so keen on regime
change? Was it simply unfinished business from the Gulf War? I think there was a
mix of reasons. There wasn't one single reason and that's important for
understanding what happens next. It's interesting, I talk to lots of people,
weapons of mass destruction often only came up as a kind of secondary issue. In
some case it was a visceral dislike of Saddam. There was a sense of unfinished
business from the first Gulf War, including by George W Bush, the new president,
whose father had taken on Saddam but not toppled him. Then you had a more neo-
con worldview which wanted to transform the Middle East into some kind of
democracy but starting with Iraq to make it safer for the world in their minds.
And then in other cases post 9-11 you just had these people who wanted to
demonstrate American military power against someone and that country was Iraq.
And one of the former SIA operatives tells you we would have invaded Iraq if
Saddam Hussein had a rubber band, a paper clip and somebody would have said oh
he's going to put your eye out. Given that and given everything that happened,
why was Tony Blair seemingly so keen to align himself with Bush? So I think that
goes to this post 9-11 era. I think Tony Blair had positioned himself as the
bridge between this angry, bruised United States and the rest of the world. Over
Afghanistan he'd kind of built a coalition to try and guide America and he
thought he could influence the United States. He thought he could deliver an
international coalition to deal with this rather than having America acting
alone. I do believe that was the fundamental driver more than if you like the
specific threat from Saddam and weapons of mass destruction, even though that
was part of his reasoning behind why dealing with Iraq. But I think those
drivers were the real ones and I think it's only now 20 years on that he and
others are really able to kind of talk about it in that way. So weapons of mass
destruction, it's fascinating, which was the public justification, were not
really the fundamental driver for war. But this idea that there was a kind of
alignment with Blair and Bush and that of course that Bush wanted Blair to be
there and so forth and then when it came to it, Bush didn't even tell Blair the
night they were going after Saddam. Yeah I mean you had this strange alignment
of liberal interventionism of Blair, very confident after what had happened,
with this kind of neo-conservative hawkish American mindset. But how much
influence did Tony Blair really have? I think that's a really fundamental
question we look at. And Eghraif, when you were looking at it from Baghdad and
hearing what was going on, was your sense that this was going to be a short
burst of shock and awe and it would be over? Or early on did you realise that
there was going to be something much more prolonged, much bloodier, much more
violent and much more corrosive? Look when I was talking about the war with a
group of friends and we're sitting in my room and we're discussing the war, I
mean part of me or part of in our thinking is like why they're talking about
weapons of mass destruction? I mean we all knew Saddam had no weapons of mass
destruction, the regime was so falling apart, but at the same time why don't
they talk about human rights inspections? Why don't they talk about the actual
reasons why this regime was banned? The other thinking, I never thought that the
regime would be toppled in a couple of weeks or three weeks. We all thought it
will be a long prolonged war, that maybe there will be some kind of front line
somewhere in the south like the Kurdish, you know, independent regions, they
will create a zone like this somewhere in the south. We never thought that this
regime was, with all its brutal machine, I mean the regime's been working for 30
years for that day to survive, it would be toppled so quickly and I think it
fell so quickly because everyone was so fed up with Saddam. Everybody was fed up
with Saddam, but this idea that you were going to have a country which was
certainly going to be almost transformed by a western democracy, rather working
with the tools you have, and that was part of the problem wasn't it? It wasn't
like a second world, post-second world war where you kept the civil service in
place and Adner worked with what he had. The Americans just crushed everything.
Absolutely and for a long time I subscribed to that narrative that the whole
mess that followed the invasion happened because the Americans did not work with
the tools they had and of course, I mean, there were tools and they could have
worked with the Iraqi army officers, they could have worked with someone else,
but then later throughout the years I came to realise that there was no scenario
in which this invasion could have worked, which is you can't bomb a nation, put
it under sanctions, bomb it again and then come with the same army and the same
tools and the same American legacy and the western legacy in the Middle East and
say, hola, let's have a democracy now, let's transform your society. Well Emma,
you know, as we say, the invasion topples it down very quickly, you arrive on
the scene. Tell me about your journey to end up in Kirkuk and we'll talk a
little bit about you becoming the governor there, but I mean, had you ever been
to Iraq before? No, I'd never been to Iraq before and basically I didn't get any
brief before I arrived in Iraq. The foreign office said, you know, find your way
to RAF Brice Norton, get on a military plane to Basra and when you arrive you'll
be met by someone holding a sign with your name on it and taken to the nearest
hotel. So, you know, I thought it sounded plausible, I assumed the government
knew what it was doing, so I followed those instructions, got on the military
plane, arrived in Basra and nobody was expecting me, there was no sign with my
name on it, I had no idea what I was supposed to do. So, I slept in the airport
the first night with all the British soldiers, then found a C-130, one of those
big Hercules planes that was going to Baghdad the next day. So, I got on that,
arrived at Baghdad airport and then found a bus that was going downtown and I
knew the headquarters of the coalition was Saddam's palace, so I found my way to
the Republican palace and when I was there I was kind of, you know, hello Emma
from England, come to volunteer and there I found my name was on the list, so
that was good and I spent sort of a week in the palace getting briefed on the
whole idea of what the coalition provisional authority had, what they thought
they were doing and then they said, look, we've got enough people here, try the
north. So, got on another plane to Mosul, when I got there they said, oh we've
got someone here, keep going. Then eventually, you know, I arrived in Kirkuk and
they said, great, you are now, you know, the senior civilian in Kirkuk,
reporting directly to Ambassador Bremer and good luck. So, essentially you're
the governor of Kirkuk, in a way the mixture of carelessness and arrogance to
think that they could just rock up and send you in, rock up without actually any
sense of what you were going to do when you got there or any sense of what
legitimacy you had. So, what was it that you set out to do when you were there?
Because I mean, you had 10 years of negotiation between Palestine and Israelis,
you were a negotiator, you did understand diplomacy and foreign affairs, but
what did you know about what was going on in Kirkuk? Well, I knew absolutely
nothing. And, you know, Iraq had been really cut off for the rest of the world,
all through those years of sanctions. So, nobody really knew anything about
Iraq. There was no research, there was no opinion polls, there was nothing. And,
you know, I had gone to Iraq because I wanted to apologize to Iraqis for the war
and help them rebuild their society. I had no sense that I'd be put in a role
like a colonial administrator. So, I set out, first of all, to try and get to
know people in the province, who were the leaders, what was the structure there
that I could work with, and how I could understand what everybody thought about
the conditions, about the future, what they wanted. And people had been living
for years and years of trauma. A place like Kirkuk, Saddam Hussein had been this
awful, evil leader, he had mass murdered his people. And you had every person I
met there had suffered in some way. Everybody had some grievance. And there was
this expectation that America was going to come in, fix the country within six
months and make it look like Dubai. I remember at Gordon Career hearing
endlessly about rebuilding and it was all about Halliburton and Dick Cheney's,
it was all about that. It wasn't about how you put in place some kind of
structure, which is suitable for a country like Iraq. It's not the UK, it's not
America. It's fascinating because lots of things seem shocking now, but the
absence of planning seems almost the most shocking element of it. And what it
was, was that you had different factions within the US who had different ideas
of what should happen. So you had some, and the kind of Rumsfeld view, John
Bolton, when I interviewed him for the series Express This, which was basically,
you get in, you overthrow Saddam and you get out. John Bolton had them a copy of
the Federalist Papers, the US constitutional papers, say, good luck, walk away,
and let them deal with it. And that was one genuine view within Washington.
There are still people who hold to that. There are others who were, we have to
develop democracy. There are other people who thought, well, maybe you put in
some exiles quickly to put it over. There are others who thought, well, these
exiles are completely untrustworthy. You had a complete mess, which was never
resolved. And so you end up making up as you go along, which is what happened.
And bad actors supported by the US. And you know, this is the second thing,
which is, so if we say that the first disaster was an occupation, the second
disaster were the exiles, because the exiles came from outside, they had
developed these kind of very claustrophobic ideas about injustice, about
persecution, about victimhood. So when they came to Iraq, they wanted to address
their victimhood. And in that kind of binary narrative, in which there is one
section of the society is a victim, the other must be the victimiser. And that
quickly moved from Saddam being the oppressor into the whole of the Sunnis of
Iraq being the oppressors. And suddenly you have a huge group of people who many
of them did not support Saddam. But what you show in your book, so I mean,
incredibly graphically, and you witnessed so much of the maiming and the torture
and the murder. And I understand that you were operating with various identity
cards, so you could go around. This idea that it was, as we said, that it was
Sunni on one side and Shia on the other, when sometimes you had Shia and Sunni
forces working together, you had some Kurds coming in. This was presumably mind
blowing for Americans on the ground, because they couldn't get, they couldn't
understand what was going on. Because in Iraq, I don't want to say there was no
sectarian identity, but the sectarian identity was not the most important. But
it was reinforced by the way that Bremer set up the coalition. Absolutely,
absolutely. Suddenly you have all the security forces kind of drawn from the
kind of the Shia exile community, and people were in Iraq. But then also, the
Sunnis were pushed in a corner have to come up with a kind of an opposition, a
rejection to this kind of programme of this occupation that's targeting them.
And that is the easiest recipe of a civil war. If you want a civil war in any
country, send the foreigners, align themselves with what and which is of course,
the British did in India in the 19th century, they always kind of worked with
one side of community versus the other. So that was reinforced in Iraq. And, and
you know, when I started journalism, I didn't know who was a Sunni and a Shia
amongst my friends. But when I started journalism, as an assistant 2003, I
started recording names on my phone, and adding Sunni Shia. So I myself fell
into that kind of binary way of thinking. You have, I mean, and you have
particularly individual stories that the story of Hamid, you know, Hamid, Sunni
resistance against the Americans, and then sides with the Americans against Al
Qaeda. Tell me about how people were trying to navigate their own lives at this
point. I mean, absolutely. Hamid, I met him in 2005. And he's been already a
kind of a quote unquote, resistance fighter, you know, fighting the Americans,
blowing up Humvees and all these things. But he used violence for a purpose. And
that purpose was to re establish his role and the role of other kind of army
officers in the new Iraq. He didn't want violence for the sake of violence,
which puts him in confrontation with the people who actually wanted violence for
the sake of violence, Al Qaeda and the jihadis who wanted to have a civil war.
And then he finds himself in this awkward situation. His enemies are kind of
Shia militias, kidnapping and killing. Al Qaeda is also attacking him. The
lesser evil are the Americans. So Gordon, and at one point early on in Naqeeb's
book, he talks about there's a particular hit on an army vehicle, and the
helicopters come in and just strafe everybody, including, you know, endlessly
the civilians. And you see this throughout the book, that it was the civilians
who paid the price. You have this initial security vacuum, into which the state
collapses, there's chaos, there's looting, there's insecurity, into which then
Al Qaeda and kind of jihadist groups very quickly move. It's unsurprising that
people then look for security within their communities and find ways of
identifying it on a local level, sometimes in that level. Meanwhile, the kind of
resistance to the US grows. The US retaliates often with, you know, kind of
amazing excessive force, killing civilians, which then breeds further
resistance. And you're very quickly into this absolutely devastating cycle of
resistance, occupation, but also civil war on a sectarian level. Emma, from the
people you were talking about, were you very aware of this kind of binary notion
that it was Sunni versus Shia, and that's the way we had to handle this whole
thing? Very quickly, did you understand, and were you trying to communicate to
people how much more complex it was? So in Kirkuk, you had more groups than
Sunni and Shia. You had Arabs who were Sunni and Arabs who were Shia. You had
Kurds, you had Turkmen, you had Christians, you had all these different groups.
And the province had really suffered from Arabization, where Saddam had tried to
change the demographics in the province by expelling Kurds and Turkmen and
bringing Arabs, particularly Arab Shia, up from the south to change the
demographics in favor of the Arabs. Because Kirkuk had so much oil, he wanted to
ensure that the Kurds couldn't take Kirkuk and annex it to their territory
because they were seeking independence. So you have a very, very complex
environment. What I tried to do was create platforms for consultation to be as
inclusive as possible. But then what happened was diktats that came from Baghdad
that said, you must implement de-Baathification, you must dismiss the security
forces. And so the people that we had been working with on the Sunni side then
found themselves kicked out of their jobs. We had hospitals with no doctors, we
had schools without any teachers, which meant the people who were working with
us then moved into opposition and then moved into insurgency against us. So
constantly trying to manage all the different communities, all saying that they
had been victims, all highlighting the level of their grievance. But were you
operating, I mean, you were getting all this incoming, saying you had to do the
de-Baathification and so forth. And were you pushing back? I mean, was this
coming from the Americans or were the British? Who was delivering all these
diktats? So it came from the headquarters, it came from Ambassador Bremer, who
put out Order 1 and Order 2, CPA orders. What we tried to do initially was hire,
we tried to give exemptions to the de-Baathification order. When people's
salaries were cut off, we tried to hire them back on local US contracts. When
that proved impossible, we were running out of ways to respond. So of course, we
were reporting back the problems to Baghdad. But you have to understand that the
Coalition for Regional Authority was a small organization built from scratch,
built from the hoof, didn't have systems, didn't have people who'd worked
together. We were trying to administer a country of 20 million people with a
hundred, you know, a couple of hundred foreigners who had come in to do this. It
was mission impossible. Yes, mission impossible. It was bound to fail, Gordon. I
think looking back, it's quite hard to see what situation, as Rafe was saying,
could have created a better outcome. I mean, you can look back and you can say,
well, no, don't do de-Baathification, don't disband the Iraqi army, put in more
troops at the start to stabilize it, have a political plan. I mean, all of those
things would have been better. But effectively, it is very hard to see what
would have made it more successful, or at least successful in absolute terms.
But Gray, from your point of view, you're the Iraqi here. Rather than having all
these people coming in, and I'm not taking Emin in any way, any kind of
disrespect, but having all these people coming and saying this is what had to
happen. I mean, you were there, I mean, obviously you didn't know what was going
on in terms of the conversations, but when you were watching it, what was your
overriding emotion? Look, there was a sense of disbelief among all the Iraqis
I've talked to. So even in Saddam's hometown in Tikrit, I remember going there
like two, three weeks after the war. People were, you know, happy to get rid of
Saddam. In Ramadi, army officers, I mean, let's remember that it's the army
that's tried to topple Saddam three times in the 90s. So everyone was, if there
was one thing everyone agreed upon is that Saddam's gone fine, finally, you
know, war after war, destroying the whole nation for decades for his kind of
megalomania kind of beliefs. Now, what's next? What's next is, it came the
disaster and people say, why are the Americans pointing their guns at us? Why
the Americans are driving tanks in the middle of the streets? Why the Americans
are not protecting buildings? So that, and you know, you have to remember for
Iraqis, America is the greatest nation in the world, America would just change
everything. And then when they see the Americans failing, they don't believe it
is an American failure, they think it's a conspiracy against Iraqis. But two
things, first of all, had they not disbanded the army, would the outcome be
different? You're not sure? I'm not sure because the conditions were there for
failure. But if they had more troops on the ground, they could at least protect
petrol stations, protect electricity, power stations, prevent looting. Up until
today, I mean, 20 years later, we still don't have electricity in Iraq, partly
corruption, partly because of the looting and the destruction of the
infrastructure. In 2003, I mean, you had a team of 100 people trying to run a
country, but the country was allowed to fall apart, destroyed in front of their
eyes. But also you had bad actors coming in like Iranians were coming in as
well. I mean, look, the Iranians had to defend themselves against the Iraqis. I
mean, this is another natural outcome, I'm sure. For the Iranians, the kind of
the whole axis of evil, and then they say 150,000 American troops next door.
What do you expect them to do? Fight the Americans on Iraqi soil? Kind of have
all their, you know, different militias equipped armed to fight the Americans?
And as this was, sorry, carry on. Well, I was going to say, on the, you know,
the absence of security, I mean, the only ministry they put in troops to protect
was the oil ministry at the start. I mean, which, I mean, the symbol that that,
you know, what that represented to Iraqis told people a lot about what they felt
the invasion might be around. And part of it was the ideology which drove the
invaction, which said, you know, the Rumsfeld view and the Pentagon, which was
small force numbers, just use our power and then get out. And that drove that.
But then it was entirely predictable that other actors would start to move into
Iraq. I mean, it was in, it should have been predictable. It would become a
theatre for jihadists to move in. It should have been predictable that the
Iranians next door who'd heard these hawks in Washington say Baghdad first, then
Tehran, would seek to make it harder for America to do that by getting involved.
So that was predictable. And yet very little was done to stop it. But it was so
predictable, which is the opposite of people say, oh, with hindsight X, you
know, it was predictable. And that's the big difference. And that's what seems
what I think is shocking as well. So I would like to add one thing about the
jihadis. I mean, throughout the 90s, so Saddam kind of defeated the political
Shia Islam in the 80s persecuted, executed and killed. In the 90s, he was after
the kind of the Salafi, the radical Sunnis who started posing a threat to the
regime. And it has and it devoted, it's the security forces to fight the
jihadis. I'm not defending Saddam's security forces. I'm just saying the threat
to Saddam from political Islam was a Sunni political Islam was a jihadi
political Islam. And then suddenly 2003 borders are open. A guy comes from
Afghanistan, who was in Iran, probably called Zarqawi has an absolute goal. His
plan was evil and brilliant, create civil war to push all the Sunnis to join the
jihad. And I want to come on to a little later when Emma was back. But before
that, just on the question of the the personality of the people you met, because
in your book, so clearly, you see, you know, obviously, people became abusers.
But also, justifications that were made by perfectly sane and reasonable people,
you would think people that maybe you'd have a coffee with then. And they turned
into jihadis. I mean, that that for Iraq was very difficult. That was very
difficult for me to comprehend how see, I kind of never left Baghdad. I lived
all my life in Baghdad. I went to Kirkuk a couple of times, a few summers. But
in in these 29 years, Baghdad, this flat, ugly city had no borders within it had
no divisions had no separate identities. And within months, the city is divided,
I have to negotiate lines, I have to find I became a stranger in my own city,
which is, of course, the title of your book, because I need someone in that
neighborhood where I used to eat falafel, who would take me to that neighborhood
who would vouch for me there. And again, I see normal people becoming, becoming
killers, basically becoming killers, planting IED card, IED bombs, kind of
kidnapping Sunnis kidnapping Shia killing them. And that in itself becomes
another dynamic is, it's no longer killing a Sunni because it's killing a Sunni
for his house for his guns. You were able to get up close to all that. And you
never were badly injured. I mean, that's extraordinary in itself. And you were
there as a journalist, but the idea that a journalist would be trusted, I mean,
it would only have been because you're in Iraqi, they could even go into those
situations. But it must have been for yourself and your own state of mind to see
such horror week in week out. Yeah, I mean, at one point, our life resembled
those of, you know, ambulance drivers, we sit in hotel rooms, and we scan the
horizon waiting for this plume of smoke, and we start chasing car bombs and, and
killings and streets in Baghdad becomes war zones. Of course, it all builds up.
And it's not only one year or two year, it takes 20 years, culminating in Mosul
and ISIS. So it's all one line. And of course, Emma, that could have been
stopped earlier, I think your view is. In 2007, you went back during the surge.
Tell me about that. Well, the nature of violence in Iraq really changed over the
years. I mean, I'd only been in Kirkuk for about a week, when I had a house
downtown Kirkuk that was attacked by in, well, I can't say insurgents, they were
attacked by jihadis who blew up the house with me in it. So that back in 03, led
people like me to move from being downtown, to move into military bases. And by
the time you get to 2007, the US military had withdrawn to big bases. So weren't
living out within the community. So the violence at the beginning of 2003, after
the invasion, was very much directed at the occupiers, and those that we put in
power. So we'd all set up provincial councils, we'd set up parliaments, we set
up all of these things. So the initial violence was directed at them. That
violence, the nature of the violence then changed. And by the time you got to
2008, you had the first attack on the Sunnis. And by the time you got to March,
as Raif was saying, you had Zarqawi, who was instigating attacks on the Shia, in
order to get this backlash against the Sunnis. So the violence had morphed from
insurgency really into full blown civil war. So by the time President Bush took
the gamble to surge extra forces into among the coalition leaders about what was
driving violence, and the approach was to really push US forces to live back out
amongst the Iraqi population, to protect them from the violence. Up until then,
the Americans had been hunting bad guys across the country and creating more and
more grievance, more and more enemies. So to have this change of approach to
say, look, we have got to break the back of this violence, we've got to bring it
down, protect the people. The Iraqis then began to see the Americans almost as
the protectors, rather, you know, from the violent extremists. So it changed the
nature. It changed, you know, there was already a Sunni awakening turning
against Al Qaeda. The Americans worked with it to spread the Sunni awakening.
And you started to see the decline in violence. And that at that point, of
course, you were advising Petraeus and you're advising General Oh, and obviously
what you'd said, were saying, did matter. But then Gordon, the Americans back
Maliki, and he hasn't even got majority in the parliamentary election. What you
get is this, you get the surge, which is successful in that period in
stabilising, but then you get this sense of weariness, you have President Obama,
who is his motivations and his Vice President Joe Biden are to disengage. And
you have a disputed election and effectively, they walk away at a time of kind
of political turmoil, which then results in a kind of renewal of the violence.
And I find it extraordinary that, you know, you know, having invested all this
in the surge, you then have this, you know, kind of disastrous period, which
then leads to the reemergence of ISIS, you know, or the creation of ISIS in Iraq
and Syria. So you have this kind of renewed cycle of violence, partly because of
the continued failure to kind of to build and to sustain. And we've got a
situation where, as you say, Obama withdraws, and Joe Biden is the one who has
to deal with Iraq. Emma, fair to say you're critical of Obama over this? Oh,
yes. Because Gordon was saying we've done so much to bring the violence down.
The 2010 elections, everybody turns out to participate in it. And you have
people who formerly were in the arm struggle running as candidates. It was a
really good election. But Maliki doesn't believe Maliki was the Prime Minister,
and he didn't believe the election results. And he insisted on trying to change
those results. In the American system, they were divided about what to do. On
one side, though, those, including myself, who argued that the US should
maintain the results of the election and allow the winning bloc to first go at
forming the government in line with the Iraqi constitution, in line with
customary practice in parliamentary systems. And Joe Biden says, Nope. Maliki's
our man. Iraq's not really ready for democracy. It needs a sheer strong man.
Maliki, you know, he's an Iraqi nationalist. Let's keep Maliki in power. Maliki
gets his second term. He has the support of the Iranians. And his policies from
then onwards are very, very sectarian. He goes against the Sunni awakening
leaders, accuses them of terrorism. He goes after the Sunni political elite,
accusing them of terrorism. And all this creates the conditions for ISIS to rise
up out of the ashes of Al Qaeda in Iraq. And, and, and, Hayth, one of the worst
things and was heartbreaking chapters, to be honest, in your book is the battle
for Mosul in 2016. A direct result, presumably, you would think of Maliki.
Absolutely. I mean, I totally agree with Emma here that that it I divide the the
Iraq war into the first civil war, which ended around 2008 and nine. What I
disagree with him, I don't think any Iraq if so, the Americans as you know, as
protectors, but what happened is the Sunnis were totally defeated by the Shia
militias. They aligned themselves to the Americans. It was the awakening that
helped end the violence to a larger extent rather than the surge as a surge. But
anyhow, civil war ends by 2009 2010. Maliki comes to power and totally agree
with Emma, he goes after the Sunnis rather than reconcile that rather than bring
them into the country. He believes in this whole idea, his whole idea is on
money, which will never hand it back. We have the power. It is for us, Shia
political Islam, and it will stay in our hands will not hand it back. So what
does he do? He creates the condition to alienate the Sunnis. He allows massive
corruption in the army and the state because corruption is his tools to, you
know, to build his patronage networks. So army officers, you know, they run
their military units like fiefdoms. So you have a battalion 3000 soldiers in
reality have 500 600 fighting force, the rest are salary siphon to create these
military fiefdoms. Now that is coupled with the effects of the Arab Spring in
Syria, where the chaos across the border with sectarianism, which were first
emerged in Iraq is nurtured in the Syrian civil war, allowing the jihadis to
rebuild their networks across the border, come back to Iraq, and we leading to
the creation of ISIS. So that whole Maliki episode that period, you look at that
as part of the start of the legacy. Yeah. And I think there's two interesting
things here. One is the the lack of of Western patients, if you like. And I
think that's a really interesting question. Have we is there the patients in the
West to, to sustain intervention and commitment? But the second question which
relates to that is, how far does the responsibility lie with the Iraqi political
leadership now? I mean, they would clearly Iraq has been given a terrible
inheritance from that 2003 invasion. But it's also some of the decisions of
those Iraqi leaders like Maliki, and some of the that actually drive what
happens next as well. So I think it's quite interesting trying to balance out
those, those different factors in terms of what happens and what where Iraq is
now. But on the on just returning to Maliki, and just this is being like almost
like this hinge point. And, you know, we know what the Americans have done,
they've backed Maliki. What because you've spoken to a lot of people about this?
What were the British thinking at that point? Well, the British influence is so
limited. And I think that's what's extraordinary is, you know, they've gone into
this invasion in 2003, thinking we're the partners, but right from, you know,
the date when war is going to get a start to the post war planning to
afterwards, you know, there's no doubt where the junior partners I mean, you
know, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, who was the kind of coalition administrator said,
you know, the Americans had 95% of the influence, we have maybe 3% other
countries, 2%. That was how he balanced it out. Emma may have may have a
different view on that, but but it was limited. And now, in the closing minutes,
we should talk about the legacy. I mean, if you go backwards and forwards, tell
me when you were last in Baghdad, what was happening? I was in Baghdad last
week, and I'm writing kind of about this whole legacy of 20 years after the war.
And of course, you know, Baghdad is is, you know, at peace at this moment, but
it the absence of war does not translate into long peace. I met one of the
characters who made his name during the civil war. I mean, he's the the
murderer, the kind of the killer of civil war, his name is Abu Dara. And Abu
Dara, his name is associated with these worst massacres. I accompanied him
driving around the streets of Sadr city, he's positioning himself as like almost
like a charity worker, handing salaries and a frozen chicken to families of
widows and orphaned children. And, and as we drive, and he says, this is where
we fought the Americans. This is all what happened. We go into side street, and
he takes me to this car park and shows me 20 armored vehicles, says I'm keeping
them. And for the day when I need them, and I'm thinking, I mean, look, the
Americans killed and got killed for months, years over that stretch of a
highway, to control that highway to defeat Abu Dara. 20 years later, Abu Dara
has his military car park next door, and he's there and he's kind of positioning
himself as a bag. There is no accountability, no accountability to the Western
leaders who created the war, no accountability to the Iraqi leaders who killed
and maimed their nation. And Emma, from your point of view, the legacy of the
Iraq conflict? The legacy has affected not only Iraq, the Middle East, but I
think the wider world. And it's always seen as an example of how US, the great
superpower, violated the rules based international order by invading Iraq. Putin
always refers to it, people in the global South refer to it. It's mentioned a
lot in relation to the Ukraine war. I think it undermined America's leadership.
It's unipolar moment, I think came to an end with the Iraq war. I think it
undermined how democracy is perceived in the Middle East and around the world. I
think you can relate the fallout from the war, the arrival of those refugees in
Europe at the time of the British vote on Brexit, that the fear of a million
Middle East refugees coming to the UK was one of the drivers to limit
immigration, to regain control of the borders. And you can look at President
Trump, who was forever referring to Iraq as the worst decision ever, he would
save America from terrorism. Let me just bring Gordon in. Your view on the
legacy? I think it's a seismic event, which ripples out everywhere. And it
ripples out whether it's trust in public life in politics in the UK, whether
it's our confidence in intervening around the world, whether it's in the Middle
East in terms of the relationship of power Iran has to other countries, security
and terrorism. I think the terrorism threat would have been very different were
it not for Iraq. But I think above all, it's a legacy for the Iraqi people
themselves. Well, thank you this morning to all my guests. Emma Skye, founding
director of Yale's International Leadership Centre and author of The Unravelling
and In a Time of Monsters. Raif Abdo, Ahad's A Stranger in Your Own City,
travels in the Middle East, Long War has just come out. And you can hear Gordon
Carrera's 10 part series, Shock and War, Iraq 20 Years On, on BBC Radio 4 and
BBC Sounds from next Monday at 1.45. Many thanks to today's studio engineer, Tim
Heffer. Next week, Tom Sutcliffe will be back with another Start the Week. But
for now, from all of us here, thank you and goodbye. Start the Week was
presented by Kirsty Wark and produced by Katie Hickman. And you can find
previous editions on all manner of topics on BBC Sounds. Wild Isles with David
Attenborough starts next Sunday night on BBC iPlayer. On Radio 4 Longwave, you
can hear the Daily Service now here on FM. Our new book of the week is
Travellers to Unimaginable Lands by Dasha Kipper. Compassionate case studies
that blend science with lived experience to explore dementia from both the
patient and the caregiver's perspective. The reader is Teresa Gallagher. When I
was 25 years old, I moved in with a man who was 98. This man, whom I'll call Mr
Kessler, wasn't a friend or relative. He was a Holocaust survivor in the first
stages of Alzheimer's disease. And I'd been hired to look after him. Although I
had a background in clinical psychology, I was by no means a professional
caregiver. I was hired because Mr Kessler's son, Sam, thought his father
shouldn't live alone. Once ensconced in Mr Kessler's two-bedroom apartment in
the Bronx, I became, as so many caregivers do, a record keeper of someone else's
obsessions. Where are my keys? Have you seen my wallet? What day is it? Where do
you live? Where do your parents live? He didn't ask these questions every day in
the year I cared for him. He asked them nine or ten times a day. Every day. I
wanted to help him, but I couldn't. I wanted him to appreciate my efforts, but
he couldn't. Some mornings Mr Kessler knew who I was. Some mornings he did not.
Some days he resented my presence. Some days he was glad to have my company. And
some days, as if in gentle reproof to his own forgetfulness, he looked at me and
murmured, How long have I been like this? Or, Why don't I remember? Or, I don't
know how you put up with me. As Mr Kessler teetered between knowing and not
knowing me, between wanting my company and rejecting it, between happily eating
the meals I prepared and accusing me of taking advantage of his hospitality, I
felt myself pulled between feeling useful and feeling like an intruder. His
oscillations began to tug at my own sense of existential rootlessness. Why was I
here? What was I doing? Was I doing anything wrong? Why was I here? What was I
doing? Was I doing any good at all? It was my first indication that people with
dementia disorders can still find your most vulnerable part and poke at it until
you yourself feel unraveled. One evening, about seven months into my stay, Mr
Kessler haltingly climbed on top of a chair to change the battery in a smoke
detector. When I warned him how dangerous this was and offered to help, he
snapped in typical fashion that he was the boss and didn't need help. Usually,
when he tried to fix things, I would distract him. But this time, for just one
minute, I needed him to understand that there was such a thing as objective
reality. Forget about the alarm, I said firmly. It's too dangerous. He waved me
away and put a foot on the chair. Aggravated by his condescension, I felt an
uncharacteristic urge to strip him of his delusions. I was tired of playing this
game, tired of being his co-conspirator in the belief that nothing was wrong
with him, which ironically made it easier for him to question my presence in his
home. So I did what caregivers shouldn't. I argued. Shaking with indignation, I
shouted that he didn't do anything by himself, that he always needed my help,
that he wasn't capable of living alone. Although my outburst didn't seem to faze
him and fled his memory after 10 minutes, it so disturbed me that for weeks I
succumbed to apathy. I thought I was failing, perhaps not in my duties, but as a
human being. Caregivers want to re-establish a shared reality. It's not cruelty,
but desperation that drives us to confront patients with the truth. In many
cases, dementia disorders create a world so fragmented, so skewed, so redundant,
so indifferent to normal rules of behavior, that family members outwittingly
become part of the madness. Yet clinicians and researchers continue to posit a
clear distinction between the mind of the caregiver and that of the patient,
between the normal and the abnormal, when in fact the true burden for caregivers
is often the absence of such a divide. Children and spouses do not merely
witness their loved one's cognitive decline, they become part of it, living in
its surreal, bleak reality every minute of every day. My case studies are
therefore always about two people who unknowingly collaborate in misinterpreting
the disease. Patient, I use the term patient throughout as a shorthand for
person with dementia, and caregiver. Relying on cognitive and neurological
research, as well as on my own experience, I want to show how both patient and
caregiver react to the existence of the dilemma created by dementia. Sam's
relationship with his father had been fractious from the time he had announced
at 21 that he was going to be a professional musician. Mr. Kessler didn't mind
Sam making noise in the house, but Sam needed to get a job first and play music.
He was a very good musician, and Sam was a very good musician. Sam was a very
good musician, and Sam was a very good musician. He needed to get a job first
and play music second. His job, Sam told his father, was playing the tenor sax.
What kind of job is that? Mr. Kessler's conviction that Sam was wasting his life
was relentless. Dementia was punishing them in the same way they had always
punished each other. At least once a week I heard a version of the following.
Sam, stop trying to fix the lamp in your room. It's dangerous. Mr. Kessler, I
don't touch the lamp. I don't know what you want from me. Sam, you mess around
with the lamp and the wiring. That's how you cut your hand. Mr. Kessler, I never
touch the wires. What wires have I touched? Sam, don't argue with me. Just do as
I say. It's for your own good. Mr. Kessler, when do I argue with you? Sam, you
always argue with me. You're always giving me trouble. Mr. Kessler, no one ever
said I give anyone trouble. Sam, you're giving me trouble right now. Mr.
Kessler, how? How am I giving you trouble? Sam, you don't listen to me, and if
you keep arguing and contradicting me, I'll stop coming to see you. Mr. Kessler,
I promise. I promise I will listen to you 100%. Sam. Okay. Now promise me you'll
stop touching the lamp in the bedroom. Repeat it to yourself. I will not touch
the lamp. Mr. Kessler, I never touch the lamp. What lamp? Sam. God damn it. Stop
arguing with me. Mr. Kessler, when do I ever argue with you? While Mr. Kessler
would quickly forget their arguments, they accumulated in Sam's mind until his
frustration and anger boiled over, as did his guilt. Although I had grown
accustomed to feeling helpless when confronted by Mr. Kessler's distress, I
thought that surely I could help Sam. One day, after another bad fight, I took
Sam aside and showed him photographs of the healthy brain and the dementia
brain, with the hippocampus pitifully shrunk to half its normal size. Sam looked
appropriately somber. Here was indisputable evidence that his father was no
longer the person that Sam had been fighting with for decades. Yet only an hour
after Sam viewed these photographs, he and his father were shouting at each
other again. It was a lesson to me. Just as I had mistakenly regarded intimate
moments with Mr. Kessler as touchstones of closeness, I mistook Sam's moment of
clarity for long-term understanding. Who, I sometimes wondered, was suffering
more from memory loss, Sam or his father? Because memory is biased toward pre-
existing knowledge, we all edit the present to make it look like the past. No
matter what new symptoms his father presented, Sam's memory encoded his father's
behavior in a way that made him appear more consistent with the man he used to
know. Just as Alzheimer's can magnify conflict, it can also bring out affection
and tenderness. Quiet moments when arguments cease. One Sunday afternoon,
something unusual occurred. Sam offered to shave his father. At first, Mr.
Kessler declined, but sensing that his own hand was no longer steady, he
hesitantly agreed. Watching them from the doorway, I noticed that once Mr.
Kessler felt the warmth of Sam's fingers and the stroke of the razor, he began
to enjoy himself. And Sam took pleasure in Mr. Kessler's unabashed delight at
being pampered. You're like a professional barber, Mr. Kessler said, chuckling
as Sam finished up. I should pay you. And then, when Sam wiped away the last of
the lather, Mr. Kessler leaned into him and sighed, that's good. Sam, I knew,
looked forward to these 15 minutes when he and his father could be together. So
it came as a jolt when, during one of their sessions, Mr. Kessler, after telling
Sam that he should be paid, casually added, you need the money, don't you? Your
hobby keeps you poor. Taken aback, Sam felt a familiar surge of anger and
quickly stepped away from the sink. Mr. Kessler, unsure what had happened,
turned his head and asked, what's wrong? Why did you stop? Sam said nothing.
Stolledly, he began shaving his father again. Alzheimer's not only kept Mr.
Kessler's image of himself intact, it also preserved an outdated image of Sam.
Over the years, I've encountered a lot of anger from caregivers. Sam was just
one of many whose anger was constantly being rekindled by a patient's moving in
and out of awareness. It's almost axiomatic that in troubled relationships,
caregivers would rather hold on to their anger than accept the pain of losing
someone. And this reluctance to let go is only exacerbated by a disease that
creates just enough ambiguity in a patient's behavior to keep caregivers from
facing their grief. One evening, as Sam helped his father get into bed, Mr.
Kessler looked up and said in a kindly tone, who are you? Startled, Sam replied,
your son. My son? Mr. Kessler said wonderingly. How long have you been my son?
Well, I guess 62 years now, Sam said, feeling both alarmed and amused. Mr.
Kessler's eyes widened. 62 years you've been my son and only now you're telling
me? Sam laughed. Well, sometimes it slips my mind. Seeing his son laugh caused
Mr. Kessler to laugh as well. Later, a grim looking Sam found me in the kitchen.
I'm a jerk, he muttered. Why do I continue arguing with him? He doesn't even
know who I am. Our minds abhor ambiguity. And as long as a patient's memory
flickers on and off, we tend to see what we want to see. As I continue to
observe Sam's seesawing reactions to his father's intermittent and fluctuating
recall, I realize that it's not the absence of a memory system that frustrates
and confounds caregivers, but rather it's fragmentation. Given the way a normal
memory functions, memory loss in someone we know well feels less like a
neurological deficit than an act of betrayal. After all, when patients forget,
it's the caregivers who end up feeling erased. Their words, efforts, and
sacrifices often going unacknowledged and even denied by their patients. It's
why so many caregivers feel they're being gaslighted. Without the other person's
memory working alongside our own, collaborating with us on facts and events,
we're left shaky and unsure of what's real, of what's to be trusted and not
trusted. Memory loss does not just create ambiguity. It impedes the possibility
of growth, of repair, of accountability, of achieving closure. Travelers to
Unimaginable Lands by Dasha Kipper continues at the same time tomorrow. It was
read by Teresa Gallagher and abridged by Christine Entwistle. The producer is
Kirsty Williams. One man's fight for civil rights and to enroll at the
University of Mississippi. It was one man's fight for civil rights and to enroll
at the University of Mississippi. It was really the centerpiece of segregated
education in Mississippi. Triggering what some have called the last battle of
the American Civil War. And I say segregation now, segregation tomorrow, and
segregation forever. Now aged 89, James Meredith tells his story. I knew the
state of Mississippi would stop at nothing, including killing me. Breaking
Mississippi with me, Jen White, starts next Monday to Friday morning at 9 45 on
Radio 4.