TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-20H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 A joint statement from the Department of Health and Social Care and the Royal
College of Nursing says both sides are committed to finding a fair and
reasonable settlement, one that recognises the vital role nurses play in the NHS
as well as the wider economic pressures facing the UK and the Prime Minister's
priority to halve inflation. The Health Secretary will meet the Royal College of
Nursing tomorrow to begin talks. The Education Secretary says she's written to
the teaching unions, inviting them to enter formal talks on pay, conditions and
reform. On the condition that strikes across the north of England next week are
cancelled. President Biden has stressed that the US and other Western countries'
support for Ukraine will not waver in a defiant speech in Poland delivered in
the run-up to the first anniversary of Russia's full-scale invasion. He told a
cheering crowd in Warsaw that Vladimir Putin's lust for power and land would
fail and painted the conflict as a battle for democracy. In an address earlier,
President Putin accused the West of fuelling the war. A Romanian court has
confirmed the social media influencer Andrew Tate and his brother Tristan will
remain in custody for a further 30 days. The two men have been held for almost
two months while police investigate allegations of human trafficking and rape,
which they deny. Asda and Morrison say they're putting limits on purchases of
some fruit and vegetables, as supermarkets face shortages of fresh produce. Asda
is capping sales of items such as tomatoes, peppers and lettuce at three each
per customer. The shortages are largely the result of extreme weather in Spain
and North Africa, where bad weather has affected harvests. BBC News Cassidy and
Roy have company when we head to Ambridge in just a moment. And then on
tonight's front row, the Hollywood star Michael Douglas talks about his double
Oscar-winning movie career, how he's still learning the craft of acting, and
about his new film Ant-Man and the Wasp, Condomania, which is in cinemas now.
Also on the programme, leading animators join Tom Sutcliffe to discuss their
fears for the future of visual effects and animation in the UK. Front row, usual
time just after, at quarter past seven. BBC Sounds If you own a smart speaker,
did you know you can access a whole world of BBC content through it? To get
started, just say Open BBC Sounds. Then ask your speaker to play whatever you
want. You could listen to a music mix like this. Play Focus Beats. Or try a new
podcast. Play Desert Island Discs. And of course, if you want to listen to live
radio, you can just say Play Radio 4. Music, radio and podcasts, available on
most smart speakers. Just say Open BBC Sounds to get started. BBC is hiding from
her next door neighbour, in the archers. BBC is hiding from her next door
neighbour, in the archers. She is hiding from her next door neighbour, in the
archers. She is hiding from her next door neighbour, in the archers. BBC is
hiding from her next door neighbour, in the archers. She is hiding from her next
an adjoining door so he doesn't have to bother ringing the bell. I'm sorry. No
Roy, you need to get home as soon as possible and help. Well help how? I don't
know but he's your daughter's grandad. What's that got to do with anything? Just
get back as soon as you can. Brian, come in. Right, where do you want me? What
on earth did you say that for? Because I don't want to be the one who stands
between him and his daughters. I thought Tom was going to finish off planting
the broad beans. Don't change the subject. Suggesting he go with them sounds
like you want him to go. I do. If that's what he wants. Helen, you're making no
sense. Dad, Lee is a very experienced physiotherapist. If he can get a green
card he'd find work out there quite easily. I can't pretend his only choice in
life is to watch his children get on a plane and move to the other side of the
world. But suggesting he go with them and set up a life in America. I've turned
this over and over in my head, Dad. I see how much he's hurting and it is a
valid and real option. The only thing stopping him is us, him and me. It'd be
selfish to try and keep him here. So what if he decides to do it? I don't know.
If Lee chooses to move to California, what happens to you and the boys? Would
you go with him? I don't see how that's possible. The boys schooling and my work
here. So if he goes, that's it for you, Dad? Dad, I wish it was simpler. I wish
Mabel and Evie loved it here and didn't want to go abroad, but they really do.
Lee's cut up about it. If he needs to be with his children, who am I to stand in
his way? I love him too much for that. Besides, we'd still be here living our
lives, but his side of things would be pretend. That's a very noble approach,
Helen, but it's a risky one too. One that could cost you your happiness. Well,
right now it is Lee's happiness I'm thinking about. I know he's been so quiet
since last night and not even sure he's speaking to me. Oh, well, that'll make
judging the pancake competition fun. Yeah. You had a chance to speak to Lillian
yet? One problem at a time, Helen. He's asleep in the armchair? Yes. How long?
Just over an hour. Oh, can't he sleep at his own house, in his own chair?
Apparently not. He started off well, really tried to help, but he can't really
distinguish between the old paint and the new. The colours are too similar. At
least he tried. So I convinced him to come down for a break and one cup of tea
and two digests later, he's gone. But you should wake him. Me? Yes. I was really
looking forward to some telly in me, feet up after the day I've had. Join the
club. I was meant to be soaking in the bath around about now, but how can I with
Brian in the living room? We could just go out to the pub, leave him a note in
case he wakes up. How does that help? I don't know. Wouldn't it be too horrible
for him to wake up with no one here? Well, maybe he won't wake up and he'd still
be asleep when we get back. Either way, I'm starving so... Well, look, I know
it's my turn, but I haven't had a chance to cook. Hang on, I thought you said he
brought the shepherd's pie. Oh, yeah. I'll go and put it in the oven. Tony? Lee!
You come to collect me for the pancake competition. In fact, shouldn't you be
over there flipping pancakes already? Oh, Natasha and Pat are there with Helen.
They seem to be doing okay without me. You were all gung-ho yesterday. Yesterday
seems a long time ago. Listen, Lee, is this about the girls being excited about
San Francisco? They confided in you too? No, Helen did. Right. Only because she
was trying to get her thoughts in order. Did she tell you she suggested I move
to California with them? Yes. Wow. So she's really been thinking about it. She's
obviously looking for a way out. Nonsense. She's literally asking me to leave,
Tony. Oh, maybe I shouldn't be discussing this with you, but... Lee, she's
reminding you there is an option where you get to be closer to them. No matter
what it costs Helen and the boys. So she's willing to let me go. I'm not sure
willing is the right word. She's been in knots about this. She seemed pretty
calm and clear last night. It's not an easy situation for either of you, but
each day she sees you enjoying being a father with Mabel and Evie. She's acutely
aware of what you'll be missing when they go. I asked her, what about us? She
didn't say anything. It's not her decision to make, it's yours. I know my
daughter, Lee, she doesn't want this to be more difficult for you than it has to
be. Sooner or later the girls will be getting on a plane and it seems you have a
decision to make. I'll be all right if it was just one decision. I thought this
was about me and the girls. But me and Helen as well. Maybe I'm just not good at
judging this kind of thing. I don't think that's it. Then why would she tell me
going was an option? Because if she faced the same situation with Jack and
Henry, what would you tell her? Stay and let your boys go? What she said took
every bit of love and strength she has in her, Lee. She suggested it because she
loves you and she knows how much you love your girls. What am I supposed to do,
Tony? I don't envy your situation, but I will say this. Being a good parent
isn't just about being in the same house or the same country as your children.
Of course it's the ideal, but when it's not possible, that's not the end. There
are a dozen ways you can be present in each other's lives in a meaningful and
real way, even long distance. I keep worrying they'll think I don't love them.
Maybe an Evie are old enough to know you love them, Lee. I see it whenever
you're together. Yeah? Yes. And you have this knack of making all four children
feel loved without ever feeling like they're competing for first place. Why do
you think they all get along so well? That is true parenting in my book. The
UK's canals and rivers are teeming with a plethora of... Oh, I'm awfully sorry.
I don't know what it is about this chair and that narrator's voice. It puts me
right to sleep. Don't worry, Brian. That was to the best of us. You're probably
more tired than you think you are. Maybe an early night would do you good. Yes,
yeah. Well, I better be off. Oh, and don't forget the shepherd's paw. It's
already in the oven. Oh, good. Good. Give yourselves a night off cooking.
Thanks. Why don't you stay? What? What's a massive shepherd's pie? It's too big
for two. Yeah, I know. Joy's food parcel's a very generously portion. Yeah,
listen, thank you, but I couldn't possibly impose after the embarrassment of
dropping off. Oh, well. And you've got something for your dinner, have you? Yes,
yes, yes. Don't worry about me. Well, there's no point in defrosting another
dish when there's plenty to go round. Really? Well, if you're both sure. Of
course. Well, I might go get change if that's OK. Maybe you'll crack open a
decent bottle of wine from next door. Oh, sounds great. I'll bring some over.
Well, it'll be ready by the time you get back. Excellent. I'll see you both in a
moment. Yeah. Oh, what's going to you? He was ready to leave. Oh, come on. He
did bring the pie over. It's freezers. Stop full of them. I'm only trying to
find the silver lining. There isn't one, Roy. Our house has been taken over.
Quality wine and good home cooking isn't the silver lining. It's not that I
don't feel awful for him. And my heart goes out to him. It really does. But... I
won't say it. Brian's company isn't exactly... He always asks about work. And
before I know it, he's going on about ways to develop the rewilding site that
are diametrically opposite to my basic worldview. What he means, well... I know.
And I hate myself for saying this, but once he's had a couple of drinks, he
doesn't know when to stop. And I'm so tired of having to smile politely and wait
for him to wind down. I don't know what's worse. When he's out like a light on
the sofa or when he's railroading the conversation. Well, do you want to call
him and tell him not to come? Oh, sure. There's nothing mean about that. What?
You're the one who wants rid of him. And you're the one who keeps inviting him
back. I do not. You literally just did. You did, didn't I, yeah? Oh, I'd better
get changed too. And tonight, you're doing all the clearing up. Thanks for
coming out for a walk with me. Oh, you don't have to thank me. It's nice. Walk
those pancakes off. You're quite full on, aren't they? Sorry I was late tonight.
That's OK. You've got a lot on your mind. I have. Especially after what I said
last night. I haven't stopped thinking about it. Since you said the words, I
kept wondering what you meant. You suggesting I go? You could have asked me. I
was right there. Yeah, but I'm a typical man, aren't I? A dumb bloke who's happy
to get lost in his own thoughts and ask for directions. And? I thought, why is
the woman I love looking for a way out? Why is she keen for me to leave the
country? Keen? Lee, that's not what I said. And it's certainly not what I meant.
I know. I spoke to your dad. Oh. He was great. He cleared a few things up. Such
as? Such as? What would I say to you if it was your decision to make? And then I
spoke to Alicia. And tonight I'll be speaking to Mabel and Evie themselves. So
you've come to a decision? I have. The way I see it, if you can be courageous
enough to support me moving away to be nearer my girls, even if it means losing
us, then I ought to be man enough to let my girls be happy. So let them go and
try out San Francisco for themselves. I told Alicia I want video calls, visits
in the holidays whenever possible, and I need to trust they'll always know I'm
their dad, know how much I love them. And then I have to do everything I can to
be a meaningful, present part of their lives. So you're staying? I'm staying.
And this way I get to be a good dad to my daughters and to my sons too. You
know, I've been trying these past few days to think of how I might tell the boys
that you might be moving far away. I just couldn't do it. I couldn't find the
words. Good. Because I'm not. Adil has some tough love for Roy when we return to
Ambridge tomorrow night at seven. Plus spam counts falling James Gallagher will
investigate for tonight's Inside Health at nine o'clock. And before that at
eight o'clock this week's Fireland 4 turns a spotlight on the Fire Brigade.
Let's hear more now from Jane Deeth. It started with London Fire Brigade. A
review found the culture was toxic and the level of ingrained prejudice against
women was dangerous. It opened a Pandora's box of revelations of sexist bullying
in other fire services. Fireland 4 has been listening to firefighters'
experiences. Women who've had their kit tampered with had fire axes thrown at
their heads and had to fight off sexual assault. They say no one helped them and
they were silenced because they were forced out when they dared to complain. But
now that silence is being broken. On Fireland 4 after the news. This is BBC
Radio 4. Time now for tonight's front row with Tom Sutcliffe. Hello. A strange
place, the Quantum Realm, snail-headed horses, rubber buildings and Michael
Douglas too. In just a moment he talks to us about the latest addition to the
Marvel Extended Universe, Ant-Man and the Wasp, Quantum Mania. A film in which
his very familiar face is one of the few sites that hasn't been generated by a
computer. British companies have been prominent in providing such visual effects
and animation for Hollywood but for how long if the British government doesn't
keep pace with tax reliefs offered elsewhere. We're also joined tonight by
William Sargent of Framestore and Sean Clarke of Aardman Animation, both worried
about how their industry is going to stay competitive after Brexit. And we have
orchestral maneuvers in the dark. The Odessa Philharmonic there with the
Ukrainian national anthem conducted by Hobart Earl in a performance in which the
only electricity was musical. He talks to us later about playing under blackout
conditions and we report on an operatic contribution to Ukraine's continuing
resistance to Russia. We're starting there with Michael Douglas, Hollywood
royalty by inheritance as the son of Kirk Douglas but also an actor who carved
out a place at the head of the A-list in his own right, particularly with a
string of big films in the 80s. They included Fatal Attraction, Falling Down and
Wall Street for which he won a Best Actor Oscar. He won another Oscar as the
producer of One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest and an Emmy for his performance as
the closeted entertainer Liberace in Steven Soderbergh's film Behind the
Candelabra. And though he's now 78, he shows no signs of stopping, his latest
appearance being in Ant-Man and the Wasp, Quantumania, in which he plays an
inventor, Hank Pym. Meddling with the laws of time and space obviously runs in
the family because after Hank's granddaughter gets a bit carried away with her
science project, the entire family, Ant-Man's son-in-law and all are
accidentally whirled down a cosmic plug hole. When I talked to Michael Douglas
about the film, I suggested that while the setting might be otherworldly, the
essential plot here was a family road trip. Very astute analysis. Exactly what
it is, when it's all broken down. I mean, it's that road, family road trip is
totally camouflaged in this, in this new world, the quantum realm, about 90% of
the movie, except for the very beginning, in the end, in place in this
miniscule, tiny, tiny world, totally fresh. And it's really impressive, I must
say, you know, when you're doing these so-called green screen movies, you get a
suggestion of what it might look like. So you only see green when you're
filming? You're not seeing any of the effects or even a place of? Now you see
some of the effects, the effects that are done by the time of the filming are up
on the screens and are part of it. For instance, there's that one bar scene when
we first arrived, when Bill Murray arrives. That was a combination of the
creatures, a weird assortment of actual actors dressed up. And then beyond that,
on the screen, Bill's spaceship pulls into the parking place and you believe
it's actually there. So you have something to act against? Sometimes you have
something to relate to. What advice would Sandy Kaminski give about green screen
acting? You play him, you play the acting coach in the Kaminski method, a very
funny Netflix series. What would he say to a young actor about the best way to
deal with it? It's comic books. It's larger than life. There's a degree of
theatricality, but not theatricality. It's your dialogue may seem simplistic. It
is, but it follows the same sort of tight, short, curt sentences that one gets
in comic books, except for Hank Pym, the professor, whoever he wants to get,
have to elaborate and articulate as if he really understands what the hell is
going on. So you've been studying the quantum realm. Why didn't you ask me about
it? I tried, Mom. A lot. You never wanted to talk about it. Cassie's just been
curious and we gave her some pointers. This isn't exactly ant science, is it,
Henry? You know how dangerous the quantum realm is. We all do, Mom. Nobody's
going to the quantum realm. That's why we made this. Your daughter built a
subatomic Hubble telescope in a basement. And now you were at all nostalgic for
the days when there was a bit less in the way of digital effects. I mean, the
special effects in Wall Street were the script. Those lines that kind of went
into the conversation and stayed there. My entire career has been contemporary.
And so it was a conscious effort on my part saying after 50 years in the
business and doing all these contemporary projects, except for one, to do a
green screen. I was curious about acting when things were not there. And so I
was curious. And that's really the reason why I wanted to try it. And it's
different. You have to have much put faith and trust in your director when you
say, I really feel like I'm overacting because you don't see things. They're
telling you, OK, there's a comet coming at you and no, then it's going past. And
your eyes are wide and this. And you feel like, I really feel silly. They say,
trust me, don't. So it's a unique kind of partnership, whereas it normally is an
actor who trusts your own instincts. And 99.9% of the time, they're absolutely
right because they know, they've seen the storyboards, they know how it's all
going to come. But when you're driving the spaceship by plunging your hands into
two giant animated transparent jelly worms, which are writhing around, you're
just pushing into thin air. Are you? No, no, those plastic things were actually
coming up. And I had to lubricate my arms to go in. They were already
lubricated. I felt a little bit like an obstetrician. There is a generation of
filmmakers who kind of minds the prevalence of these superhero movies, the way
in which they really take up a lot of kind of space in Hollywood now. What's
your feeling about that? Well, I guess I remember time for my father's period
where it was nothing but Westerns. And with the advent of streaming, thank
goodness for the sci-fi green screen Marvel pictures, because that seems to be a
large part of what's supporting movie theaters' very existence these days. I
think we have enough space. I mean, and you can't argue with success. Marvel's
done close to 40 now, and I think 36 out of 40 have been blackbusters. Well,
it's an interesting analogy, that with Westerns. I mean, because Westerns did
occupy a huge amount of real estate, and then they became another way of telling
different stories within that. But I wonder, I mean, I was thinking about your
filmography, you know, Fatal Attraction, Falling Down Wall Street, The War of
the Roses, films like that. They provoked debate about real issues in the world.
I mean, sometimes quite complicated debate, Falling Down. There was a lot of
kind of anger about that film. The superhero movies don't do that, do they? No.
No, they don't. And my career has generally been based on controversial films,
sort of the gray area, not right or wrong, but just sort of ambivalence and kind
of questioning. Yeah, that's what has interested me, but allow me once in a
while to go off in another direction. I enjoy this. This is a different area,
sort of a different style. It's a pleasure. But it's a... I'm guessing. You say,
you know, there are other challenges of green skin, but I'm guessing that this
wasn't the toughest day at the office for you. And I'm wondering in your career,
what was the biggest stretch for you as an actor? What was the role that
really... One that I enjoyed, I mean, this kind of character acting, which I
really like. I don't have a confidence as a leading man necessarily just to use
your own persona. It's something I'm actually working on later in my life, where
just being yourself, a lot of leading men, it's sometimes harder just to be
yourself. But so I like characters. So something like Behind the Candelabra,
where I play Liberace, was enjoyable, hard work. You know what? I have a great
idea. Why don't you come work for me? As what? Well, you could be my secretary.
I don't type. Hell, Scott, I can pay people to type. I need a companion, a
bodyguard, someone to keep people off my back, someone I can talk to the way we
talk tonight. Please say yes, Scott. Wall Street was hard. It was hard work, a
lot of dialogue and very demanding. Oliver Stone was an excellent director and
he pushed me. In what ways did he push you? I mean, it was tough on set, was it?
Well, he pushed me. He came to me the second week of shooting. He came into my
trailer and said, you okay? I said, yeah. He said, are you doing drugs? I said,
no, because you look like you never acted before in your life. Well, Gordon
Gekko just shriveled up into a little ball. And I said, well, I guess I better
go look at some dailies, because that's the only time I look at dailies if
there's an issue or something. He said, yeah, you better. And I went to look at
them and I thought it was pretty good. I'm looking and I came back and I said,
yeah. I thought it was okay. I said, it is. I said, what do you want, Oliver?
What Oliver wanted was a little more nastiness. And he was willing to be the
confront me. And if I was going to be angry at him, angry at him for the rest of
the pictures, he stood right next to the camera with his script looking at it,
not even looking at me, then that would so be it. And that's his kind of
commitment. But as a result, I won an Oscar and he made me a better actor for
it. So I will always be indebted to that. The point is, ladies and gentlemen,
that greed, for lack of a better word, is good. Greed is right. Greed works. If
I've got the mess right, your father, Kirk Douglas, was still making, I think he
made his last film at 88. Probably. You don't need to make a reputation. You've
already got that. I'm taking it. You don't need to pay the utility bills by
going to work. What is it that gets you out for those kind of early morning
calls? I love my job. I love working. I mean, I think it's true with most, we
use the word loosely, artists. You don't think about 65 years old and being, oh,
I kind of can retire now. So I just do this because I enjoy it. You suggested
that you're still kind of learning how to do it, just in an answer to this. I
tried to, yeah. I've never been really comfortable with a screen. Early on in my
career, someone said to me, the camera can tell when you're lying. Who is the
camera? So I was into this sort of method acting and thinking, oh my God, I
can't lie. I've got to be. And then, of course, I think it was fatal attraction,
it was that far along the line. I'm getting ready for my characterization and
method acting. And they said, okay, okay, I've got to be a lawyer. I said, all
right, well, I could be a lawyer. You live in New York City. Yeah, I live in New
York City. You're an adulterer. Well, you know, that's a possibility. So all of
a sudden I said, well, wait a minute. I could play this part. I know this sounds
silly. And then once I realized that, then I said, wait a minute, I lie every
day. At least once a day I'm telling a lie. I mean, acting is about lying.
Acting is lying, making convincing somebody that you're telling the truth. And
so I had this total epiphany and it sort of freed me up and made me enjoy, but
up to then it just been painful as a profession. And once that sort of happened,
I just became enjoying it much, much more. One of the pieces of advice Sandy
Kaminski gives his students is you've got to love the character. We never quite
know how to take Sandy's because we don't know how quite, you know, but is that
a good, is that a good note? It is. And that's probably why I love villains. You
know, that's why most actors, male actors, love, love the villains. You know,
for a long time, ladies, I'm going back to when I produced One Flew Over the
Cuckoo's Nest and five actresses turned down the role of Nurse Ratched before we
were able to get Lou's Fletcher piece. At that time an actress, a woman, did not
want to play a villain. Whereas a guy, all he ever wanted to do was to play a
villain. That was the most fun. And what do you feel, last question, just about
that streaming revolution? It was interesting. I was watching Wall Street last
night and there's this very interesting moment where Gordon Gekko pulls out this
little tiny television. And he's showing off, you know, it's a toy he's bought
for his kid. And Charlie Sheen looks at it and says, you can't see anything on
that. And I thought, oh, you don't know what's coming. How about the one, I'm
going to have the old brick cell phone. You got the brick cell phone. But that
little screen has become important. People watch on it, don't they? They do. And
good content is made for it. Very good content. I'm so happy and excited about
it because at least in the US, not so much over here in the UK, but the
television careers and film careers were in separate tracks. And granted, kind
of tough feature films looked sort of down on television. And it was very
difficult to make the transition. And when I produced Cuckoo's Nest, I was still
in the streets of San Francisco, a TV show, which I had left to produce that
show. We won the Oscar, now I'm an Academy winning producer. But as an actor, I
can't get arrested in feature films. So I actually started doing a couple of
movies where I was producing it. But in this case, Jeff Bridges, I'm taking a
movie called Starman, got the role. So streaming has brought in the best of
feature film, predominantly writers, because in streaming the writer could also
be a producer and do well, as well as television's talent acting and directing.
You know, I think it beats with anything that's so post-believe. But when we
talk about anything that's in a movie's theatre, it's there for maybe a week,
possibly more, before it goes into streaming. So that is the future. Michael
Douglas, I really enjoyed that conversation so much, though. I made up for
having to go and see the film first. Anyway, Ant-Man and the Wasp, Quantum
Mania, is in cinemas now. You don't need to go to the quantum realm to find
yourself in an alternative universe. Of course, power politics can do it too,
brutally. Ever since the 24th of February last year, musicians and artists in
Ukraine have been in a very different world, performing work under the threat of
Russian missiles with companies pulled out of shape by conscription and the
urgency of national defence. Ukraine Opera won Company of the Year at the
International Opera Awards last year for their achievement in producing
outstanding work in challenging circumstances. And this week, they're reviving a
work they first premiered last year, Katarina, which tells the story of a
Ukrainian girl whose love is betrayed by a Russian soldier. For Front Row, Luke
Jones talked to the opera's director, Oksana Taranenko. You know, the war
actually started in 2014. Since then, the biggest part of Ukrainian society
became aware of what kind of neighbour called himself our brother. And I was
thinking what can be offered to the Ukrainian public with Ukrainian art. So
Covid times gave me time for that. And actually, when we started to rehearse
Katarina, we already put in the mise-en-scene in costume, in aesthetics, in
choreography, we already put all our understanding of the situation, of the
relationship between us. And we call them Moscowites. These people are
Moscowites. They are just wild beasts. Story of Katarina herself. She got
pregnant from the Moscowite. She got abandoned and she committed suicide because
she didn't have any other choice. So rehearsals were well underway. You had this
new opera, but then, of course, war breaks out. All my actors, they are on the
beach collecting sand for sandbags. You know, they were covering the theatre
building with those sandbags to protect it. I'm from Kiev and composer and
choreographer Alexei Sklarin and composer Alexander Vodin. Three of us,
Kievites. It took us 16 hours to get back to Kiev to join our families. And when
did you feel safe to return and to even think about doing some kind of creative
work? That was all about decision of the CEO of the soap, Rana D.E. Babich. This
courageous woman, she called me and said, like, Oksana, we are going back to
work. Whatever cost, we are going to make this premiere on September. So
immediately my life gained the future back and I came back. Could you just
describe for me that the opera house in Odessa, just so we can picture it in our
lines? Odessa Opera House. This is the Pearl of Odessa. The theatre itself is
situated in the quite dangerous spot because it's very close to the harbour. And
of course, Russians are trying to reach the harbour. Was it damaged at all? Oh,
no, no, no. There is no scratch happily. What about your performers? How easy
was it to reassemble them as the war continued? Well, actually, there was like
two thirds of the people because mainly, you know, women went abroad. Lots of
men from the orchestra, they went to army. And so a choreographer, Alexis
Glarenko, he volunteered to territory defence. He was paramedic. I mean, it was
a huge job to take him back at least for two weeks so he can finish his
choreographic job. His reality was totally split. We were under shelling as
well. There were alerts a lot. And it was very annoying. We were not scary, but
we were annoyed because we were losing time. So you were even taking rehearsals
down into the bomb shelters when you needed to? Yeah, we did it. Yes, the spirit
was very high. Okay, great. The main message that people got that I put that and
people got it that never again We will not be victim anymore Alexander Rodin who
wrote who composed the music and he also did libretta He managed somehow to
Transmit that spirit of the land and all our you know yearly ceremonies Yeah, I
mean you think that when the war was very much still going on people would Stop
going to the opera and the theater and seeing live music That'll be one of the
first things that they dispense with The other was totally full and it still
stalled out Well paradoxically at that time, you know, there's a opera being
considered as a high art now became like closer to people you know because the
music and the singing and Ukrainians we are singing nation it kind of affects
the Subconscious strength of the people and releases that Survival is not only
about physical survival survival is about what we are surviving actually for
What is our idea who we are what we are going to give to our children to our
future generations art brings these answers definitely Oksana Terenenko talking
to Luke Jones there and Katarina is now being streamed on Arte concert and
returns to the Odessa Opera stage this coming Friday and Joining us now to talk
more about Performing in wartime is Hobart Earl who's been principal conductor
of the Odessa Philharmonic Orchestra for over 30 years now To such effect in
fact that he was named a people's artist of Ukraine in 2013 welcome to front row
Hobart. Um, is it very common for that you you weren't born in Ukraine? I think
you were born in Venezuela. Is that right? Correct. So is it common for the the
people's artists of Ukraine to go to somebody from outside the country?
Actually, I am the first non Slavic person to have that honor. It's a huge honor
and The way it works. It's a government award You have to have had a certain
amount of time as distinguished artists of Ukraine before you get upgraded You
work your way up. I take I take it you recognize much of what you we've just
heard from Oksana That interruption of rehearsals that's been happening to you,
too Absolutely, although I will say this that the situation in Odessa this past
January when I was there I spent three weeks there during New Year's concerts
and other concerts was that The musicians entirely by their own will and they've
been doing that when I'm there and when not is Pretty much to ignore the area
its sirens and I have a gut feeling that that's not only with the Odessa
Philharmonic Orchestra I think that's with a lot of other performing arts groups
as well. So I know your Circumstances are slightly different from the Opera
House because that is down near the docks and has a reliable supply of
electricity You don't that that concert we heard at the top of the program there
had to be played without any lighting at all except for the the Audience using
their phones and little torches to light the musicians. What was that like?
Well, the audience used their phones to make their way into the concert hall
because it's pitch dark but once they were seated their phones were were off the
orchestra has small little battery powered lamps on each stand that work either
on batteries or with power banks and Unfortunately, some of our concerts have
been from start to finish in the total darkness Um, it's it's absolutely the
last way you would want it, but I assume you get an extraordinary atmosphere
from that Don't you a different way of listening? There is no question that the
audience is so totally focused when it's dark our New Year's concert traditional
New Year's concert Which is Julian calendar new year January 13th is New Year's
Eve in the Julian calendar Was in darkness from start to finish and the
atmosphere was Magical because there wasn't a single free seat in the entire
hall having said that it's I think it's easier for the orchestra to play when
the lights are on because this visual communication between the players gets
lost and I it's a very sort of special atmosphere But I think if we took if we
took a roll call find that the orchestra would be much happier playing with
lights on Presumably the conductor is very important in that role. You need a
spotlight on you in that repertoire They do need me very much. And what we have
is is a very sort of small lamp That's quite high above my head But I have to
stand in the middle to make sure that I'm really well seen and of course we
rehearsed that way to make sure That if the concert would be in the dark that it
was that everyone could see me well because the Viennese Waltzes are very very
subtle. The orchestra is very good at that. We've been doing that for many many
years I studied in Vienna and I love this music dearly so but still they do need
me in that repertoire. So Talking about the repertoire How much is it a change
one could understand that there would be a deep reluctance to hear a lot of
Russian standards at the moment Have you have you increased the amount of
Ukrainian music you're playing? Well, we have always Taken pride in that we do a
lot of Ukrainian music and just now literally two three weeks ago we gave the
first performance in Odessa at least since 1991 if not at all of The seventh
symphony by the Crimean Tatar composer Alemdar Karamanov his seventh symphony is
called moonlit sea Which is it and it was written in 1958. It's extremely
unusual music for that period and for that period in Soviet music as well and
And this was wonderful because the audience was I think very very taken by this
music this atmospheric You know Odessa is by the sea and of course when it's
dark and if you have full moon you have this moonlit path so this atmospheric
music was very interesting for everyone including some of the musicians who
didn't play who actually came to hear the Performance came backstage to say how
taken they were by the music which of course they never knew before You've
played music by Miroslav Skorik as well We've got a little bit of that that
that's another kind of Ukrainian composer and let's just hear a little bit of it
before we do And now Hobart to my untutored ear that sounds as though it's
absolutely tapping into kind of folk folk music And Ukrainian folk music is that
right? It absolutely is unfortunately because of the link. I'm on here. I didn't
hear what excerpt you played from the piece I'm we're alive, but that is
absolutely It's what's called hutsul music hutsul are a mountain people in the
western region the Carpathian mountain region of Ukraine and this is One of
Skorik's masterpieces written. It's actually movie music for shadows of
forgotten ancestors. It was a 1965 classic of Soviet music for which Skorik
Soviet film and we come You've come here now to to give a talk Music in wartime
a huge subject that and what are you actually focusing on? Well the talk Tom is
a video presentation of lots of short videos of ours from 2014 until today
Unfortunately, this has been going on for nine years. Of course, it got a lot
worse on February 24th last year much worse But still we've been in the
situation of war and between the videos I speak About the music that's being
heard. I speak about the history of Ukraine I speak about how performers adapt
to performing under wartime how composers sometimes consciously sometimes
subconsciously reflect music wartime in their music and then perhaps most
interestingly how audiences Can perceive the same piece of music differently
under times of war with very precise examples In the videos that are being
played and just give us one example Will you have that change of audience
perception? I'll give you an example without naming the composers thought to
ruin the surprise It's a piece of music which is extremely well known to every
single person in the former Soviet Union. It's a waltz It's one of these very
famous wartime waltzes from the Second World War which everyone grew up with But
here's the thing. It was not written to have anything to do with the Second
World War It was written way way way before and the people who heard that music
before the Second World War came around because never dreamed that it would
become to be perceived as wartime music and of course Nowadays, it's perceived
in an entirely different way Because we've got a fresh war going on and I think
there's no question That's one example, but there are other examples in my talk
of how for example In the Requiem of Valentin Sylvesterov when you suddenly have
a Ukrainian text in the middle of this Latin Requiem Which was written way
before this conflict came about and he's quoting a poem by Tarasz Shevchenko In
which suddenly yeah, it goes into Ukraine The Requiem is a memory of his wife,
but suddenly Shevchenko goes into Ukraine. That's a bombshell It must have an
enormous. Yeah, it must have an enormous effect on an audience and thank you
very much indeed Hobart Earl and that talk you're going to give Ukraine music in
wartime is tomorrow at 2 30 p.m At the University of St. Andrews the Laidlaw
Music Center and admission to that is free And you might like to know that the
Ukrainian-born pianist Dinara Clinton is going to feature on add to playlist
this Friday Now in terms of agricultural exports Shaw Le Mouton Shaun Das Schaff
and Shaun La Pecora are a notable British success You'll probably know them
better as Shaun the Sheep But as well as being sold to French, German and
Italian television Aardman Animations creation has traveled worldwide Animation,
children's programming and visual effects are a great British success But
according to Aardman's managing director Shaun Clark things are now as
precarious as the cliffhanger moment from a Wallace and Gromit film A scene from
the wrong trousers the kind of homegrown hit which those in the industry fear
might be endangered If the tax reliefs and assistance offered to creative
businesses don't match those available elsewhere The government has just
concluded a consultation with audio visual companies about this And joining
Shaun Clark to talk about the case they've been making is William Sargent One of
the founders and now chairman of the very successful creative studio frame store
Which has been essential to the success of numerous films and television series
including Paddington, Top Gun Maverick and recently The Last of Us Shaun Clark
you said recently about children's television particularly What's produced in
this country will go off the edge of a cliff in the next couple of years unless
something is done What is the cliff first of all that they might go over? It
sounds a bit like a Wallace and Gromit film doesn't it? It does a bit
Essentially what I was getting at was without any investment We will change from
being a very proud nation that has been making for the last 50 years Children's
television to a nation that conceives ideas and they're made elsewhere And
that's sort of principally around how we look at investment and infrastructure
And in the last 10 years there's been much change in the industry driven by
streamers, much disruption And a lot of money has come into the industry It is a
lot of... The Treasury brief for this consultation said that in 2021 to 2022
alone Audio visual reliefs provided 927 million in support to film and
television and video games industries Could you just clarify how that works? I
mean it's not money you're being given is it? It's money you don't have to give
the government that you can then reinvest is that how it works? Yes, essentially
you get the tax relief you get the tax back So you can include it as part of
your financing You have to have to deficit finance it during production But you
essentially get that money back So it's an important part of any financing plan
But what's happened is in the last 10 years there's a lot of money come into the
industry And clearly other countries were a part of that So they are coming in
with much more competitive tax credits ranging from anywhere between 37 and 50%
Whereas we're at 25% And I think all we're asking for is a level playing field
to compete You know, Aardman and Framestore and many other companies are very
proud of making productions in this country And we want to continue that I'm
really feel passionately we want to be able to have that next Aardman That next
Shaun the sheep and without that investment then I think that diminishes I just
want to bring in William Sargent here Do you share Shaun's sense of alarm to the
same degree? I think what Shaun is highlighting is that we have built a business
If we take what you just said the 900 million of tax credits It actually
delivered three and a half billion of tax right and 15 billion pound industry So
it's actually incredibly good money So from that point of view we have delivered
on the support that all governments in the UK have given us over the last 20
years So we've built it and we have the platform in that What Shaun is correctly
identifying is that the other G8 countries would like to have a piece of the
action And are going after it And that's really what he's talking about the
competitiveness of where we are now Now Shaun I presume that the other G8
countries would have been going after that money Whatever happened with Brexit
but has Brexit made a difference too? It has and you know when we were part of
the European Union we were able to access Creative European media funding And I
think when I looked at the stats and accounts the the UK accessed on average
around 21 to 22 million pounds a year And we currently have a replacement for
that which is around 7 million We also had which was a brilliant initiative a
Young Audience Content Fund Which was linked to supporting UK production about
40 million over three years 221 projects were created including an ARBON project
and that's now come to an end So if we're going to compete you know we really
need to compete with a competitive tax credit An investment for producers to be
able to keep the rights Of if you don't keep the rights you have to sell them to
finance them And that dilutes the creative integrity of the project You have
more people involved in the creativity And it also means there's less money
coming back into the country Everybody quotes Peppa Pig that's owned by a US toy
company So all the profits go back into the US versus coming back into this
country Does free of a movement make a difference here? I mean we're told that
these are talent industries and as it were being able to hire the right talent
is crucial isn't it? It is crucial and you know a third of our colleagues come
from the member states in Europe And we now have a cost obviously to bring them
in and that but I think to take it to the bigger picture The tax credit has
built an industry that currently supports a quarter of a million jobs That's a
tenfold increase over the last 20 years and that right The you know we have five
billion pounds coming in every year from effectively Hollywood and North
American places like that Now that underpins a huge set of jobs and so forth And
in our case we're the technology end of it and technology is basically about 80%
of the large films Like Maverick and Harry Potter and those sort of films that
you see And we for example do tap into the European Commission grants and that
But for us you see the issue is that the there's a cap at the last 20% doesn't
have a tax credit Visual effects is portable and leaves the country One of the
things that we're trying to do in this tax credit consultation is to make sure
that we remove that So that the visual effects stay here because the visual
effects drive the industry and let me give an example of the output at present
The Imperial College are using software developed in our sector to to have the
cost of trials for degenerative drugs development Right so our industry is the
R&D bedrock the technology part of the of the industry is It's a key part of the
community and we own that at present That's why that's why the other countries
wanted because we own the seed of the future of digital skills So it goes in all
directions in your view in your view does does um brexit make it easy for easier
for us to do some of these competitive things It's a no-brainer to just take
away the cap for example Then you transform it and the key there is the visual
effects that digital production side of the industry really You know if we get
that right and the metaverse is coming in behind it What we do is the metaverse
and the uk leads and that right and instead of talking about a quarter of a
million jobs We're talking about a million jobs in 10 to 15 years time It's as
basic as that and we have a choice whether we want it or not And as sean says if
we're not competitive we won't get those jobs Um sean clark, um, they are also
talking about simplifying tax rules. There's an absolute blizzard of acronyms
when you look at this Um, is that something that will help is that significant
do you think? Just simplifying the regime any simplification? Is useful I fear
um I totally support what will is saying in terms of uh protecting the effects,
but my fear is that if they Took away the cap they would reduce the tax credit
So I think that the message really is is if you take away the cap You know at
least maintain it and and look at increasing it. Um, you know, we we we need a
level playing field And we need investment to encourage people to carry on
making productions in this in this country. Um, I was very struck. Um, uh by a
little line that said in order to qualify for these tax reliefs Productions must
be certified as culturally british by the bfi Uh now sean you would have no
problem at all with what's in gromit and and sean the sheep I would have thought
Um very clearly culturally british. How what about top gun maverick? sci-fi
movies and fantasy movies if you stick a castle in a few lines of british poetry
And definitely a few british actors, uh, you're probably qualifying as a british
movie So there are ways around it. There's a creative approach to it. We're a
creative industry We have a creative approach to qualifying as a british movie
Well, um, thank you very much indeed. Um, sean clark and uh, william sergeant
apparently government action is coming by 2024 they say, um, do you believe
them? In terms of action, I mean in terms of action. Are you holding your
breath? Well, I believe that they look they understand it. Um, and certainly the
prime minister when he was chancellor certainly got the picture Okay, right, but
we'll follow that story up, of course And we will come back to it in the future
to say what's happened. Thank you very much indeed sean clark and william
sergeant That is it for tonight, uh on tomorrow's front row from sulford the
actor turned film director Nathanael martello white on his psychological
thriller the strays sounds very interesting And we look to at the great new
yorker writer janet malcolm's autobiographical essays Still pictures, uh join
nick had for that at 7 15 tomorrow Until then good night Front row was presented
by tom soot cliff and the producer was harry parker the studio engineer was
jiles aspen So On bbci player Six robbers have carried out an armed raid
stealing almost three tons of gold inspired by britain's biggest gold heist How
do you shift three tons of gold? Slowly 26 million pounds worth of pure gold in
the possession of people who didn't expect to have it If you could handle a job
like this then out of earlier you only hear about the people who get caught
Stealing it was just the start. We're looking for six robbers and three tons of
gold Every ring every watch if you're looking for the gold it's all around you
the gold watch on bbci player Coming up after the news phylon four investigates
claims of racism sexism and bullying in the uk fire survey