TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-10H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Last time a US president spoke to the people in Eastern Europe. Our editors Dan
McAdam and Josh Tindall with Nick Tomfield and Josh Searle here. The studio
director George Thomas. Goodbye. BBC News at nine o'clock. The Russian president
Vladimir Putin is due to give an update in the next few minutes on what he calls
his special military operation in Ukraine. He'll deliver his annual state of the
nation address almost a year since he ordered troops into the country. Our
Russia editor Steve Rosenberg is in Moscow. Based on things that President Putin
has said, comments that he's made in recent weeks, there won't be any hint of
remorse or regret or any admission that he made a mistake, a giant
miscalculation when he launched what he still calls the special military
operation. Contrition, Putin doesn't do that. Instead, what we're much more
likely to hear again, I think, is the Kremlin leader trying to justify the
invasion. President Biden will also give a major speech this afternoon,
outlining support for Ukraine as part of his three-day visit to Poland. The
public finances were more than Â£5 billion in surplus in January. The figures
from the Office for National Statistics defied predictions from analysts after
substantial spending on energy support schemes, record debt interest, and one-
off payments to the EU. Rescuers are searching wreckage after a new earthquake
hit the Turkish-Syrian border region yesterday evening. It caused widespread
panic and some already weakened buildings toppled. A baby born in the rubble
after the earthquakes in Syria earlier this month has been adopted by her aunt
and uncle. The girl was still connected to her mother by her umbilical cord when
she was rescued and was the only member of her immediate family to survive. The
world's biggest trial of a four-day working week has been hailed as a major
breakthrough, with boosted productivity and a drop in the number of sick days.
Sixty-one companies across the UK took part in the six-month pilot last year.
Almost all of them said they wanted to keep the new working pattern. BBC News
Over on Five Live, Nicky Campbell is going to be discussing the role of
journalists and social media users surrounding the disappearance of Nicola
Bully, asking, do we get the media we deserve? And we continue in that vein here
on Radio 4 later, when Call You and Yours is asking to hear your experiences of
social media, both good and bad. That's beginning at midday. Now though, on
Four, we reach for the cosmos with Jim Al-Khalili. Hello and welcome to The Life
Scientific. Today I'm in the Peerhead building in Cardiff for the Cardiff
Science Festival and I'm talking to an astrophysicist who grew up just down the
road from here in Bari. Both her parents left school as soon as they could, but
she stayed on in education as long as possible, studying for a degree and PhD at
Cardiff University, where she's now a professor of astrophysics, specialising in
cosmic dust, those small particles of matter spread out through interstellar
space. For centuries, cosmic dust was nothing more than a source of irritation
for most astronomers, because like smog, it prevented them from seeing the
stars, a bit like the foggy view I saw here across Cardiff Bay when I arrived
this morning. Now, cosmic dust is challenging some deeply held assumptions about
the physics of stars, and being able to see through it has revealed a lot more
of the universe. Professor Hayley Gomez from Cardiff University, welcome to The
Life Scientific. Thank you, thanks for having me. Well Hayley, I should perhaps
have introduced you as Hayley Gomez MBE, because in 2018 your work was
recognised by the Queen. That must have been a nice surprise. Yes, it was
surreal. I still remember the day I was changing nappies on parental leave. Very
glamorous. Yeah, very glamorous. And yeah, the letter came and I had to read it
out to my husband and say, is this a parking ticket or is this something else?
And it was very strange. And then I suddenly thought, oh, I still got to change
the nappy. I've got to carry on doing that. It was for services to physics, and
in particular, all the work you've done to inspire the next generation of
physicists and astronomers. Which outreach project would you say you're most
proud of? We did a project called Universe in the Classroom, which I'm really
proud of because it took physics and astronomy and the excitement of space into
primary schools. So it kind of looked at talking to very young children, and
even those children already had ideas about who could be a scientist. So they
often drew a male scientist, a white scientist, lab coat and glasses. And we
found that after kind of working with them a little bit and telling them about
space, they ended up thinking of a wider range of scientists. They drew
themselves as scientists, or they drew people that were like themselves, which
was really lovely to see that even though those old fashioned thoughts of
science and who could do science at such a young age could actually be turned
around. So I feel really proud that we managed to do that in Wales. Of course,
you yourself are a shining example of how you don't have to be a certain kind of
scientist. So Hayley Gomez, let's talk about what got you into astrophysics. You
grew up in Bury in South Wales, and I understand both your parents were
unemployed for most of your childhood. Is that right? Yeah, we had a very nice
childhood, but it was very noisy. There were five of us in a kind of council
house. And yeah, there was nobody around us that had any desire to go to
university or even do A-levels. It was kind of, that wasn't the path that
everybody took. Everybody just took the leave school when you can, get a job,
settle down. But I've always found learning is quite a calming, quiet process.
And I think part of it was an escape from that kind of loud, chaotic family. My
producer tells me you spent a lot of time at the local library. Yeah, that's
right. I had a lot of freedom as a child. So one thing my parents really good at
is that they would just let me walk down the bottom of the streets, go around
the corner, local library, and I would sit there all day, every day. And is that
for the peace and quiet or for the books? Peace and quiet and the books. But I
love the fact that you could find out anything. So books for me were a huge
escapism. So it was wonderful. And I remember reading such a wide range. I'd
read Asterix comics, even though they were in Welsh and I couldn't speak Welsh.
I would still read them. And then I read lots of stories and I kind of, it
sounds very cliche, but I stumbled upon a book, which was an encyclopedia of
space. And I remember opening it and there was this really badly drawn sketch of
a black hole. And I remember just being caught up in that. How can there be a
hole in space? How can there be a black hole in the universe? How do they even
know that exists? And I remember finding that point on, I just thought I need to
know what's going on here. And that's what, that's, that's been your journey,
hasn't it? Because you're now a professor of astrophysics. So tell me Hayley
Gomez, were you a stellar student at school? Oh no. How on earth should I be
here? No. I liked, I did well in physics and maths. I didn't really enjoy them,
but I did well in them. So I kind of chose to take them on. I loved learning. So
I knew I wanted to do A-levels. And you, for your A-levels, you actually had to
switch schools because you went to an all-girls school. But then to do A-levels,
you had to go to a boys' school. That's right. It sounds very old fashioned. I
was in a girls, all-girls comprehensive school and they didn't do physics in the
girls' school at A-level. And I had to go to the boys' school and, you know,
walking, walking down the atrium of the boys' school, thousands of boys kind of
catcalling and wolf whistling and shouting at you, walking through the atrium to
get to the sixth form room. And there were about 12 girls in this school
compared to a thousand, over a thousand boys. It's quite, quite tough. So how
did you cope? I, do you know, I, I didn't cope that well, actually. I, I had
some very good teachers. I had a maths teacher who really encouraged my, my
interest in space and a physics teacher who did the same. But I actually, I kind
of got a part-time job and, and most of my friends were just dropping out of
school. And I just kind of thought maybe learning isn't my journey. Maybe I
should just get a full-time job and leave. And, and I didn't, I didn't do very
well. You'd also left home by this point. That's right. Yes. Yeah. So I'd left
home by 17. Again, it's the noise and I shared a room with my sister and two
17-year-old girls sharing a room is just, so yeah, I left home and I had to pay
bills, you know, so I had part-time jobs. You didn't get high A-level grades.
No. But you still managed to get into Cardiff University. That's right. So I,
yeah, I did very badly. I mean, I'm not ashamed to say I had a C and two D's at
A-level and normally that wouldn't get you into an astronomy degree at
university, but I only applied to Cardiff because it was the local department.
And also because I knew some of the research they were doing, I was interested
in it. And I got, I got accepted after an interview, which was wonderful. They
let me in, even though I hadn't got the grades expected, but they could see I
had a passion. And so, yeah, I got in, I somehow scraped in. And since then it's
been, you know, I've never left. I love it. Was it plain sailing as a, as an
undergraduate? No, no, no, no. A year one was fine. A year two, I found that I
actually, I had a letter home from one of, one of my now colleagues, a professor
in the department, who wrote me a letter home saying, if you don't back up your
ideas, then we're going to have to kick you out. You know, you're not coming to
lectures. You're not, you're not doing what you're meant to do. But this was
because you were working? I was working all night in a petrol station in Bari.
And so I just didn't go very often to uni and I'm still getting okay grades, but
I just, I just wasn't going. And when I got that letter, I thought, okay, I
either now leave or I stay. And if I stay, I have to make it worth my while. And
I kind of felt a little bit, you know, a professor telling me that I'm not
turning up to lectures in a letter was quite, quite kind of scary. I thought,
oh, so I did decide to actually focus on the studies and then, you know, I just
loved it. Working fewer hours at the petrol station, presumably. Yes,
absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. A little bit more sleep. Always good. Well, Hayley
Gomez, after your degree, you stayed on at Cardiff to do a PhD. Was this the
point when you became interested in cosmic dust? Yes, I had a wonderful PhD
supervisor called Mike Edmonds. And Mike was kind of had these crazy zany ideas
where he kind of wanted to challenge the status quo of science. And he said to
me a very simple question. At the beginning of my PhD, he said, look, everybody
thinks cosmic dust comes from a star a bit like the sun. And they think that
this pollutes the universe with dust grains, which can go on to form rocky
planets and can form life itself. I'm not sure it can. So these were, when you
say smaller stars like our sun, that when they when they die at the end of their
lives, they sort of shed their outer layer as they cool. And it's a quite a
gentle process. But that's what was thought. That was the consensus, the
textbook description, explanation that that's how dust is formed. Absolutely. So
these these kind of fading small stars produce all of the dust that we see in
the universe, produce the building blocks of planets and so on. And he just kind
of had this idea that they're not that many of those stars, but we find that the
universe is polluted with a lot of dust. So could it be that we're missing
something here? So we just made kind of mathematical models and showed that,
yeah, actually it can account for it a little bit of it, but nowhere near
enough. So what was the alternative explanation? At the time, we we put forward
the idea that it could be stars that are very massive. So stars that we know
when they die, they explode quite violently. There's a supernova. Supernova,
yeah. So these explosions of huge stars. And we know in that explosion, you get
a huge amount of material, metals that gets flung out into space. But one thing
was thought at the time is that that couldn't make dust. Or if it did make dust,
it would be vaporized because the explosion is very hot. It's not very
hospitable place for dust grains, little particles of carbon or silicate. So we
kind of thought, well, OK, nobody believes that dust is formed in these
supernovas. These big explosions. But actually, if we model it, can they explain
this shortfall that we have in the dust budget? And they do. They easily explain
it. You need a little bit of dust per supernova explosion and you can explain
all the dust you see in galaxies. So this was your PhD work. You wrote up your
findings in a paper. This is in 2003. Yes. How was that paper received? We had a
very nasty referees report for that paper, actually. It was very critical. But
we were able to answer that referees questions and criticisms and it made the
paper a lot stronger. So I believe actually that that process was really
helpful. And then we kind of went away and we decided to look at a supernova and
to see if that's... Because there's a big difference between solving an equation
and developing a computer model that makes a prediction and actually looking out
there in space to check. Yes. You need to see it with your own eyes, as it were,
or with your telescope eyes. So we decided to look at a supernova nearby
Cassiopeia A and we wrote a paper in Nature to say that, hey, there's a lot of
dust in this supernova. Maybe our theory is correct and maybe the consensus
everyone has where dust isn't produced by these stars is absolutely not correct
or misleading. And that kind of got quite a lot of attention, that paper. I
mean, not bad for a 24-year-old who'd spent her student years working in a
petrol station to have a paper in Nature so early in your career. Yeah. I mean,
the thing is, I was really lucky enough to have such wonderful people to work
with. So it was not only Mike Edmonds, but also a colleague of mine, Loretta
Dern, who led that work. And I did the modeling for it to show it would work, it
would fit everything. But it kind of... Our high became a low quite quickly
because soon after we published our paper in Nature, a German team published a
paper where they said we were wrong. And that was quite interesting. It was just
literally our paper, dust in supernova remnants, and their paper was no dust in
supernova remnants. Okay, that's quite clear what you mean by that. So what was
their argument against your prediction? They argued, and I think it's a really
good argument, that what we were seeing was not dust in the supernova explosion,
but dust between us and the supernova explosion. So if you imagine, you look out
with your telescope, you look for the glow from dust, and you can pick up all
the dust between you and the supernova. Okay. So they thought it might be a dust
cloud in the front that just happened to look like it was in the supernova. And
they made a good point, except the measurements weren't quite right. So we now
know after other teams have got involved and so on, that actually we were right.
But at the time, how did it feel then to be shot down? You'd had to argue
against the referees for your first paper. Now you have this big paper in
Nature, the most prestigious science journal in the world. And soon after,
you're told you're wrong. I mean, you must have felt a bit down. Yeah, I kind of
felt, I don't really care who's right. I care about the science and what it
shows. I mean, I'd be happy to say it was wrong if it was wrong. So I didn't
take it too personally. And of course, it must have felt good when you were
proved correct. Yes, it was very good. So we had a 2009 paper. And since then,
other groups have also verified that yes, there is a huge amount of dust in the
supernova. And here you were still in your mid-twenties, mixing it with the
world's top astrophysicists and astronomers. Clearly, you've made it as a
scientist now. How did your parents feel? Were they very proud of your
achievements? Yeah, they're very proud. I don't think they quite understand when
I'm talking about papers and referees are just, okay, that sounds strange. I
don't think they quite understand, but they've always been really proud. They
understand things more like the NBE and things like that. They can kind of grasp
that more. But yeah, they're very proud of me now. Okay, Heli Gomez, let's talk
a little bit about the astronomy and how we detect this cosmic dust. Of course,
everything we know about stars and galaxies, we learn from capturing light from
telescopes. There's no other way we can learn about the universe. We can't see
this dust, however, using optical telescopes, visible light, because obviously,
the light doesn't get through the dust. But we can detect it directly in the
infrared part of the spectrum, because these dust particles radiate heat. That's
right. Yeah. Even things that we think of as cold still have heat. Everything
above absolute zero has heat. And all we need to do to see the heat is use
infrared cameras or goggles. So we're used to kind of seeing infrared images of
our houses, maybe, to look at where heat is escaping. The thermal imaging.
Thermal imaging, yeah. Thermal imaging, infrared cameras. We radiate in the
infrared. Our heat glows in the infrared. So we had the challenge as a community
to try and build telescopes that can see this heat from dust grains, see them
glowing in the infrared. Well, in 2009, the Herschel Space Telescope was
launched. And that was a huge leap forward, because that's an infrared
telescope. So that must have made a big difference for how you could see this
dust. Yeah. We had very little idea of what the infrared universe was like. And
the reason I say that is because what makes Herschel special is its ability to
see large bits of the sky, large bits of space. So instead of just looking at
one small patch, you can map a whole area. So instead of 100 galaxies, you now
have orders of hundreds of thousands of galaxies. So you're opening a new
window, really, on the universe. And not only that, but it was able to see
different infrared colors. So what I mean by that is it didn't just look at one
type of infrared light. It looked at a huge range of infrared light. And so it
could capture the glow from very cold dust at minus 250 degrees. And it could
capture the glow from very hot dust. So you could see all the dust for the first
time. And it turns out 90% of all the dust in the universe is actually cold. And
no telescope before Herschel saw that. And of course, it provided a lot of data,
a lot of work for astronomers around the world. You focused in particular on one
object in our own Milky Way galaxy, not a distant galaxy, the Crab Nebula. Why
did you focus on the Crab Nebula? Well, I love the Crab Nebula, and I've always
loved it. If you imagine the famous image from the Hubble Space Telescope of
these incredible filaments of gas. This star exploded a thousand years ago in
our own galaxy. It was seen, thought to be seen with the naked eye. And the
imagery of it is just incredible, always has been incredible. It was quite an
accident that I managed to analyze the Herschel observations of this object. It
was actually the person who was supposed to be leading that work didn't get
around to it because of other work constraints. And so they asked me to look at
it. So it was a bit accidental. And I looked at it, and I remember getting the
data from Herschel. It emails you and says, oh, your space telescope has taken
your data. You're the first person to see it. You open it, and you just think,
oh, my gosh, this is the first infrared view of all of the dust in a supernova
remnant. So it was... So it really is very visual. It's not like you're dealing
with numbers. It's there. Yeah, yeah, yeah. You literally press a button, and it
comes from the pipeline from the telescope, and you open it up, and you can see
the dust in the Crab Nebula at all different temperatures, and you can see where
it is. And yeah, it was quite a surprise. So what do you do then once you see
this picture? Well, the first thing I did was think, there's a lot of dust.
There's a lot more dust there than I'd expect. And there's a lot more dust there
than anybody would expect. So I made a measurement of how much I thought was
there. And it's really amazing. People think this is complicated, but it's
literally year one undergraduate physics. You take the image of the crab in
different wave bands that Herschel saw, and you put a circle or an aperture
down, an ellipse down, and you say, how much dust is in this ellipse? And you do
that in all the different wave bands, and that tells you how much you have to
make it glow the way that it glows. So black body physics, basically. And I did
that, and I thought, oh, that's quite a lot. That's a lot of dust. That's
200,000 worth of rocky planets worth of dust. That's about 200,000 more than
people expected. And I just presumed I'd got it wrong. So I presumed I'd made
some mistake. But I mean, this was really confirming the work that you'd done
over the past how many years. I mean, your PhD work making that prediction that
supernovae, these large stars explode and produce dust. It was your nature paper
that then got criticised. Here you were looking at data from this crab nebula,
the remnants of a supernova. So I mean, you've confirmed what you would hope to
find. Why were you still doubting it? Because it was such a big number. I
expected, I hoped to find some dust. I didn't expect to find this much dust. And
if this is true, and all stars explode like the crab nebula, then, you know,
we've got loads of dust in the universe and that's great. That solves all our
problems, but it is different to what the textbooks say. So I asked my
colleagues to recalculate it blindly. So I gave them the data and said, you do
whatever it is you do to get the amount of dust and we'll compare it. And they
got the same answer. And you published this work in 2012. Yes. Has this now
changed the textbooks description of how dust is made? Somebody needs to write
this textbook actually, because the original textbook the original textbook has
not changed. It was in 2003 and it hasn't been updated there. But I am very
pleased to see that now papers and publications are now starting to say dust
comes from stars like our sun and massive star explosions. I guess the moral of
the tale is if you don't look, you don't find. And also that sometimes
scientific consensus can be wrong, not always, but sometimes, or to be more
precise, the scientific consensus is often only part of the truth. Yes. And I
think the lovely thing here is that Herschel opened our eyes, as it were, into
how rich the infrared universe is. And that allowed us to have a different view
on things. So we were able to partner that up with the theory and the maths.
Now, clearly, Hayley, this has been your life. I, as a scientist, as been your
life, I, as a fellow physicist, find it tremendously exciting. But I suspect
that there might be people who are thinking, so what? Who cares how much cosmic
dust there is in the universe? And certainly, why does it matter where it's
made? Yeah, I think that's a valid question. And what I would say to those
people is that if, you know, cosmic dust is really important for assisting stars
forming, it's also important for assisting complex chemistry, things like DNA
and so on. You kind of need some molecules and dust grains in space to form
those things. And so it really is a question of the origin of us, of life, and
the places where life could potentially exist. And the thing about the textbook
explanation of dust is that would mean the first stars after the Big Bang, you
would need to wait a billion to 10 billion years before you have those raw
materials ready for life. Because stars like our sun live so long. Live so long,
exactly. And it takes such a long time to get to their death phase, their
stellar death. Stars like the ones that we're looking at, supernovae, they are,
within 10 million years of the first stars in the universe, you have the
materials for life. So you're kind of changing the time scales it takes to build
up those raw materials for life. That's kind of what I would say, it's a
question of our origin as well as those little rocks in the space between stars.
I mean, to take a line from Bob Dylan, the answer, my friend, isn't blowing in
the wind, it's hidden in cosmic dust. Oh, yes, quite. But it is quite something,
isn't it, to think there's all this cosmic dust out there that we didn't know
about before and how much we've learnt from it, thanks to work of you and others
just in the last decade or two. Absolutely. And it seems like a long time ago
now, 2009 to 2013, but people are still going through the data, the rich data
that Herschel has taken. And we've been looking at the half a million galaxies
it discovered that were not seen before, they were seen. That is the other
thing, isn't it? Not just are we learning how this dust is made, but now that we
have the instruments that can see the dust, we can sort of see through it. And
so much of the universe was hidden before. Yes, and I think that what Herschel
has done is not only show, reveal this part of the universe we didn't see
before, so we're seeing things that are odd and strange and then need to be
explained in some way. So, yes, it's completely changed our view, I think, of
the universe. And what's lovely, you see these pictures, astronomy pictures now
of, say, a galaxy or supernova, invisible light, and now you can see the same
thing, but in infrared, and you can put those two together. And it's basically
giving us a much richer description of the universe than we've had before.
That's right, yes. And the thing that I always kind of think about is that dust
grains are so small. You know, we talked about Foggy Day in Cardiff Bay. That's
what dust is like. It's little tiny particles, a bit like a smoky room or foggy
room. They're tiny size, they're a tiny mass of a galaxy, and yet they can block
out 90% of the total starlight of a galaxy. So they profoundly change our view
of everything. With Herschel, we kind of get that missing puzzle back. It's like
now suddenly we can see the universe in a bright, sunny day rather than through
the fog. That's right, exactly. The fog is clearing, yes. The fog is clearing.
And all this because you and other scientists started to ask questions to
challenge the consensus and find answers about cosmic dust. Well, now it's time
for some questions from my audience here in Cardiff. And so if you would like to
ask Hayley about her life or about her research on cosmic dust, raise your hand
and we'll get a microphone to you very quickly. And don't be shy. And what are
you interested in researching next? What are some of your big questions? Oh,
that's a really good one. I've kind of moved back towards the 2003 work, kind of
gone full circle there. And we are trying to work out what's making these very
extreme galaxies that Herschel has discovered, what makes them tick? So we don't
know why, but they form stars a thousand times faster than our galaxy. So
something is different in those is it the gas? Is it the more stars form? Is it
that there's more dust? What's going on? So I kind of want to know, I want to
pin down why those things are so weird and so extreme and why we don't see them
in the universe today. I would like to know what would you say to a young
council estate girl from multiple generations of non-working families who would
love to be a scientist, but don't have the knowledge to do it, but would love to
be a scientist, but don't think they can because of where they come from? Well,
you can. You definitely can. And I feel like not being upset by things that go
wrong actually has made me push through areas where people might go, you don't
belong here. I have experiences. And I think you kind of use your hard nuts,
kind of like, you know, I'm a council girl or I'm a council boy. And you kind of
go, yeah, I can take it. And you just, you can do it. If you like maths, if you
like physics, you could be a space scientist. You could be an astronaut. Yeah.
Hayley Gomez, thank you very much for sharing your life scientific. And thank
you to my audience here at the Peerhead building in Cardiff. I'm Jamal Khalili.
My producer was Anna Buckley. And of course, you can listen again on BBC Sounds.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, Jim. An inspiring end to that interview. Now on
BBC Radio 4, we ask, can playing video games make us better people? In one to
one. Hello, I'm Ellie Gibson. I'm a comedian. I'm a games journalist, and I've
played video games my whole life. So I'm interested to find out whether that's
been a complete waste of time or not, basically. So I've come to the Oxford
Internet Institute to talk to Andrew Przybylski, Professor of Human Behaviour
and Technology. Hello. I wanted to talk to you about a study that you did into
video games. And I'm not going to lie to you. I've played video games for pretty
much all my life, about 40 years. And I've been under the, some would say
impression, some would say wishful thinking that that's having some sort of
benefit on me. But your study, as I understand it, and this, again, I'm aware
headlines often get things wrong. But your study seems to be saying there's no
benefit to playing video games. Is that right? So our study looked at whether or
not playing games impacted different aspects of mental well-being. And yeah,
it's true. At the end of the day, we didn't find, or rather, we found you'd have
to play an impractically large amount of video games. What do you mean by
practically large? Well, you'd have to ramp up the amount you play from whatever
you're doing now to about 10 more hours a day, every day. But I guess I just
want to push back on this idea that you said that you need games to be doing
something positive for you, for it not to be a waste of time. And I would just
ask you, what's so terrible if the games are just fun? Well, that's true. What
makes that a waste? That's true. And I did, in fact, I wrote a column about your
study. And the first thing I said in the column, just to contradict myself, was
that it's a shame, isn't it, that games have to justify themselves in a way that
perhaps TV or films don't? I think we're probably just having this interview in
the wrong decade. I think that if you go back with different forms of media, you
can go back quite a bit further than movies. But movies and comic books and
television, people, experts like me, have always weighed in on how media might
be impacting people for good and for bad. So if we agree, then, that it's a
shame that games have to justify themselves, why study them at all? Why bother
to do this thing to prove whether or not they have an effect? Well, I mean, I
think that one of the things that really kicked off the public fascination with
video games, actually, like the first news coverage of video games was back in
the 70s, before either of us were born. Thank you. And it focused pretty
dramatically on a story in the New York Times on a game called Death Race 2000.
So in 1976, there was a very popular arcade game. And when you played this game,
you're driving a car around to run over goblins, I think. And every time you run
over a goblin, it becomes a tombstone. And then you have to avoid these
tombstones whilst killing more goblins. And a psychologist like me, a traffic
safety specialist, came out of the woodwork, and they expressed a lot of
concern. And I mean, the goblin rights activists, don't forget, they were
absolutely furious. They're basically trolls. And they kind of pointed out that
this game would lead to more careless driving and possibly kill pedestrians. And
like every one of these stories, at the end of the line, the publisher is
laughing all the way to the bank because he's just gotten a bunch of free
advertising from the Times. So I mean, like, I think games got off to a rough
start in terms of, you know, how they're publicly framed. And the funny thing is
that, you know, we're about four decades away from that, more than four decades
away from that. And things haven't really gotten much better scientifically. So
why I do a study is because it hasn't ever been done properly. So how did you do
your study then? How did you make sure it was proper? Well, one of the things
that makes it proper is data. And one of the things that's missing a lot from
research is actual hard data from games companies themselves. So in the last 10
or 15 years, actually, games companies have gotten quite good in their own way
at actually being able to record when you play what you play. Because it's
useful to them, right? Because then that's marketing data as well, right? Well,
yeah, I mean, Sell you more stuff. I think so. I think the first thing they're
kind of curious about is who's playing their games and where do games break?
Where do players fall off? But yeah, absolutely. That data is very valuable
commercially, but it's also very valuable in some ways scientifically. So
instead of just asking people, how much do you play? We went in and we want to
actually count the time and use that as something to study. Yeah. And were you
surprised by how many hours people were spending on games? Was it kind of what
you expected? Well, I mean, we only looked at a few games. We looked at in the
study, we only looked at seven games, which is really a drop in the bucket. But
I mean, we were surprised, maybe not, we shouldn't have been by the fact that
people are pretty crummy at estimating how much time they play games. They tend
to actually overestimate how much time they spend on games. Well, can we talk
about kids then specifically? Because that's the big worrying thing, isn't it?
And I get asked about that all the time. And I say, you know, I played games my
whole life. I'm not an axe murderer currently, you know, but also when I was
young, when my brain was still forming and all that, I was playing games that
sort of basically looked like they were made out of C-facts, do you know what I
mean? Just little tiny blocks. And the games these days, they are a lot more
realistic. I would always argue that, well, yeah, but don't let your kids play
hyper-violent or hyper-realistic violent games in the same way I wouldn't let my
kids sort of watch a really violent slasher film, do you know what I mean? But
do you think that's putting too much emphasis on the parents? Is it all about
the context in which we're playing games? Well, number one, it's really good
that you've given up the murder. But number two, I mean, like I actually didn't
play any violent games as a child either. You know, my father was a pacifist.
You know, he grew up during the Vietnam War era. There's a tension here between
matters of taste and matters of preference and matters of values and matters of
science. So it's entirely plausible and entirely defensible to not want your
kids to see video nasties or content that you find morally or personally
abhorrent. But this is entirely separable from a scientific question about
whether or not kind of playing a modern, even quite graphic video game, whether
or not that actually changes a young person's behavior or encourages them to
commit actual violence. And so, you know, we've also done studies on this. We
asked young people basically what they've been playing in the past month. We
coded those games in terms of their violent contents. And then we actually went
to the parents themselves and we asked the parents, you know, use this validated
assessment of, you know, conduct disorder and behavioral aggression. And we
combine those two sources of data, the kids estimating, us coding, and then the
parents assessing. And we couldn't find any link in that research either. Well,
yeah, and I sort of wasn't surprised. And I was pleased that your study didn't
kind of go, yes, video games will make your children axe murderers or terrible
social recluses, or it's all awful. But to be honest, I was a bit surprised and
disappointed that they didn't say, you know, games can have a good effect on us
because games have been such a huge part of my life. And I've often turned to
them when I'm feeling sort of lonely or sad. You know, when I was a kid at
school and I was being bullied, games were like a safe place where I could go.
And especially for me, because I didn't have online games, they're even safer
perhaps than they are for kids now. And in the lockdown, I started streaming on
Twitch because I love travel in the real world and I wasn't able to do that. But
suddenly I could go not just to like the north of England, but to medieval north
of England, then I could hack people's heads off. And it was really exciting and
joyous. So I was really surprised that you don't think there's a positive
benefit to playing games. Well, I mean, it's not really fair to games, the kinds
of research that we're doing right now, because really, you're telling me about
experiences that you have. I'm using my one singular anecdotal experience to
counteract your entire research study. Exactly right. And I can say, you know,
some of the most positive experiences that we had as a family during lockdown,
we're playing games together as well. Those observations are ones that we're
having with modern games in 2020, 21, 22, 23. I guess I'm going to push back on
the idea that my own study is a good one. It's good, but it's good for like
1980. It's good for 1990. Something happens when we panic about every new video
game or every new online experience or social media platform or whatever, which
is to say that our attention gets very narrow, we get very focused on something.
Is it video nasties? Is it addiction? And when scientists kind of go along with
the panic, when we ride that hype wave, that moral panic, actually, we become
less creative, we become hyper focused on kind of serving policymakers or
serving worried parents exactly what they might want or need, which is a
university professor telling them to not use games. All right. And that actually
that has an opportunity cost. That means that actually interesting research
isn't done. People like me don't learn how to work with data to touch the kinds
of experiences that you're talking about, which is how exactly do people use
games to regulate their mood when they're feeling down or feeling isolated or
feeling lonely? Or how do families actually play games together? And what
positive effects that might have? Yeah. And I've seen things that you've said
about context and about games being like a bicycles or trampolines that
trampolines are really, really dangerous. Kids end up in A&E. I can't remember
the last time I had to take my son to A&E because he was playing too much Mario
Kart. Do you know what I mean? So there's that. And it's similar to something I
think I often say when I'm asked whether I let my kids play games and how much I
let them play. And I say it's like ice cream. You know, I let my kids have ice
cream. I don't let them have it for every meal and I don't let them eat a whole
tub of it at a time. But now I think, actually, is that right? Because, again,
games are so diverse. And like a bicycle or trampoline is a thing that a kid
does a thing with and has a specific set of risks and benefits. Whereas a game
like Minecraft is really like a doll's house or a Lego set where you can do
infinite things with. It's not the same as those sort of specific objects with
specific purposes, is it? Yeah. And I think that that it's a matter of degree,
though. So the behavior that you're describing that you do with your kids and we
do with ours is called scaffolding, which is that you use some degree of your
own expertise and your emotional capacity to figure out where your kid is in the
activity so that you don't just give them a trampoline. You kind of try to
figure out how coordinated they are and you kind of work around them. It gets
harder to scaffold different types of digital things and different types of
games. Actually, I think Minecraft is probably a really easy one because you're
right, it is a bit like a box of Lego. But there are many other types of
experiences online and with games where the actual contents of it changes.
Someone is upgrading your bicycle or your trampoline without the parent knowing.
And those are the things that are potentially tricky or impossible to scaffold.
So you're just not going to say it, are you? You're not going to say that
playing video games makes us better people because that's what I'm really hoping
for. Well, I'm not sure what makes anyone better people. Well, but let me...
It's not yoga. Let me phrase it in a slightly more serious manner. So I've read
some stuff by another professor, Professor Jay McGonigal, who talks about how...