TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-13H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Every step of the way. Watch on BBC iPlayer. Our political correspondent Ione
Well says getting the DUP on board with any new deal could be a challenge. Part
of these negotiations is not only to resolve some trading barriers between Great
Britain and Northern Ireland but also to try and make the DUP go back into
government in Northern Ireland. So one of the key tests is going to be whether
or not they are happy. They are concerned that any deal might still give too
much sovereignty to the EU over Northern Ireland. Events are being held across
Northern Ireland in a show of support for a police officer who is in hospital
after being shot multiple times. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell is
critically ill after the attack in Olma on Wednesday. Police have arrested five
men in connection with the incident. Investigators are focusing on the dissident
republican group The New IRA. The Deputy Chair of the Environment Agency has
called for a massive transformation to the way food is produced and distributed
in the UK. A number of supermarkets are limiting the sale of some fruit and
vegetables because of bad weather abroad and high energy costs for British
growers. Judith Batchelor said the food production system needed to adapt to
climate change to create more resilient, secure supply chains. There is an
unprecedented number of different factors impacting the price of our food. And
that's not just here at home in the UK, but we're part of a massive global food
system that is extremely complicated and interlinked. And I think we are seeing
or facing into what needs to be a massive transformation of the way that we
produce, distribute and retail food. The Chair of the Committee that advises the
government on vaccines has said an outbreak of bird flu has pandemic potential.
Health officials are drawing up contingency plans after the death of a girl in
Cambodia who had contracted the H5N1 strain of the disease. Professor Andrew
Poyard from the JCVI said it was important for authorities to be vigilant
because humans had no immunity against the strain. At the moment we've got no
evidence of human-to-human transmission, which I think is reassuring. If that
does happen, that would really make us very concerned. And if there is evidence
of mutations being acquired in this virus, which does allow it to transmit in
humans, and that we're ready to really get going with an action plan early to
try and stop that from spreading further. One of Vladimir Putin's closest
allies, the Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko, is to make a state visit
to China. The war in Ukraine is expected to dominate talks. Michael Bristow
reports. Mr Lukashenko's four-day trip begins on Tuesday. He's urged foreign
governments to take China's position on the war in Ukraine seriously. Over
recent days, Beijing has tried to promote itself as a peacemaker. It's issued a
series of proposals to end the war, and its top foreign affairs officials
visited Moscow. Inviting Mr Lukashenko to Beijing could be seen as a
continuation of this diplomatic offensive. But for many, China's refusal to
condemn Russia for invading Ukraine has undermined its credibility as a neutral
party in the conflict. There are long queues at polling stations across Nigeria,
where people are voting in the country's most competitive elections since the
end of military rule. Nearly 90 million are eligible to vote. Three candidates
are seen as front-runners in the race to succeed President Mohammedu Baha'i.
Antony Albanese has become the first serving Australian Prime Minister to march
in the gay and lesbian Mardi Gras in Sydney, one of the biggest global events of
its kind. He told the crowd that the fight for equality must continue. BBC News.
And now on Radio 4, it's time for Money Box with Paul Lewis. Hello. Vulnerable
customers are being left for months with a prepayment meter that won't let them
pay for the electricity they're using. And how can savers take advantage of
rising interest rates to earn more on their savings? But first, the Chancellor
is expected to use his budget on March 15th to introduce changes to encourage
people over 50 to return to work. Since 2019, there's been a big rise in the
number of people defined as economically inactive. That means they're not
working, self-employed or looking for work and claiming benefits. The number
rose by 830,000 in the last three years and three-quarters of those were aged
over 50. The Department for Work and Pensions has a programme to encourage
people of that age back into work by offering help with health support, pension
planning, flexible working opportunities. Claire Worden has had exclusive access
to the programme for Money Box. We're just in Shrewsby, job centre now. We're
going to have a bit of a tour. Simon, are you working at the moment? Not at the
moment, no. How's that been? Quite a struggle, really. Financially, anyway. What
did you used to work at? Before that, I was a builder, but the body's given up.
After walking into the job centre for the first time at the age of 65, Simon's
now found a job as a bus driver and is looking forward to a new challenge. It's
going to be a lot different if I do do this because there won't be the hassle
with tools and chasing customers and all the rest of it. It'd be nice to have a
regular sort of job. And what have they been like here? They've been very good,
to be honest. Yeah, they are very friendly, very supportive. Did you ever think
about retiring or were you always going to work till the end? I was just going
to work till I dropped running. Another older worker who's found help here is
Svetlana. She fled her home in Ukraine a year ago after the Russian invasion.
She's made a life here in Shrewsbury, finding work after getting extra help
learning English and support using computers to apply for jobs. We spoke via an
interpreter called Jakob. Jakob, I want to ask you about the role of Svetlana in
Shrewsbury Hospital. She's a senior kitchen assistant. She likes the job because
she has the ability to speak, to be part of an international team. A lot of
people from Ukraine, from India, for example, are working there with her. And
also she likes very much working with her supervisors, with her managers. It's
always a pleasure for her to work with them. How did the job centre help you get
into work? And what was harder, the fact that you weren't speaking English or
the fact that you were an older worker or was it a bit of both? She says with a
little bit of patience in the job centre and after waiting on others, after all
this paperwork had been processed and after all the procedures, she managed to
find the position, they made it happen, just with a bit of patience, with a bit
of everything, maybe with a bit of luck. At the Shrewsbury site at the moment
there are 19 job coaches. They can see up to 20 job seekers every day. But older
people are being offered longer appointments to discuss the kind of work they
want to do and the transferable skills they've been developing over a lifetime.
It's all part of a push by the Department for Work and Pensions who say they've
invested Â£22m extra to support people in this age group. Some of that money has
been spent on people like Dan. Hi, my name is Dan Clinch and I'm the 50 plus
champion for Mercia. What people are beginning to realise, and this is the
reason for the initiative, is we're an ageing country. And the 50 plus cohort
will be one of the largest demographics in the workforce. And so companies are
now realising they have to start planning strategically. You know, some of the
key things for older workers might be flexible hours because they have, whether
that's health or their caring responsibilities, there's been lots of wonderful
research from people like Centre for Ageing Better, that older workers are
resilient, we're reliable. We're also much more likely to keep the job at 50
plus. It's an opportunity, not a problem for you, isn't it, having these older
workers? Absolutely. And hopefully, you know, a few years from now, we won't
need to talk about ageism in the workforce. And also the 50 plus cohort will
realise that absolutely, you know, don't dip your head when you say you're over
50, but, you know, keep your head held high and be proud of being in that age
group. Dan Clinch, and Dean Clare Worden's report. Well, listening to that is
Gregory Thwaites. He's Research Director at the Resolution Foundation, a think
tank that concentrates on people with low and middle incomes. This week, it
published its own report into the role older workers could play in boosting
economic growth. And Gregory Thwaites, what did your research find about why so
many people over 50 has left the workforce? There are several reasons. What we
can see is that there are lots more people with long term sickness who are now
no longer in the workforce. We can also see that people when they retire early
tend to be quite wealthy. So it's going to be difficult for government policy to
reach the people who that who retired or left the workforce around the time of
the pandemic. And one of the things the report says is we need to think very
broadly about getting everyone who wants a job in into the labour force and not
just trying to unretire that cohort. Your report says that most countries with
large economies, the so-called OECD countries, have seen their working age
labour force participation rate rise since the start of the pandemic. Ours has
fallen. What are other countries doing that we're not? Yes, there's three or
four things going on. And the first thing to say is that before the pandemic, we
were doing relatively well. We were seven out of the 38 OECD countries, which is
the group of rich economies. And we've moved to about 15th. So we're still not
doing too badly, but we're moving in the wrong direction. And most other
countries are moving in the right direction. And there's a few things. One is it
seems that access to health care has worsened more in the UK, although we can't
be categorical about that. It's much easier to get hold of your pension savings
in your 50s in the UK than it is in most other advanced countries where more of
the money would come from the government. And then you've got more people in
their 50s living in mortgage free houses and those people are likely to retire
earlier. So we've got a few things here, but it's partly other countries
catching up and then some UK specific factors as well. There are early signs,
though, aren't there, from the Office for National Statistics that older people
are beginning to return to work. Is this a problem that is going to go away?
Well, it's possible, but I think it's far too early to tell on the basis of
those dates. We just had like a few months and some very early signs, some very
welcome signs. But these numbers bounce around from month to month, so I
wouldn't place too much weight on them. How could the government best act to get
people back? I mean, Jeremy Hunt seems to think they're on the golf course and
from what you said, some of them may well be. But they're not going to stop
access to pensions, for example, in your 50s, are they? Well, well, they might
not. But what they could do is, for example, reduce the amount that you can take
tax free out of your pension. So people get very tax favorable pension savings
and can take a big lump sum out tax free and then they can get all of the money
age 55 rising to 57. But there's going to be several things that the government
can do. And what they shouldn't do is just focus on this cohort of recently
retired people. They need to think about people with health problems and
disabilities. They need to think about women with children as well, for example.
But would employers even welcome over 50s back? I mean, I've had an email just
this morning from a lady who wants to remain anonymous. She's over 50 and her
husband is too. For 12 years, they've been looking for a job. She says people
don't want to employ people over 50, especially professionals. Interview panels
go for younger candidates. There is ageism and indeed for women, sexism as well
in the workforce, isn't there? Clearly there is. And employers attitudes are
going to need to change. As the package mentioned, the population and the
workforce is aging. So we need to get used to an older workforce and the best
employers already have. But sadly, there are still lots of cases where employers
don't think that way. And very briefly, in a word, really, do you expect
policies in the budget to help this group? I expect some policies. I hope
they're the right ones. People have talked about big tax cuts for over 50s. I
think that would be a mistake. Gregory Thwaites from the Resolution Foundation.
Thanks. And working over 50 or indeed trying to is the topic for Moneybox Live
on Wednesday with Felicity Hannah. Have you unretired but worry how it will
affect your finances or are you looking for a job without success? Email your
questions and experiences of work over 50, Moneybox at pbc.co.uk. She'd love to
hear from you. Leave a phone number if you can. Some energy customers are being
left for months with faulty prepayment meters. Several people have told Moneybox
that although their electricity hasn't been disconnected, the screen showing how
much credit they have has been blank since before Christmas and they can't top
it up as they normally do. So they have no idea how much electricity they're
using or what it's costing them. The law says suppliers should take appropriate
action within hours of being told, arranging to fix or replace the meter or at
least arrange an appointment in the future. But the people we've spoken to tell
us they've made repeated calls to their supplier but no one has come. Our
reporter Dan Whitworth went to meet Brian and his daughter Jenny. Brian lives in
Shropshire, is 80 year old and blind. Hello, are you Jenny? Yes, come on in.
Hello Jenny. Thanks ever so much for here tonight. Brian, just talk me through
how long your prepayment meter has not been working. How long it's been broken
for? Since October last year. What do you think about that? The fact it's been
broken for so long? I think it's terrible. We don't know what the bill will be
at the end of it. I mean, they said we'll have a bill once a meter has been
fixed. But when that will be, I don't know. I mean, we're talking nearly four
months now since it's been broken. So you have no idea how much you've spent on
energy in that time. No, no, no idea at all. Scottish powers said we wouldn't be
without electricity. So they told you you won't get cut off, but not at all how
much you're spending on it. No. Obviously, energy is a big part of everyone's
bills right now. Jenny, you're here with your dad, Brian. You obviously live
local, come and help Brian out with things. What do you think about all this? I
thought they would have sorted it out by now, really. I mean, like you said, my
dad's blind as well. So, you know, and obviously he feels that the cold and
everything would be all right if Jenny showed me where your meter is. Brian, is
that all right? It's sort of like a utility room. Right up here. So this is it.
Wow, that's just completely dead. Yeah, there is nothing going on there. Well, I
don't think it's good enough. It's not right, is it? And, you know, like my
brothers have been getting in touch with them quite a few times. And Brian, how
often do you top up your meter, do you know? It's roughly about Â£15 a week. Are
you worried it might be more now? Yeah, I am. Yeah. And how are you feeling
about the prospect of what could be a very large bill coming for you? Not very
good, really. You know, it's money coming out of my savings and what have you.
So, you know, it's going to be a lot. So instead of doing that Â£15 a week, which
is money you know you've got, you can top up and everything else, you're now
going to get this huge bill. Yeah, exactly. After Moneybox got in touch,
Scottish Power apologised and says it has now arranged for a new meter to be
installed. It told us it will not charge Brian for the electricity used while
the meter was faulty. It will also give him more than the statutory Â£60 in
compensation. We also spoke to Catherine. She bought a holiday home on the Isle
of Skye in November. The electricity was off, but just before Christmas when she
turned it on, she discovered the meter was blank so she couldn't top it up to
pay the standing charge. She contacted her supplier right away. Got through to
an advisor who said, we'll have an engineer out to you within four hours. So I
came back up here and sat in the car out there for four hours. No engineer. So
after Christmas, I gave it another little prod via complaints. And on the 5th of
January, I got an email to say to get myself over here because an engineer would
be here within four hours. So I came and sat over here for four hours again. No
engineer. And that was when a numerous email started going backwards and
forwards between myself and the complaints department of OVO. They said it will
be an estimated amount, but how on earth are they going to estimate how much
electricity I've used when I've only owned the property since the 11th of
November and the electricity was switched off at the main until the 22nd of
December. Catherine bought the property to let it out. And for that, she needs a
certificate. But without a working meter, she can't get it. Obviously, we will
be we'll be seeking some sort of compensation because it's it's delaying the
opportunity for getting some sort of return on the investment in the house. The
supplier, OVO, told Moneybox it's sorry for the delay in replacing Catherine's
meter. And this has made a new appointment and it says it will also pay
compensation. Well, Matt Cole is from the Fuel Bank Foundation, a charity
specialising in giving financial support to people on prepayment meters. Matt
Cole, we've heard from several people affected by this. It's hard to know the
scale. How do you how often do you hear about this as a problem? Hi there, Paul.
We don't hear about it that frequently. So I think it's fair to say it's not a
volume problem across the UK. It happens infrequently. But as rare as of
entities, if it happens to you, it's a really big issue and it needs to get
sorted really quickly. You know, having a meter which doesn't work, it sounds a
really crazy thing this day and age, you know, they need to get sorted and need
to be sorted quickly. Yes. And the regulation indeed says that, doesn't it? If a
customer thinks their meter is faulty, but the power supply is working,
suppliers have to arrange an appointment within three or four hours. That's
obviously not happened in these cases. Catherine waited four hours twice and no
one turned up. What should they be doing? It's a really simple thing, really. I
think regardless of who your supplier is, customers expect that if there's a
problem, things are sorted really quickly. And those standards should be
consistent across the industry, both within a supplier and across the industry
as a whole. And so I think it's really important that suppliers, when they find
these kind of issues, that they're on them really quickly and they're trying to
solve them. Because when he spoke to Brian, you see the stress and anxiety it
causes when he's not able to top up the prepayment meter he normally tops up.
And the fear of the bill is a really big thing for him. Yes, because of course a
lot of people on prepayment meters are just about getting by, aren't they? So
they need to know what they're using and what they're paying. I mean, luckily,
he's not going to be charged. But will that happen generally? I mean, can they
charge you? Certainly Ovo told us it could and would be charging Catherine.
Ultimately, it depends what's happened with a prepayment meter. So if it's
impossible to see what energy has passed through it, it's really hard to
identify what you can be charged. But a supplier could charge you an estimate
based on what you'd used previously. I think it's really sensible to assume that
you will be charged something, not to just assume that if your meter is broken,
it's free energy because probably that's not going to happen. No, of course, but
always worth checking and asking for it to be free. And then perhaps even going
to the energy ombudsman. Now, those firms have said they'll pay compensation.
What are the rules for that? How much should they get? So like the piece said,
if your meter is faulty and it's not working at all, somebody should be out to
see you within three or four hours, depending whether it's a weekday or a
weekend. If the meter is broken but the energy is still flowing through, it's
okay. An appointment should be made within three or four hours. And if the
energy company fails to meet that promise, you're entitled to Â£30 compensation
and another Â£30 if the original targets aren't met. But people don't want
compensation. Yeah, people don't want compensation there. They just want the
meter to be sorted. Â£30 isn't as good as a meter which is working properly. And
that's the issue, I think. Indeed. We did ask major energy suppliers and they
said they're not experiencing many delays like this. So if somebody finds
themselves in this situation, what should they do? First thing to do is speak to
your energy company. We also say as well, best put it in writing as well, so
you've got a record of when you raised your concerns when you said it wasn't
working. So you can follow it up more simply. I think that was the key for the
lady who spoke to from Sky. You know, she needs to follow it up to make sure
that people are looking at her situation properly. And then to escalate it
quickly, if it's not being sorted, people like Sitan's advice is extra help. You
need to have a really good place to go. They can advise what needs to happen and
escalate it for you on your behalf as well. And this, of course, is the latest
of some fairly damning stories about prepayment meters. Forcibly installing them
is on hold. Compensation may be paid for that. Just briefly, in a few words,
what do you think needs to happen about prepayment meters? So prepayment isn't a
bad thing. You know, a lot of people who have a prepayment really like it, but
we need to have a proper route and branch review of the way prepayment works
today to make sure it works properly and meets people's needs today. You know,
people struggle with that have energy. And we're sadly seeing so many people now
who are clearly vulnerable have a prepayment meter and probably they shouldn't
have. Matt Cole, thanks very much. And a bit of news breaking this morning about
energy bill support and Claire Worden has more. Yes, from today, the 900000
households who don't pay their own electricity bills, so people living in park
homes or on boats, some people in care homes and those who are just off grid can
now claim the 400 pound energy bill support scheme payments. For details of how
to make your claim, go to gov.uk and search energy bill support not automatic.
That link does work. And an update on another story. Moneybox has been following
Claire. Yes, a company which charged taxpayers to make claims for tax refunds
can no longer operate. HMRC said this week it had found that Tax Credits Limited
had committed serious breaches of anti money laundering laws. It means it's now
a criminal offense for Tax Credits Limited to trade as a tax repayment agent.
You might remember Moneybox reported on this company last year and those hefty
fees it was charging customers to make claims for marriage allowance or working
from home tax relief. HMRC has already refunded 48000 of the firm's customers
and now it says it will contact the remaining 11000 by the end of March. It's
also reminding people that no one needs to use an agent to claim tax relief. You
can make your own claim directly through gov.uk or call the tax helpline. Their
number is 0300 200 33 00 that's fee free. Thanks Claire. Useful tips. Now
whether you're saving up for a deposit for a home, a holiday or indeed for your
retirement, the interest paid on your savings is rising. The data service Money
Facts says this week, average interest this month, I beg your pardon, average
rates paid for easy access savings accounts hit their highest level in more than
14 years, which is 1.75%. Well a big improvement on the 0.01% some banks offered
until recently, but you can do much better than that. Annaboe's is a founder of
savingschampion.co.uk. Annaboe's savings rates have been rising. Many people
just stick them in their bank, don't they? What can people get now? Well, it
depends on what type of savings account that you want, but when we were looking
at that easy access figure just now, the average rate that you can get over 3%
now. So from 0.01% just over a year or so ago to 3% is a very, very good
improvement. Yes, and of course some high street banks are being criticized,
aren't they? They've reported these big profits last week or so. They're being
accused of not passing on the Bank of England rate rises to savers. Is that
fair? Yes, that's fair. I'm not surprised, unfortunately, but the Bank of
England base rate has gone up by 3.9%. And for example, Barclays has an everyday
saver, so its standard easy access account has gone up by 0.54%. So it's only
paying people 0.55%. There's an account with Virgin Money, which isn't a high
street bank, but a well-known brand. And that's paying 0.25% still. So if you've
got one of those accounts, you just need to move your money away from them. Yes,
I mean, UK Finance, which represents the banks, told us saving and lending rates
aren't directly linked and they'll move at different times. As rates rise,
though, is there a danger that people with substantial savings will have to pay
tax on them? Well, yes, we've all got used to because rates, interest rates have
been low and there was something called the personal savings allowance, which
was introduced in 2016. That meant that for basic rate taxpayers, the first
Â£1,000 of savings interest earned, you don't pay any tax on. Now, back a year
ago, when the best easy access account was paying 0.75%, you'd need over
Â£133,000 before you breached that personal savings allowance. Today, with
earning 3.15, you only need Â£31,700. So a lot less money will mean you use up
your personal savings allowance, which is good news. It means you're getting
more interest, but it does also mean you have to watch out because you'll be
paying tax. Yes. And what about then what about ISAs because their interest is
tax free? Are they more worthwhile now? Yeah, the good news is that ISAs are
really improving. So we've known for a long time, we've seen big gaps between
the best non-ISA bonds, for example, and the ISA, the fixed term ISAs. There's
been a big gap. So actually, in times, the net rate you'd earn on a bond would
be better than the best rate on an ISA. But now you can do much better,
especially if you're starting to pay tax, you're going to be doing much better
if you make sure you utilise your cash ISA allowance if you haven't used it
elsewhere, your ISA allowance. And very briefly on national savings, I mean,
they've put rates up three times and of course on premium bonds. Are they now a
better buy? Definitely. So especially if you've got a lot of money, because the
all money that's with national savings is guaranteed by the Treasury. And
therefore you can put and so, you know, they've got an easy access account
paying Â£2.85, you can put Â£2 million in that and it's all safe. Unlike with the
financial services compensation, it's up to Â£85,000. But yeah, so these rates
are much, much better now. And premium bonds, tax free prizes, you're not
guaranteed to win a prize, but it's quite fun when you do. And when you do get
one, it's tax free. And the law of statistics is on your side if you've got a
lot. And yes, literally in a word, should you be fixing for four or five years
or going for the best rate every year? It's a difficult one, depends on your
circumstances, I'm afraid. But, you know, the interest rate cycle is coming to a
height, we think. OK, Anna Bose from savingschampion.co.uk. Thanks. One way to
make the most of your money is, of course, listen to Moneybox. And if you miss
an episode, you can hear the programme at any time on the Moneybox podcast on
BBC Sounds. Moneybox Live with Felicity Hannah working after the age of 50, lots
of emails coming in about that. And our email is moneybox at pbc.co.uk. Today
reporters were Claire Worden and Dan Whitworth researchers, Sandra Hardiel and
Joe Krasner. Studio manager Jack Corda, editor is Jess Quayle. And I'm Paul
Lewis. Many thanks, Paul. A good dose of news quizzery is coming up in a few
moments. After the one o'clock news, it'll be any questions. Then at two
o'clock, it'll be your turn when any answers gets underway. And with the details
is Anita Onond. Tom, thank you very much indeed. So a year since Russia invaded
Ukraine, we had powerful testimony on any questions about the fear facing
Ukrainians every day. So how long can we and should we back President Zelensky?
Your thoughts, please. 03700 100 444 is the number. We had the homes for Ukraine
scheme. I wonder if you took part. How did it go? If you did. And what about
refugees from other places? Should we do more? 03700 100 444. How do you feel
about turnips? Is it okay for politicians to recommend that you eat seasonal
food? Are you worried about the lack of cucumbers and tomatoes on the shelves?
And what do you think is the cause? Is it bad weather or Brexit? 03700 100 444.
What did you make of the Ferraris around Roald Dahl books this week? I'd love to
know about any and all of these things. 03700 100 444. You can email any.answers
at bbc.co.uk. Text 84844. Text will be charged at your standard message rate. Or
you can tweet using hashtag bbcaq. All lines open now. Thank you very much,
Anita. Comedy now on Radio 4. Welcome to the news quiz. Our teams this week.
Well, in a week where not only have vegetables been disappearing from the
supermarket shelves, but rumors of a Beatles Rolling Stones collaboration have
been sweeping the Internet. We have team Sergeant last remaining pepper against
team. I can't get no salads action. On team pepper we have Andy Parsons and from
the spectator Kate Andrews. And on team salads, Holly Walsh and joining Holly,
it's Ian Smith. Our first question goes to Andy and Kate who this week popped on
the karaoke machine and belted out a frankly appalling rendition of the classic
number one hit. It's my party and I'll ramble on deludedly for almost two hours
if I want to. I believe this was Vladimir Putin correct who said he was going to
suspend the new start to nuclear treaty and then very shortly afterwards by then
made a speech in cave. I was obviously you know after John Kennedy had gone to
Berlin and said it could be an iron Berliner which apparently means I'm a donut.
I was very surprised that Biden actually made quite a good speech and didn't
actually say that he was himself a chicken coated in breadcrumbs. We were very
lucky I'm speaking was an American because you know, Biden had one job and that
was to show up and remember where he was and remember what side he was on and he
really did rise to the occasion. This of course marks the one year anniversary
of Russia's war against Ukraine and you had these competing speeches within you
know a matter of hours. And so yes, I'm delighted to say this time the answer
was Putin in terms of a rambling speech and not the president of the United
States. One of them had a very different view of how the war started than the
other one. I mean, Biden thought it was Russia's fault and Russia felt that it
was very much the West's fault. So it was kind of like Jeremy Kyle but done on
this world stage. Biden said in his speech and we will not tire but it's funny
because it visibly wore him out just to say that. So Zelensky still there one
year on and he was of course he was the number one target for the Russians and
they they wanted to eliminate him to sap the morale of the Ukrainian people. I
was thinking that course he'd been Britain that had been attacked rather than
Ukraine. I'm not sure the Russians would have targeted Boris Johnson or Liz
Truss in quite the same way because they'd have worried it would have the
opposite effect on our morale. I was just going to note the difference between
watching UK and American coverage of these speeches. You know, here we were
basically trusted to watch the speech and know who was the good guy and who was
the bad guy. But in America where people have been a bit more misbehaved that
little insurrection and all it was interesting to watch the news presenters
because they would play the Putin speech and then they jump in and be like this
is a lie. This is not true. Please do not storm the Capitol again. I do think
Biden did say quite a lot in the speech that was wrong because he said Putin
thought the world would roll over and he was wrong. But the world is rolling
over constantly. Almost daily. Can I tell me how Joe Biden got to Kiev? Bus
pass. Close. I think he might have delivered the actual speech from Warsaw. Yes.
Because the Polish government was putting a lot of pressure on Joe Biden, of
course, to defend NATO and they want to sign Ukraine up to a different kind of
security level. But, you know, there's a lot of pressure being put on the
president. So again, the fact that he was able to keep it all in line and show
up for the occasion was very impressive. It was it was a 10 hour train journey,
wasn't it? That's correct. So for any British listeners, that's equivalent of a
day single from Hull to Liverpool. As you mentioned, the START Treaty. So this
is the last nuclear pact between Russia and America. I mean, do we need to keep
things in perspective? Because I mean, thanks to the success of various nuclear
treaties over the years, there are now only enough nukes in the superpowers,
respective arsenals to wipe out all life on Earth 10 to 20 times, whereas it
used to be 20 to 30. Actually, yeah, no, it's decreased significantly. So a
reminder as well that politicians can never win, because if you are promoting
keeping your nuclear weapons, everyone says, well, no, we need nuclear
disarmament. And Ukraine learned that the hard way. But then if you're saying,
no, we should really scale back or we're going to scale back, everyone's like,
more weapons now. There's just there's no winning. But it's been brilliant in
some ways. Putin thought he was going to win in two weeks and a year later, it's
not worked out how he had hoped and written one of the biggest supporters of the
Ukraine weapons, loads of marches. And it has been incredible. Everybody wearing
blue and yellow on the marches. I did see one bloke wearing all green. And the
only thing I could assume was he'd actually put his blue and yellow stuff in the
wash. I mean, there was a story this week. There was a protest. The campaign
group led by Donkeys had a protest outside the Russian embassy in London. They
painted the street yellow and blue, the colors of the Ukrainian flag. But
unfortunately, just stop oil then came along with some red paint, leaving
passers by terrified that Putin had just invaded Ecuador. Yes, one year on from
the start of the Ukraine war, Vladimir Putin gave a formless and incho here and
hour and 45 minute long wind ramble. Celebrity justifying his floundering
Russian flunk-upation of Ukraine while Simil Tennessee blaming the West for
making him do it. Now, obviously, tantrums at birthday parties are nothing new.
But when it's a scripted 105 minute stop before you even got to the pass the
parcel phase, you know things are not going well. And some senior officials,
including former President Dmitry Medvedev, were seen to fall asleep during
Putin's speech. Now, look, all of us on this panel have had people fall asleep
during our gigs. Putin also said that the West intends to transform a local
conflict into a global confrontation. Well, let me assure you, Vladimir, we do
not intend to do that. We can barely get through an unedited Roald Dahl book
without profound emotional damage. I really don't think we're looking at another
world war. I know as a species, we're obsessed with sequels, but two world wars
was frankly more than enough. Right at the end of our Ukraine round, the scores
are two to team pepper and one to team salads. We pepper or salad? Your salads.
Are we? Yeah. Yes. Sorry, you're losing. Holly and Ian, since they're behind,
can take our next question. Who tried to prove this week that he is not just a
man on a mission, but a man on five missions? Is this Kia Starner? Correct. Oh,
God. This is. Did you listen to what he had to say? He's decided he's got five
missions that he set up because, you know, Rishi had five things. So he's going
to have five things. And they're basically economy, health, climate crisis,
education, justice. That's it. They're just the most vague things ever. I mean,
you might as well just bought a tea towel on Etsy, you know, with like five
things and like what are your five missions? Just live life. Love does like
nobody's watching and Prosecco O'Clock. Like that's how completely pointless
saying those five things were. That sounds like an election winning manifesto.
Well, thank you. The economy one is quite weird. He said that he wanted the UK
to achieve the highest economic growth in the G7, which is such a the G7, I
always think, is a weird group anyway. Do you know who's in the G7? Does anyone
know who's in the G7? Just four patronizing men said yes. Yes, I do. Thank you.
It's the most advanced and richest economy. Did they do reach for the stars?
Yeah. I completely agree that they're vague. My favorite one was breaking down
barriers to opportunity at every stage. I mean, that literally means nothing.
It's like a fill in the blank option. Like what does labor mean to you? Did I
not say it? Fill it in here. And it strikes me that none of the ideas were
particularly new that they sounded a lot like Tory pledges with a splash of red.
And that does seem to be the labor tactic these days. Just move as far to the
right as possible without totally giving it away. But I think I was most
relieved that this time the missions or the pledges weren't put on a tombstone
like Ed Miliband did. I think he should have tucked them into a dream catcher or
something like that. For all we know he did, he's home right now, you know,
manifesting the election. It's totally possible. Manifesting is manifesto.
Exactly. I'm sad we missed the bits where he's presented with the missions and
asked if he chooses to accept them. Nobody's bothered about pledges anymore.
We've seen them too often. He might have just said, you know, one bullshit, two
waffle, three fantasy, four not going to happen, five. Hopefully nobody will
remember this one in two years time. And if he did want people to remember them,
he should just have had one at the end, which is something like free tomatoes.
And people are going, oh, crikey! Can I just say, I've got some missions that if
I was Prime Minister, what my pledges would be. Change April Fool's Day to the
first of June. Just like the ultimate sort of prank. Double thumbs up in your
passports allowed. That's a good one. That is very good. Show a bit of pride.
This is a very happy manifesto and something Labour voters haven't felt for 13
years now. So maybe this is... Well, you say that, but my next one is bring back
a surname based clan system. So I'm just busily me trying to get power for the
Smiths. I think they should just do one pledge and I think they should stick to
it. What would your one pledge be then? Well, mine would be to convince the
British public to stop using the word jet ski and use the word motorcycle. But I
don't know. I mean, Starma said he wanted a green tech superpower. That was one
of the pledges, wasn't it? And it'd be nice if we could get our energy sector.
At the moment, they're saying, oh, green tech, we want more nuclear power. Eight
nuclear power stations. That's what they're trying to build at the moment, isn't
it? And we're struggling to build one because we don't build the technology.
They're getting the Chinese to build it. The Chinese, of course, we're not going
to let them have any sort of part of our 5G mobile phone networks because
they're a security threat, aren't they? We're quite happy to let them build a
3000 to an old and megawatt nuclear reactor on the Somerset coast. And they
might be able to cause a nuclear core meltdown, but they will know nothing of
the survivors WhatsApp group we've set up after. Yes, Pia Starma has unveiled
five missions for the UK. Mission one is to flesh out what the other missions
are in a bit at some point, maybe with a bit more detail. And Starma pledged
zero carbon power by 2030, which looks easily achievable as long as they just
drop the word carbon. He also said he wants to give Britain its future back, but
was not specific about how we will do that. But given that he also mentioned
energy, I assume it consists of a vial of plutonium, a wild head scientist and a
DeLorean going at exactly 88 miles an hour. At the end of that round, Kate and
Andy have four, Holly Annian have three. For our next round, we have a home or
home round rather than home or away. But you have to choose one of the home
nations of the United Kingdom to receive a question about Kate, which nation
you're going to go for. I'm going to choose Northern Ireland. Good choice this
week. Now, here's your question on Northern Ireland. Some cons are pro the pro.
Some cons say the pro is a con. There's been some to and fro. Who are the cons?
What's the pro? And what are the pros and cons? Pro-tocal. Did I hear that in
there? Correct. So this is quite triggering because I had just got to the point
where I had stopped having nightmares about very specific Brexit terms, like
alternative arrangements, non-terriff trade barriers, John Claude Juncker had
just stopped haunting my dreams. And now it's all flooding back. But the
Northern Ireland protocol, which was supposed to solve the border issue between
Northern Ireland and the Republic, has not been working. Residents feel cut off
from Great Britain because there's essentially a trade barrier now between Great
Britain and Northern Ireland. So some MPs, to be specific, Boris Johnson, is
insisting that the UK just press on with this bill that he crafted, which would
give the government the right to essentially rip up parts of the protocol that
they don't like. And Rishi Sunak thinks that it maybe isn't such a great idea
just to unilaterally rip up international agreements. So he's put that protocol
back on the table. And the hope is that they can get the Northern Ireland
Assembly back up and running. It's been suspended on and off for three years
now. So just like last time, we can cancel all of our holidays. We can kiss our
loved ones goodbye because we are back to the all-consuming Brexit negotiations.
Yes. Yay. I mean, basically, as far as I can work out the sort of the
background, isn't it, is that Boris Johnson, he promised the DUP that there be
no checks. Then he signed the Brexit agreement that said there would be checks.
Then he complained when it turned out there were checks. So then he said he
wanted to introduce the protocol bill so as he could then unilaterally ignore
any checks. And then he got kicked out of office because he was lying, wasn't
it? And now he's re-entered the fray saying that, in fact, Rishi Sunak should do
exactly what he had been doing because it was working so well. Ian, I know
you're a massive fan of the Northern Ireland Protocol. Well, they're one of my
favourite prog-rock bands. Basically, it looks like it's very difficult to solve
and we need to sort of celebrate the small wins. Apparently, the EU are willing
to negotiate on reducing the amount of paperwork. We've really just got to sell
that as, like, there's a bit less paperwork. Yes, we've done it and just sort of
lean into that sort of thing. They proposed green and red lanes. And I'm going
to try and explain that now, having not really read about it. So if what you're
trying to import is green, it can go straight through. If anything is red, that
needs more checks, which is going to cause a civil war amongst peppers. Isn't
that like when you go through customs and it says anything to declare and you
think, no, I just walk straight through? Like, who bothers? Yeah, it's an
honesty box system. Yeah, it's a really stupid system. Yeah, only the honest
drug dealers get caught out by that. The UK is desperate for an honesty box
system, but the EU is not feeling so trustworthy. Once when I went through the
airport and the anything to declare thing, I shouted out, I once ironed my shirt
before a rectal exam. I like these stories because I like the term Eurosceptic
MPs because it makes it sound like they're flat earthers who don't believe
Switzerland exists. Wouldn't necessarily be that far from the truth for someone.
Well, if you describe Switzerland to someone, it doesn't sound real. It's like a
mountainous land full of banks where all people can go and legally kill
themselves. Yes, this week, Rishi Sunak has been seeking an agreement with the
EU on the post Brexit rules. But I think it's fair to say at this point that
Brexit remains the magic goose that will surely one day produce something from
its arse that looks at least a bit more golden and a bit more egg-like. Thus
far, it's had a bit of a tough time. But as a young nation-facturing process
just starting out on its career, you can't expect miracles. And it has been
hindered Brexit by things beyond its control. For example, a global economic
downturn, a pandemic, a war, dysfunctional parents and, of course, the
unexpected discovery of Northern Ireland. Andy, which nation from the UK would
you like your question on? I'm going to go Scotland, please. Kate, who in
Scotland this week said she had given a straight answer to a straight question
but was then criticised for that answer being, well, too straight. So I think
this is going to be the SNP election and it's a lady called Kate Forbes and a
lot of discussion about the views of the three candidates, particularly about
the gender self-ID. And if nothing else, the whole transgender debate has made
me very confident of what a pronoun is. And I'm very grateful for that because I
never actually got taught grammar at my state school. Kate Forbes is a member of
the Free Church of Scotland and they tend to take very conservative viewpoints.
So in addition to trans rights, she's also being asked questions about gay
marriage and even what she thinks about women having children outside of being
married. And I think it's actually a real test of stated versus revealed
preferences on our part, the publics, because ever since Partygate and Boris
Johnson's resignation, it's been all about integrity, right? Rishi Srinath
promised to bring integrity back to the Tory party. Kia Stahmah says no, I'll be
honest with voters. And Kate Forbes is the first one to really try answering
very directly these questions that she's being asked. And everyone is like, no,
thank you. Please be a little bit less honest. Roll that back. Can you make up
some beliefs because we feel a lot more comfortable if you lied right now. But
she did kind of roll it back, though, didn't she? She did an apology. A non-
apology apology. Yeah. It was one of those apologies where it's like, I'm sorry
that I'm right. It is so funny, isn't it? The SNP is basically a party that's
there for Scottish independence and they've been completely sucked into this
trans issue. It's like UKIP falling apart because no one could have agreed that
it was a blue or a gold dress. You know, that is completely pointless. I mean,
what I love about Kate Forbes with this trans stuff is that the irony being that
Kate Forbes identifies as a potential SNP leader, and yet no one else agrees
with her. They got into an argument about what constitutes a woman. It's very
controversial at the moment. JK Rowling very offended along with a lot of other
people that often she's now no longer referred to as a woman, but referred to as
sometimes different phrases such as people with vulvas. And I think your blokes
do have to be described eventually as people with penises. I think most blokes
are going to be fairly comfortable with that, I'll be honest with you. You know,
yes, yes, I've got a penis, so I'll show you if you like. Obviously I won't
because I know that that can constitute harassment. Because not only have I got
a penis, I've also got a brain. But I'm afraid I can't show you that either
because it happens to be in the same place as my penis. Kate Forbes as well, she
said that she's got these views, but she wouldn't like repeal anything. She
wouldn't change the laws. And she said it's because she's a servant of democracy
and not a dictator. And I just feel like when someone goes, I'm not a dictator,
you're like, I feel more suspicious that you might be a dictator. Now, like no
one would assume that the leader of the SNP is going to go on to be a dictator.
It's got Naked Man in a Bush going, I'm not a weirdo, kind of violent. Right at
the end of our UK round, the scores are, let's call it Ten All. We're calling it
Ten All as we enter our final round. And our final round is a picture round.
Yes. I think it could be the first picture round in Radio Quiz history. I'm
going to describe a picture and our panellists have to tell me what news story
it's from. So Ian and Holly, your picture is this. An empty shelf in a
supermarket with a parent comforting a small child who is weeping, but you
promised me I could have extra broccoli. Is it the food shortage? Yes. The
vegetable, vegetable shortage? Aldi and Asda and Morrison's, they're all
rationing the amount of vegetables, but M&S and Waitrose aren't. Mainly because
they're going in to Aldi and Morrison's and buying the vegetables, and then they
can still make a massive profit back at M&S and Waitrose. So the reason we're
having these shortages is because there have been harvest problems in Spain and
North Africa where we import a lot of this food from. So it's not just the UK,
other countries are having issues. And it's an important reminder that anyone
can be the problem because we have a war going on, we have trade tensions rising
around the world, but this time it's the holiday destinations that are giving us
the headache. Somewhat unexpected. But people keep sending photographs of French
supermarkets with loads of salad in it, as though to taunt us. As I eat my
quiche with no garnish. And I drink my pims with nothing but sweet in it. I
think we just need to start utilising some of the less popular, but still
readily available vegetables. And it's finally happening. A resurgence of cress.
We use it in primary school to teach kids, I don't know, that life is shit. You
grow it and then you don't use it again. Now it's time to get some recipes
going. Cress surprise. And our final picture question, this can go to Ian and
Holly. The picture is a marker pen scrolling all over Gene Wilder's face. What
is the story? This is the Roald Dahl story, isn't it? Yes, correct. Of course,
which I find disgusting. I just think it's about making changes, doing edits and
woking up Roald Dahl books, which is just awful because you make little changes
here, little changes there, and then before you know it, it's not a Roald Dahl
book, is it? It's a David Walliams book. Everybody's getting very excited about
this, but I mean, in fact, Roald Dahl rewrote Roald Dahl, didn't he? It was
Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, originally the Impalumpas. They were black
pygmies from deepest, darkest Africa who were happy to be slaves, only working
for chocolate because their actual diet had been eating the bark of the bonbon
tree. And then Roald Dahl read this and thought, oh, sensitivity, read my own
work, realized where he was going wrong, and actually, he went completely woke,
Roald Dahl, back in 1973. So, you know, he was the woke leader. A lot of people
struggled to believe that. A lot of this audience is struggling to believe that.
But it seems, yeah, he was actually, he wasn't just a gobba funka. He was woke
curious before that was even a thing. The difficulty, of course, Andy, is that
if you are going to make changes to text, you have to be confident that they're
good ones. So I think the one you just described is a really great example of a
good change. But, you know, I read Roald Dahl as a kid, I'm sure we all did, and
I was curious as to what these new edits were from the publisher, because they
were insisting they were very small. And I also went back to Charlie and the
Chocolate Factory, and they've addressed the Impalumpas again, and this time,
they've changed them from small men to small people. And I'm just wondering what
woman felt excluded from that group? LAUGHTER Like, I've heard women say to me
before, you know, I really want to be a part of this boys club or that boys
club, but no one's ever said I'm desperate to be an Impalumpa. LAUGHTER And
we're called enough names already, I would have thought we could have left
Impalumpa off the list. I think the changes haven't been the best. I think
that's fair to say. They changed, Augustus Cleep is no longer fat, he's
enormous. Now, I'm not sure that that is much better. LAUGHTER Kids being
bullied at school, and, you know, somebody's been called fat, and you have a kid
going, no, no, no, you can't call them fat, they're not fat, they're enormous.
LAUGHTER In all seriousness, it was done by the publishers, wasn't it? It was
done by Puffin, and they did it because there's a certain amount of people who
felt uncomfortable reading those books to their kids, because they had difficult
words that they felt was outdated. So, really, it's just a money thing, isn't
it? It's just to sell more books to more people. It's very much to sell more
books to more people, and there's two ways of doing it. Obviously, you know, one
is to try and make everybody feel more inclusive, and then they've got a bigger
audience, and the other way, of course, is to change completely unnecessarily a
couple of words, and then everybody thinks, well, that is completely ridiculous.
I'm going to go online and see if I can get one of the old editions, and
generate sales that way round. And those prices are going to spike, because
demand is going to be high. And they probably bought loads of the copies early,
so they were working the system from the inside. Oh, my God, this is like
Ocean's Eleven all over again! LAUGHTER I can't believe that got rid of... The
creepiest bit in China Chocolate Factory is those wife-swapping grandparents who
said... LAUGHTER..to give them separate beds. We all know what's going on there.
LAUGHTER They're at it 24-7, and Charlie Bucket's sleeping with his hands over
his ears. No wonder he's out looking for chocolate bars all the time. He's just
trying to get away from that sex fest that's going on in there. LAUGHTER There's
a reference in the BFG of Mary going as white as a sheet, and they've changed
that to as white as a farmer's market. LAUGHTER APPLAUSE LAUGHTER Yes. Indeed,
the publisher of Roald Dahl's books has been changing some of the wording in his
books. Roald Dahl remains one of Britain's most popular anti-Semitic children's
authors. LAUGHTER It's important to keep his work successful for all anti-
Semites today. LAUGHTER Dahl himself made revisions, as Andy said, to his texts,
and some of these revisions made now are sensible, and some are probably
unnecessary. Is it progress? Is it regress? Is it destroying literature? Is it
saving it? And above all, do we need to take a more nuanced view of these things
and stop seeing them as simple binary choices? Well, do we? Come on! Yes or no?
LAUGHTER And that concludes this week's news quiz. Our winners, going home with
a luxury cucumber for two and an all-inclusive lettuce... LAUGHTER..Holly and
Ian on team Salads with 14. APPLAUSE..and finish on 12. Thank you for listening
to this week's news quiz. I've been Andy Altman. Goodbye. LAUGHTER APPLAUSE
Taking part in the news quiz were Ian Smith, Holly Walsh, Kate Andrews and Andy
Parsons. In the chair was Andy Zoltzman. An additional material was written by
Alice Fraser, Katherine Brinkworth, William Hall and Jade Gebby. The producer
was Sam Holmes. It was a BBC Studios production. APPLAUSE And we'll be more from
Andy and the NQ team next week. Now, the weather forecast and Thomas
Schaffenacher is with us. Hello, Thomas. Hello, Tom. And it is chilly out there.
That cold, northerly, dry wind. The cloud cover is also quite varied across the
country. Some areas have been pretty overcast so far today. And we've also a few
fleeting showers across eastern parts of the country. So here are the details
then for the rest of the afternoon. Let's start with Scotland. The best of the
weather will be in the western isles and central parts of Scotland. The further
east and south you are in Scotland, the cloudier it'll be and also a chance of a
few showers. For example, in Aberdeenshire. Onto Northern Ireland. Northern
Ireland actually enjoying a dry day today. The winds are lighter as well, and it
feels a little bit milder here compared to the rest of the country. Onto Wales.
Also a dry day today with generally sunny weather across western parts of Wales,
a little bit more cloud further east. And then across England, that's where we
have most of the variation. Around the North Sea coast, it's that chilly wind,
often cloudy. Showers are expected on and off, mostly light and fleeting ones
carried by that breeze. And generally to the east of the Pennines, a few showers
also scattered across the southeast. But generally speaking, I think plenty of
sunny spells as well. Now on those temperatures, I'm quite deceptive really,
because they are about the average for the time of the year. Whether you're
north or south, we're talking about 8 degrees Celsius, the peak this afternoon.
But because the wind is quite strong and it's a dry wind crucially, it actually
feels like it's about a couple of degrees above freezing. Now onto tonight,
plenty of clear weather, a touch of frost across western areas of the UK. And
then tomorrow it's going to be more of the same, but I think the wind will be a
little bit lighter tomorrow. So perhaps it won't feel quite as chilly. Back to
you. Thomas, many thanks. The news is next. We are making changes to the way BBC
live streams are distributed via third party services and platforms. And the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds.