TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-17H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This week they're looking to the stars. That's coming up in a couple of minutes
here on Radio 4. Last night, investigators say their primary focus is the
dissident Republican group, the new IRA. Liam Kelly, the chair of the Police
Federation of Northern Ireland, says the new IRA are dangerous. They've had a
diminished threat because the security services in conjunction with the PSNI and
our partners have been able to infiltrate the group and we've had a number of
successes over the last few years in relation to them but they still have a
cohort of support and experience and they are obviously posing the threat and
that manifested itself last night. Official figures show that a record number of
asylum seekers are waiting for a decision on their case. There are 166,000
people currently in the backlog. Of those, 110,000 have been waiting more than
six months. Ambulance handover delays outside hospitals in England have jumped
to their highest weekly level since early January. A quarter of ambulance
patients waited at least 30 minutes last week to be transferred to A&E teams. 10
percent of patients had to wait over an hour. Ukraine's president Volodymyr
Zelensky has said he would welcome a chance to meet representatives from China.
Mr Zelensky didn't give any details of how this might happen but he was speaking
a day after the most senior Chinese diplomat Wang Yiyi visited Russia. Mr Wang
praised Beijing's relationship with Moscow but also offered to mediate in the
war with Ukraine. Staff working at the European Commission have been ordered to
remove the TikTok app from their phones and many other devices which run
official EU programmes. TikTok, which is owned by the Chinese company ByteDance,
has faced numerous allegations that it harvests users' data and hands it to the
Chinese government. BBC News. BBC Inside Science is in half an hour and this
week they have a focus on Antarctic sea ice. Earlier this week ice coverage hit
a record-breaking low so we'll hear what this means for the continent and the
rest of the world. Also we'll find out how underwater microphones are helping
scientists learn more about the human impact on marine wildlife. We'll join
Victoria Gill at half past four. But first here on Radio 4 it's time to join
those infinite monkeys. I'm Robin Inks and I'm Brian Cox and this is a new
series of The Infinite Monkey Cage. And today we are in Australia again of
course we're in Australia because as many Australians will know when you kind of
got a sitcom in Britain that eventually is starting to fall apart and reach the
end of its life it comes to Australia. So are you being served Tony Hancock,
love thy neighbour, all of them eventually found themselves here and so do we. I
wouldn't say we're a sitcom. There's no place for comedy in science that's why
we work well together actually. Meow, it turns out Schrodinger the cat was
alive. That was my first and only ad lib of the evening. Which is weird because
when I hear you talking about physics I think you're making it all up. One of
the great joys of the southern skies is the view afforded of our galaxy the
Milky Way. The southern hemisphere points directly towards the galactic centre
and the rich star clouds of Sagittarius the constellation of the archer. And of
course that's one of the reasons that we've picked that particular one the
constellation of the archer because anyone here who is a regular radio fall
listener knows that anything that involves the everyday story of country folk
even if it is from an astronomical point of view wins over an audience. And this
by the way was a joke that Brian suggested that we put in and he said it's
really going to work and that shows. Both of us are doing heavy lifting but very
much in different genres here. Does anyone have a clue what the archers is? Yeah
I see so it just wasn't funny then. You all got all the concepts and older
background. I think it was because you said archer singly. Yeah I think that's
one of the problems. It was the singular rather than the archers which suggests
the everyday story of country folk. I think you find it was your delivery
initially that destroyed that. But it's not called it's the archer isn't it?
Yeah I know that's the problem you see this is the issue with doing jokes and
mixing them with science is because science has to be accurate very often that
means it wears comedy involves misunderstandings right? Whereas you go a
misunderstanding I cannot have that that is not the Schwarzschild radius at all.
But it is if we're going to do the black hole joke. Well we can't do the joke
then. If you want to talk about science what you've employed is the Schuller
principle and that's a very specific archer's joke. There was a character called
Schuller in it for many years. Well I'll tell you what we slowly got a laugh but
you get a lot of respect you get a lot of respect for being niche. We don't talk
about the archers in Sydney for an Australian audience. Now you do your next bit
which is you sounding a bit like Carl Sagan the deeds of heroes and guards in
the skies. Yep go on. The night sky is a place of beauty and legend the stars
have always told the stories of origins and endings and the deeds of heroes and
guards. But what stories do the stars tell us today? What secrets do they reveal
when we gaze at them not with human eyes but with the telescopes and instruments
of the 21st century? Today we are at the Powerhouse Museum in Sydney and with us
to discuss the magic of the southern sky and its stories past present and future
we are joined by two astrophysicists and the 11th greatest stand-up in the world
and they are. I'm Kirsten Banks I'm an astrophysicist and science communicator
and the weirdest thing I've seen in the night sky is while working at Sydney
observatories a tour guide I saw this really bright light thinking maybe it was
Venus but it was in the wrong spot so then my undergrad brain went am I seeing a
star exploding? No it was just a plane. I'm the Vika and I'm a stellar
astrophysicist and a senior lecturer at Macquarie University. Something in the
night sky that really touched my heart was the transit of Venus in 2004. Now the
transit of Venus is very special because it is an event that you know back in
the 1770s when Captain James Cook came looking for it in the Pacific Ocean he
didn't really see the transit as well but he did lend up mapping or rather
discovering Australia. So the transit of Venus helped him sort of spot Australia
and in my case I was a student back in India in 2004 I saw the transit of Venus
and I landed up in Australia for my PhD. I'm Ross Noble I'm a stand-up comedian
and the weirdest thing I've ever seen in the night sky was a strange pulsating
orb. I was in Wales I won't tell you what I was doing but I was on a Welsh
mountain in the dark. I was having a wee I'll be honest I was having a wee and
behind me a strange red orb started pulsating. I looked up thinking it was a UFO
right it was the red light on top of a wind turbine and every time the blades
went round it went on and off not a UFO at all. I've redeemed it with the police
we've told you before. Yes you're right stop urinating on that slide. It's also
completely inaccurate because it's not in the sky then is it it's on top of a
wind turbine so it doesn't count. It was bloody high though. Hang on sorry first
question from a layman's point of view where does the sky begin? I've gotten
this question on TikTok many many times on TikTok yes sorry it didn't it wasn't
accompanied with a dance. That's the secret you're gonna dance while you're
doing your science. Where does the sky because I've got a big ladder. That's a
good start. I've got a big ladder. When Jimi Hendrix said excuse me well I
kissed the sky is it possible to do that with a ladder? Well see I would argue
that the sky starts where Rayleigh scattering happens where we get the blueness
of the sky and that happens in some kilometers above the ground. How many
kilometers? Some. Some yes right where the blueness starts. I'm from the
northeast of England. I didn't see blue sky. Technically that means there's no
sky. How about anything above the horizon? That could be sky. That's very far
away though. Yeah you see how difficult it is doing this show. I was hoping we
were going to deal with the death of stars but I don't think we're really going
to get beyond the end of the pier are we? Anyway this is our panel. Also by the
way can I just say to me I was impressed when you were talking about Captain
Cook and the transit Venus. The difference between when you came here and he did
is you worked out you hadn't discovered it. That there were people here already
and you weren't the first. Very true. Yes. Kirsten we'll start off really with
you grew up under Australian skies and I think for a lot of people they think
the sky wherever you are in the world is the sky and you'll get roughly the same
thing and then you come to the southern hemisphere and you discover that this is
a totally different picture. Oh yes I believe we have the best view of the night
sky here in Australia and other southern hemisphere countries of course but
that's because like you said at the start Brian that we have the most privileged
position where we look directly at the center of the galaxy and there are so
many stars but also not stars there as well where you can see some really
interesting patterns within the dusty bands of our Milky Way galaxy. And Davika
many people listen to this will not have seen the majesty of the southern sky so
could you take us through some of the highlights that you see? Sure so I grew up
in the northern hemisphere in the southern parts of India so I was you know very
familiar with the northern sky and then when I came to Australia the first thing
I noticed was everything was upside down. This is down under and everything.
Orion one of all our favorite constellations was upside down and I was like why
is the hunter upside down and I realized well that's Australia it's just
different. But you know the southern sky as Kirsten said is just spectacularly
beautiful though it confuses you in terms of orientation because the other thing
that you only see in the southern hemisphere is the closest star to our sun
which is Alpha Centauri. You cannot see this in the northern hemisphere you know
you have our sun and we're all happily you know enjoying planet earth for as
long as it lasts. But then there's another star Alpha Centauri so there's a lot
of new objects that you can't see in the southern hemisphere that you can. Now
one that you can see in both hemispheres is Andromeda which is the closest
galactic system and you can see that in the northern hemisphere but for three
months which is kind of nowish you can see it in the southern hemisphere. So
there's a spectacular system. It feels to me like if you have if anyone here has
ever been one of those like universal studio tours I would always pick the wrong
side of the ride to go on. So Jaws would always be coming out of the water on
the right hand side when I was sat on the left. The Bates Motel would always be
on the left hand side if I was on the right and that's kind of what it's like
being in the northern hemisphere isn't it we're looking right at the Arse end of
the galaxy and there's a great view down here isn't there I mean that's the
thing is we see a very different sense of even the potential of the stars. For
Radio 4 listeners Arse end means outer spiral arm. Arse end was a very popular
sitcom in the late 1950s. Please welcome Kenneth Horn with Arse End. And a
lovely suburb of London as well. It's weird isn't it because you said about
before about Orion being upside down. Yeah upside down and I thought the first
time I came here and I saw that because that is the one that you notice and you
think thank god he's got a belt on his trousers. That's all the Australian beer
that's what it is. And Kirsten it's interesting we refer to Orion because that's
one of the legends is Orion the hunter but you're a we're a jury woman and so
you grew up with different stories of the stars so could you take us through
some of the stories in the sky. I would actually love to share with you one
about Orion but we call it by a different name in Wiradjuri we call it Byami.
It's the creator spirit but what's interesting about this is it's the exact same
stars creating the picture of a man but to Wiradjuri perspective it's the same
orientation as Orion upside down which seems weird when you first think about it
like we're on the you know the right side of the world and it should be the
right way up on this right side of the world but it's not it's upside down and
that links in to one of the stories where Byami is chasing an emu which we call
Dinawan and as he's chasing Dinawan the emu he trips over a log and falls flat
on his face. Not so great for the creator spirit but that is reflected in the
stars. If you watch Orion or the stars of Orion the stars of Byami setting in
the western sky he sets head first into the ground just like falling into the
ground like the story. It's illustrated in the stars. That's really that's
interesting that you would build the stories around an upside down character.
And you know that's really good because like he was chasing the emu whereas in
the northern atmosphere we have an emu that chases people with an old man called
Rod Hull. I think they're a rich aesthetic. That's astronomy really it's looking
up at the sky and trying to figure out what's out there so you know different
cultures looked at it through different times and they interpreted the way they
saw it. The emu is the only constellation that is not made solely of stars.
That's right in Wiradjuri we call it Gugoman and if you look for the southern
cross one of the most iconic constellations in the southern hemisphere in a
place with very little light pollution you're not going to get it here in Sydney
unfortunately. But just below the southern cross you have this dark triangle
shape of dust that we call the Kolsak nebula in western astronomy but it makes
the head of Gugoman the head of the emu. And as you continue along the sky
towards the center massive bulge of our galaxy you have this thin band that
makes a long neck of the emu and then the bulge of the galaxy is the body of the
emu and its position in the night sky indicates to us as Wiradjuri people when
is the right time to go looking for emu eggs. So when it's kind of just coming
up above the horizon after the sun has gone down it kind of looks like an emu
running along the horizon. So that maps and mirrors down onto the ground that
the Dinawan, the ground emu are running around looking for a mate. But then
later in the year as the earth moves further around its path around the sun that
center of our galaxy rises higher and higher into the sky and then our
perspective changes again. Instead of it being a body of an emu anymore it's now
an emu egg in a nest and that tells us that now's the right time to go looking
for emu eggs. It seems that a lot of first nation astronomy has been ignored
until more recently and there's a lot more books coming out of this and it seems
that there was a lot of first nation astronomy was kind of dismissed because it
was interpreted as being literal as opposed to the fact that's the way we
remember by having these vivid tales. Absolutely much easier than any textbook.
To the untrained eye people who aren't astronomers you will look at the sky and
you see points of light and all those points of light basically look the same.
So could you take us through the differences that are up there? Right how much
time do we have for this program? There are many types of stars out there. Have
you got any plans for Thursday? Or Friday? And as we also know time is an
illusion possibly a construct so we can ignore it in time. Oh fantastic. So
let's start at the very beginning. The sun is a star. It's a pretty ordinary
star. It's currently burning hydrogen in its core, turning it into helium. It's
a main sequence star. Most of the stars we see in the night sky are in this
category of main sequence. But eventually when stars like our sun run out of
that nuclear fuel in their cores the core itself will shrink because it's no
longer being held up by this pressure of nuclear furnace and it starts to grow
bigger and bigger and turn into a red giant. And eventually depending on what
type of star you are you'll go through a different category or a different
journey of life. If you're more massive you have more mass as a star you will
live fast, die young, massive stars do it well. And you'll turn into, thank you,
I'm sometimes funny too. But you have these big red giant stars. There are
different categories of red giant stars. If you're a red giant branch which is
like a branch on this graph that we show in astronomy. You have your red clumps
which are a clump of red stars in the big graph as well. We're really good at
naming things in astronomy. Is that the technical term a red clump? Yes
literally called a red clump. That is my entire PhD on the red clump stars. Yes
that's what you found in the plug after Ed Sheeran's been around. Come on man. I
love it. The speed you drag it down is incredible. That even had a visualization
of someone being dragged down as well as you doing that. Yeah it's the best
because it said I can be funny too. You were like no way I've got an Ed Sheeran
gag now. Red clumps the best thing I've ever heard. Oh yes. So what is a red
clump? A red clump star is a type of red giant that is burning helium in its
core. So it's gotten rid of all the hydrogen. The cores kind of just hung out
just being helium for a little while while a shell of hydrogen fusion is
happening outside the core creating more helium that's heavier than hydrogen so
it's falling down into the core until it gets to a point where it's I believe
about 1.4 times the mass of our sun and then that helium ignites in what we call
a helium flash. Again we're really good at naming things in astronomy and then
when it's burning helium in its core that's a red clump star. And don't feel bad
by the way just about astronomy is naming things. Look at biology blobfish. All
that evolution and what you end up being named blobfish. It's not fair is it? I
must say it's quite accessible though. It looks like a blob. It's a fish. And it
doesn't look quite like a blob as well. But doesn't the blobfish when it's in
the water it only blobs when you take it out of the water. Yeah it's very
disappointing. Yeah and when it's floating it's all right. Yeah it's
magisterial. It's exactly what you don't want. This is a show about astronomy.
Stop talking about it. Let's get back to the red clump. Like a star's dead and
then but you could the light takes so long. I don't need to explain this to you
but. No Russ I want you to come on. Go ahead and try. You amuse me. Kirsten did
jokes you. I'm just saying. That would be deeply unsettling if your gran died
but you could still see the light coming off her. At the funeral you go do you
want a sandwich. Give it a thousand years I'll be gone. Right can I just say
you've never looked more confused. I'm just trying to work out how to steer it
back. I think you've been steering it back all the time. It's absolutely fine.
Davika your research is based on first of all measuring the composition of
stars. Could you run through how it is that just from the light a point of light
in the sky we can understand exactly what that star's made of. So like I said
before stars have a chemical composition and one of the long standing research
questions we have is where do the elements in the universe come from. And when I
mean elements if I take this glass of water it's got hydrogen and oxygen in it.
The question is where is this hydrogen coming from. Where is this oxygen coming
from. And like I said not all stars make the elements at the same time. As you
know Kristen said young stars are just making hydrogen into helium. They're not
making carbon and so on. So the question that Brian asks me is how do we know.
So I spend all my day looking at starlight and turning it into rainbows. That's
my life guys it's beautiful. And the way I do this is I stare at a star and the
starlight comes to me and I put it through a prism and that prism breaks up this
white light into the colors of the rainbow. That's what it does right. White
light through a prism gets broken down to the colors of the rainbow. But now
imagine my star has helium or neon or argon or whatever the chemical element is.
When the photon from the core of the star is passing through this element some
of the energy of the light particle is absorbed by that element. So what happens
is when I look at my rainbow I either see dark lines because some of the light
has been absorbed by that particular element. What we can do and this is
measured in laboratories and through atomic physics we can tell the missing
lines to great precision where I know when a line is missing I know which
element it represents. And in some cases the line's not missing or the light
particle is energized. So the light can either be absorbed by the element or it
can be energized by the element. And that's going to show up in my spectra as
what I call an absorption line or an emission line. In my beautiful rainbow it's
going to be a bright line or a dark line. It's simple. It's so cool with
studying stars like that. Like we're getting information not from the light that
they emit but from the light they don't emit. That's right. So basically
elements have a chemical fingerprint just like you and I. Very very unique. I
just got this image of you like people walking past your lab and the door's open
and it's just rainbows flying out the window. Oh she's exploring it in my little
pony again. It's either astronomy or it's the lucky charms factory. Exactly. I
can't be sure which. We should put a round up there I think. There's just one
final question. So I know you're just finishing your PhD. So what is the big
question that you would hope to answer? The ultimate question is why are we
here? And to answer that is answering the question of where are the elements in
the galaxy? And to do that we study the stars and we can study very specific
types of stars that allow us to do that really really well. That's those red
clump stars. But the problem with red clump stars they look very similar to
their red giant branch imposters. We can't use those as effectively to map the
galaxy. So what I'm trying to do is to distinguish one from the other using
spectra, using spectroscopy. So your why are we here is a kind of geographical
question basically. Why are we here? Why are we in this part of a galaxy rather
than the bigger philosophical question of why are we here? I tend to digest that
the first one better than the first one. Yeah I'd say you've got a lot more
chance of success to be quite honest. Philosophy is moving slower than we might
have hoped. To be equal what about for you? What is the big question you would
like to hope that we can understand within your working life? I think it's
really understanding how galaxies evolve with time through the basic building
blocks which are stars. So the big question is really trying to understand the
chemical composition of the universe starting from the basic building blocks
stars. And we don't know a lot of it because of the diversity. It may seem like
well yeah we know these stars make carbon but there's so many internal
complexities. If you take a galaxy and you map the chemical composition of it
it's not going to be a straight line for every element. And even the same group
of stars some of them will make carbon or some element and some of them will
decide now I'm not going to show up today and I'm not going to make this
element. And the question is why? Yeah I think it's such a wonderful picture
that the galaxy this thing as you said 100 000 light years across is a big
chemistry set. Yes it is. It's incredibly complicated. That we don't quite
understand. We understand it by and large but the intricacies of it is what we
don't understand. See that's the worrying thing though. Anyone here who if they
were a kid was given a chemistry set. What was the first thing you did? How do I
make everything explode? Which means that we might not be the people who should
be responsible for the chemistry set. Don't worry the universe explodes just
fine by itself. Okay that's good. Did you want to know the question I'm working
on? I was about to say Ross. Ross has your big question changed from what you've
heard tonight? No I'm still the same. I'm still working on my big question from
my in my research is if you were racing centaurs right would you just have them
racing normally or would you have miniature jockeys on them with horses heads?
No. Where have you got to so far? To be honest with you I'm finding it hard to
source the centaurs. Yeah. I'm using regular horses with papillomashy human
heads. So you're hoping this will be an observational science and not just
theoretically? Yes to be honest when I when I do it theoretically the people at
the bus stop move away quickly. To be honest I remember when you had two minor
tools on a unicycle that was disaster enough wasn't it? Yeah they weren't fun
with research anymore. The people at the center. The centaur center? The centaur
center. Is that the central centaur center? That's right yes. What would you...
No no no Brian don't go further with this don't. Well no I'm intrigued now. If
one of the two possible outcomes you described were shown to be which one would
you hope would turn out to be the correct answer? Well I would hope. I would
hope. I mean obviously you've got to decide do you put a jockey's hat on the
human head of the centaur? Yes. You know. Technically they've got a horse's body
but human head so that's the first thing. But that's not an observational
question that you choose that. Do you choose or do they choose? They've got a
human brain you know horse's body. Right. Yeah. To be honest I was even more
excited when you got that cyclops to play darts. The monocular nature of it when
he does change its ability doesn't it? Yes. Stop deflecting him. This is why
Brian is the greatest popular scientist because a lot of people who are very
intelligent would go shut up Ross. Yeah. I'm just trying to pin it down. What
you have to understand about science is it's just loose we don't know the
answer. It's okay Ross. What you need to say here is that's beyond the scope of
this research. Exactly. Then move on. Well anyway we'll be following up on
Ross's centaur centre research in the next series. We won't. We ask our audience
a question as well. What is the most improbable thing you would like to be
discovered deep in the universe? And here says a strawberry seen to a cat. Knock
knock and the cat replying open the bloody box and find out. Lizzie wants a
cocktail bar with hot aliens. Is there one of those in Sydney? You know. I think
that's a cocktail. Can I have two hot aliens? Space cats with laser eyes. You
know when your eyesight's not very good and you have the laser put in to fix the
eye? Would that make the cat's eyes better? If they had lasers coming out of the
eyes would it make the eyes better or worse? You said that's so much like an
optician. Better or worse? Can I ask you again? Puss in boots. Better or worse?
Laser cat. Better or worse? John said dark side of the moon on the dark side of
the moon. Took me a while. He wants to find the Pink Floyd album on the dark
side of the moon. I keep meaning to ask you this as well. What happens if you
put a werewolf on the moon? The dark side of the moon isn't dark. No no he's not
talking about that. If it's on the dark side of the moon it will be perpetually
human. If it's on the other side of the moon it will be a perpetual lycanthrope.
But it wouldn't be seeing the moon it would be seeing the sunlight. No no it
doesn't matter the moon is always going to be full though isn't it? But it is
because you're going to be on the moon. Can you explain to him why what he's
doing? No no can I just tell you just so you know even though it's night I'm
still able to move around and see things. No but I'm just saying that it's not
night all the time on the dark side of the moon. No no it doesn't have to be
night to be a werewolf. God you don't know anything about werewolves. Yet
another enormous gap in your knowledge. No but there's no difference. You said
it was on one on the dark side of the moon it'd be one thing and on the light
side of the moon it'd be the other thing but it's not because there's no
difference to the werewolf. I'm just saying tomorrow you're going to be in your
lab all rainbows flying around you're not going to be able to concentrate on
your important work you're always thinking about the moon. Anyway so uh thank
you very much to everyone next week our guests include four humans and two
spiders. We have our final show that we're recording Australia and we have an
orb web spider and a huntsman both of which you're very keen on aren't you
Brian? I don't like spiders. Love them absolutely love a spider. I'm so looking
forward to having the spiders on because we had an episode once with a crow and
you were really annoyed by the crow weren't you because the crow kept walking
around and giving you a look that showed that it possibly was more intelligent
than you because it had a little puzzle with this box that had to pull strings
and it did it and you couldn't. Yeah well the spider does that I'm going to be
extremely worried. My top tip on the spider that's right because I live in the
countryside and there's a lot of big ones around and a lot of people they try
and catch the spiders and flick them out but when you zoom in on a spider you
know how they've got the hair they've got hairy creature spiders get a bit of
hair gel or hairspray it doesn't kill them but it sets them. You just pick them
up put them outside rains on them oh I'm off. There you go with that with your
rockabilly spiders thank you very much everyone bye bye. John now nice again.
The Infinite Monkey Cage was presented by Brian Cox and Robin Ince. The producer
was Caroline Steele and it's a BBC Studios production and all the episodes in
this series are available now on BBC Sounds. Radio 4's Lent Talks for 2023. Six
reflective moments taking inspiration from the Lord's Prayer with meditations on
forgiveness, fatherhood and finding heaven on earth. A collection of personal
stories from the man who forgave his brother's killers to the writer escaping a
war zone to facing despair but finding hope. Sharing experiences on faith,
humanity and how the words of the Lord's Prayer have impacted people's lives.
Lent Talks begins next Wednesday evening at 8 45 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Now
on Radio 4 here's Victoria Gill with this week's BBC Inside Science. Hello this
week we are heading to the bottom of the world because there's some very strange
and quite disturbing things happening in Antarctica. The impacts of climate
change on this vast frozen continent are coming to light like never before
thanks to satellite imaging, submarines, sensor laden robots and just scientists
with their very insulated boots on the ground. In the last week it was announced
that there's now less sea ice surrounding the Antarctic continent than at any
time since the 1970s, a global warming low. And what happens in Antarctica
doesn't stay in Antarctica. The vast white surface of sea ice reflects the sun's
rays back into space. And as sea ice expands and contracts it drives ocean
currents that regulate our whole climate system. It even drives the formation of
storms. And the biggest source of uncertainty about future sea level rise,
something that will affect all of us, is just how much of the continent's vast
landlocked ice sheet will actually melt. It's a huge important and complicated
climate puzzle. So luckily I have an excellent climate scientist here with me to
help unpick it. Dr Tamsin Edwards is an expert in modelling climate change
particularly for ice sheets and glaciers. She also co-presents Radio 4's 39 Ways
to Save the Planet. Tamsin, thank you very much for joining us. Thanks for
having me. So I'm going to get right into mine your expertise. We've talked
about sea ice, we've talked about glaciers and ice sheets, land ice and sea ice,
quite different things. What's the fundamental difference? The main thing really
is that we have this floating ice on the surface of the oceans, that's the sea
ice. So when that melts, because it's floating, it basically doesn't really
contribute to sea level rise. But it is important, as you said at the top of the
program, for things like reflecting the sun's rays away and keeping the planet a
bit cooler up at the poles, up and down at the poles. And then the land ice is
the ice that's on, well, on the land. So that's what we often call the ice caps.
Scientists will call them ice sheets for Greenland and Antarctica, they're
really huge ice caps. And then the glaciers in the mountains. And those are the
ones that because they're not touching the water and floating in it already,
when they melt due to climate change, they contribute to sea level rise. But
what's happening with that glacier ice, with that landlocked ice, because we had
some new information about Thwaites Glacier in West Antarctica just in the last
week, didn't we, about its sensitivity to the temperature of the sea? And what
new clues are we getting there? That's right. Antarctica is a really unique and
special place in all kinds of ways. If we think about the glaciers around the
world in the mountains and the Greenland ice sheet up at the top of the planet,
those sitting on land, they kind of are mostly affected by the temperatures of
the air. But Antarctica, a lot of it is sitting on bedrock that is underwater.
So a lot of that ice is touching the oceans and therefore it's sensitive not
only to what the air temperatures are, but the oceans as well. It isn't just a
case actually of you warm the planet with the greenhouse gases as we are doing
and the air temperature goes up and the ocean temperature goes up. There's all
kinds of extra complications because of how the water currents are circulating
around and the saltiness of the water and even the ozone layer, the hole in the
ozone layer kind of contributes to the complexity. So it's a unique place, but
incredibly complicated to understand. Is it right that we're kind of seeing a
more linear sort of parallel climate change response in the Arctic? We're seeing
it warming even faster than we previously thought, but the response to climate
change in Antarctica has been a little strange and different and varied. That's
right. What we worry about is once you start to go down these pathways of change
in Antarctica, those regions can potentially undergo a kind of irreversible
change. We set the ball rolling down the hill and those glaciers actually just
keep melting and keep losing ice into the oceans and it becomes very hard to
stop over hundreds or thousands of years. So that's the thing we're really
worried about. We don't quite know how far down that path of setting that off we
are, but if we do, the consequences for sea level rise and coastlines around the
world are very, very serious. Yeah, and one of the people who is working on the
ground in Antarctica in that frozen, isolated continent is British Antarctic
survey scientist Nadia Frontier, who is a marine biologist at Rothera Research
Station, has the job of diving in the extremely cold Antarctic waters to study
the effect of climate change on marine life there. Nadia centres this audio
snippet from a day working at Rothera. Today is Tuesday morning and the sun is
shining high in the sky and reflecting off the snow like beautiful diamond
particles. You can hear the sound of it crunching under our feet. I'm helping
with conducting some long-term monitoring of the South Polar Skewer population,
which is an oceanic seabird. So they're flying above us just over a beautiful
ocean expanse of brash ice, so that's lots of bits of broken up, either glacial
ice or bits of sea ice, but it's just littering the water and giving this
gorgeous effect of a mosaic. And you can hear we've got the call of an adult
skewer, which we are slowly approaching. So the beautiful thing about being a
marine biologist in Antarctica is that you have the opportunity to work and help
out on quite a variety of different research projects. So what I'm doing right
now is something more terrestrial, so that's land-based in helping with this
seabird monitoring. But as a marine biologist here, my main aim is to study the
benthic community and that's everything that lives on the seafloor, ranging from
seaweed to invertebrates such as sea cucumbers and anemones. And what I really
love about being in a small research station is that you have the opportunity to
help out with so many different projects and it just brings a beautiful
collaboration and atmosphere that is so crucial for Antarctic science. So on our
island, Adelaide Island, we are overlooking the West Antarctic Peninsula and
that is to the south of us a beautiful chain of mountains, but also quite
frustrating because we can't actually get there. We are separated by the Lebeth
Fjord system, which is probably about five kilometers wide, so we are detached
from the mainland, but in this fjord we can see a humpback whale that is
logging. So logging is a behaviour that whales adopt when they are resting at
the surface. We get quite a lot of humpback whales here and the polar summer
starts from November to about February and it's really common to have at least
five humpback whale sightings a day. And now we have just walked down from the
Antarctic specially protected area onto a rocky beach, so you should be able to
hear the sound of waves breaking against small fragments of icebergs. We are
watching a Weddle seal swim in the water with its head up against the backdrop
of absolutely huge striking tabular icebergs which are probably about 10 meters
high. There's also a collection of Adelie penguins on the beach and one of them
is trying to swim in the snow and behind us we've got a proud fur seal that is
sitting on a rock. I do feel really lucky being a researcher here in Antarska
because we have the opportunity to see habitats that first not many people do
see and that are just absolutely incredible and fragile and it just drives this
fire in me that the importance of protecting marine ecosystems is so great and
because there are so few Antarctic researchers the data we collect and the
projects that we do have even more of a weight. Oh and we've just seen a
humpback whale logging again at the surface. That was Nadia Frontier in
Antartica. So Tamsin why is it important we've had so much technological advance
in our efforts to study Antartica but why is it really important to have people
working on the ground in research bases there? It's really important, sadly I've
never been myself. Have you not? That was going to be my next question. All my
work is really in the kind of maths and computer modelling end of things so
sadly I've never been an identifier if I ever will. I think it's important
partly because I don't know if automated technologies could ever cover all of
the incredible complexity of what scientists are doing. I mean they might drill
for an ice core and then take it up and analyse it immediately in a laboratory
in a tent in the field basically and robots and technology and so forth
obviously break in those incredibly harsh conditions. I remember the project the
Lake Ellsworth campaign I think it was their hot water boilers that they used to
melt down water to drill into the ice with hot water. I think they kept
breaking, they ran out of fuel. You know this is tough stuff you know people are
hardy and often technology can let us down because of the incredible conditions.
I think also just scientists need to see these places personally you know that's
why I'd love to go one day. You want to see really the details what are the the
crevasses you see in those ice shelves that you're trying to understand in your
computer model. What are those lakes of meltwater look like over the over the
ice shelves that might widen those crevasses and lead to that ice shelf breaking
up. If you're studying you know biology what are those penguins doing you know
you need to be there right. You can't just do it with satellites or robots. We
need to see this place to really understand the uniqueness of the environment
the way that it doesn't look like anywhere else. It's almost like its own planet
isn't it. To really get that sense of wanting to take care of the place and why
it's so important to preserve it and keep it pristine. Absolutely. What do you
think people don't realise about it? I was reading about the ocean current
circulation and how that impacts the temperatures in the UK and makes the UK
kind of relatively warmer than places at similar latitudes. The idea of
Antarctica making the UK a bit warmer seems seems very strange and
counterintuitive. What have you come across in your work that you think maybe
people up in northern Europe don't realise about the direct impact of Antarctica
on our own climate, our weather, our lives? It's a great question. The whole
world is connected. Antarctica is affected by climate change. The ice that melts
from the Antarctic ice sheet actually causes more sea level rise around the
north part of the planet, the North Pole, the near the south, which is an
extraordinary completely opposite thing to what we think. That's basically
because of an effect of gravity. So when you lose ice from Antarctica the water
around it doesn't have such a strong gravitational attraction. So it sinks
locally close to Antarctica when you lose ice from Antarctica. So that water
then gets distributed around the global oceans and causes more sea level rise in
the UK than off the coastline of Antarctica, which is extraordinary and an awful
thing that people would really hear about. Thank you, Tamsin. We'll be back with
you. But now Antarctica is absolutely vast as well. More than 13 million square
kilometres, 50 times the size of the UK. The only way that we can get a view of
the extent of the sea ice that surrounds it and the whole of the continent is
from space. Gathering and interpreting all that satellite data is something that
our next guest, Dr. Rachel Tilling from the Cryospheric Sciences Lab at NASA's
Goddard Space Flight Centre, knows all about. We can use the satellite data to
give us the area of the sea ice both in the Arctic up north and in the Antarctic
down south. Every year we see these news articles about the Arctic and record
minimum lows, but we don't often see that in the Antarctic because it's a very
different region. This year we are seeing a record low area in Antarctic sea ice
extent. It's a very newsworthy result that we're seeing. It's not just about the
extent, is it? It's about the thickness. If you're looking at the changes in the
ice overall, can you get that with satellites too? I say it's all about the
thickness. That's what I do most days because we have this incredible, and it is
an incredible long-term data set of sea ice extent in the polar regions. But
that just gives us a two-dimensional picture. It tells us the area of the ice.
To really know how the ice is changing long-term, we need to be able to measure
the thickness of the ice as well, which gives us the volume and a much better
idea of how much loss of ice we're seeing. I can logically see, taking a picture
from space, you've got this measure of the area. How do you go into the
thickness with the satellite measurements? It's not a direct measurement. We use
what we call an altimeter satellite. That's a satellite that sends out a signal,
either radar or laser, and reflects from a surface and tells you the height of
that surface. In sea ice-covered regions, it can tell you the height of the ice
surface, but it also tells you the height of the ocean surface between these big
blocks of sea ice. You can difference those to know the freeboard. The freeboard
is just the height of the ice above the ocean. And then we just apply a simple
equation to transfer that to sea ice thickness. Right. What challenges does
Antarctica present for you as a scientist in particular? It is much more
challenging because even though we're using the same theory and it would be very
fair to assume that what happens in the Arctic also happens in the Antarctic.
They're both big, cold places. The sea ice in Antarctica is actually very
different because if you think of the geography of those two regions, the Arctic
is an ocean that's very much protected by land pretty much all around, whereas
the Antarctic is a landmass surrounded by ocean. You get a lot more snowfall
because you've got a lot more evaporation coming off the ocean surrounding the
ice. That snow cover is what really gives us the problem. It's incredibly thick.
It's not just a nice uniform depth of snow. You get a lot of layers, a lot of
deformation. We really need to understand exactly where our instruments are
reflecting from because we can't just assume that it's reflecting from the ice
surface, for example, because it may be reflecting from somewhere in that very
complex snowpack. And at present we don't have the data on ground to help us
safe ashore where the radar signal is coming from. Right, and such a vast
constant, such a big place as well with all those layers. The idea that snow is
a problem in Antarctica is, I guess, quite an intuitive problem. But how
variable and how complicated and thick can those layers of snow that are sort of
muddying your signal be? The snow can be incredibly thick. I've been down to
Antarctica in the Weddle Sea, which is a little sea near the Antarctic
Peninsula. And I have spent a good day digging through snow pits on Antarctic
sea ice. And I've dug down and two meters, I've stood in the snow pit, it's been
towering above my head and I still haven't hit the ice surface yet. So this is
the thing that really complicates our satellite returns. You dig through a snow
pit this deep and there's so many different layers, so many places the radar
signal could be reflecting from. And we have something that's hundreds of
kilometers up in space and we're trying to figure out where in the snow we're
actually getting a return from. I spend a lot of my life trying to figure that
out. So apart from sending Rachel to Antarctica to dig to see where the snow
ends and the ice starts, how are you getting around that technically? We're also
doing a lot of airborne campaigns. So the European Space Agency were just down
in Antarctica flying over the continent but also over the sea ice. And at NASA
we were up in the Arctic flying over Arctic sea ice. And we essentially put mini
versions of the instruments that we have on satellites on these planes, whether
that's a radar or a laser, and fly over and along satellite tracks to get
measurements not just from the satellite but from these smaller airborne
instruments that can give us a better idea of what's actually going on in the
snowpack. That was Rachel Tilling. Now Tamsin, Rachel and her team are looking
to fill in some of the gaps in our knowledge with this satellite technology.
Those direct measures all feed in to these models that your focus is on refining
so that we can get the very best models to show us what is happening to the
global climate system. How good are those models proving to be and what is your
work focusing on to make them even more accurate and a sort of more accurate
forecast of what we're facing? They are really good. You know, they've given us
the big picture on global warming for many years now. I mean, my particular
interest actually is trying to put error bars on those predictions. So you don't
just run your computer model once into the future, you run it many times with
slightly different kind of settings to see what are the whole range of plausible
futures, what's the biggest climate change and the smallest climate change that
we might see, what's the biggest sea level rise and the smallest. That's kind of
an art in itself. It's a science, it's a mathematical field to understand that
uncertainty in the future. Then again, the sort of next stage is we don't just
run those computer models and say, oh well, we'll just believe them and that's
what it is. They're based on physics and lots of chemistry and biology and
geology and all this science that we've gathered, but we also test them. So we
run them, for example, to reproduce the last several decades of change around
Antarctica. Then we compare that with the data that we've got from satellites
from the 1970s or the 1990s, sometimes a little bit further back, certainly
further back. We have lots of data around the planet from ships' voyages and
weather stations and all sorts and we test them. When we say, well, how well did
that climate model do in the past? We try to predict the past, if you like, and
we kind of score them and we only use the best versions of the models to really
found our predictions for the future. Right. The more data, the better that goes
into testing and kind of feeding into those models, I suppose. Absolutely. These
are complex places. But I think one thing I'd maybe like to say is that we still
need to understand climate change to adapt. We know that we're going to keep
having more climate change in the future because it's going to be hard to turn
around our emissions very quickly. So we need to adapt to sea level rise. The
seas are going to keep rising even if we cut emissions very quickly. We are
still going to get changes in our weather for years to decades. We need to
understand what the future will look like as well as cutting the emissions to
keep to the Paris Agreement targets and so forth, net zero pledges and things.
So it's no longer about trying to work out the what if the emissions were very
high or very low, because as a planet, we're aiming for low emissions. But it's
also about what climate change is still in the pipeline because we're not going
to be able to stop it immediately because we're still going to be emitting. It's
going to take some time to turn the ship around. Yeah. Yeah. The detail will
show us what sort of a world we'll actually be living in in the near term.
Right. Exactly. Thank you, Tamsin. And finally, with all of that data, we are
trying to make sense of what's happening in Antarctica. But one polar researcher
and sound artist has taken a very different approach to understanding the vast
frozen continent. He's been using recordings captured over years with floating
microphones. His name's Dr. Geraint Rees-Wittaker and he's composed a novel
sonic take on how human activity is affecting life in the cold polar seas. Our
climate reporter Georgina Ranad has been listening. Hello to you, wherever you
are in the world. What you are about to hear is something that has never been
heard before. Scientists have conducted the world's first interview with a
humpback whale community from the Arctic. In this extract from the conversation,
the whales discuss the impact that industrial scale seismic airgun oil and gas
surveys has had on them and their homes. The next voices you will hear will be
those of the whales. The main bombing was continuously in the same area. The
highway had been hit there badly with a bomb, which I found I had to divert
again. So frightening. And when they were passing, I heard it come down and
their home got to direct it. So what you've listened to is a piece I created
called First Contact. I'm from Swansea, South Wales, which during the Second
World War was completely flattened really by the bombs. And so I thought, okay,
what can I do? Use the voices of the people talking about the devastation of
bombing in Swansea, as if it was the voices of the whales talking about the
devastation of the impact on airguns having on them. This is Dr Gerundreis
Whittaker. He's taken underwater sounds recorded in the Arctic and Antarctic and
turned these little herd noises into immersive compositions about these places
we don't often think about. For this one, he chose the sound of airguns blasted
at sea. There are essentially ships that go back and forth for two main
purposes. One is to look for oil and gas, and then the other is for scientific
surveys. So even scientists use these ships and what they do, they emit this
massive impulse of air into the ocean to read what's going on underneath. And so
immediately when I heard it, it sounded like a war on the environment, a war on
the ocean. This noise pollution is disrupting marine life. Studies are finding
it causes a loss of hearing sensitivity, physical injury, and increased stress
to mammals like whales. Some even stop eating. Whales use sound over long
distances to communicate, but as scientists record higher levels of human-made
noise in the oceans, they're finding that animal behavior is being disturbed.
Due to things like, for example, the winter ice melting, meaning in the Arctic,
for example, shipping lanes are increasing, the oceans are actually getting
louder, and we are having a detrimental impact. Geraint, I know you've collected
quite a few sounds, but how can they actually help us tackle climate change?
Well, I'll tell you what, Georgina, how about we listen to some of them first.
For example, this is the Ross seal. This is the Weddle seal. And this next sound
is a really interesting one. It's the singing ice. So singing ice basically
happens when the ice contracts and expands due to temperature rising, and it
creates this noise as the movement of the ice shifts. So we started there with
almost otherworldly sounds of animals, or that seal call that sounded like a
dance beat. But the ones I've found really powerful are the sounds you might
associate with climate change. As we know, scientific papers are telling us that
the Arctic is warming four times faster than other parts of the world. And when
I hear the crunching and thunderous cracking, I can really visualize the ice
breaking and falling into the water. I think it's really important when we talk
about these issues for things we can never really understand, is using things
like storytelling and dystopian narratives to put ourselves in that position to
not only help us to try to think how would it make us feel, but also it kind of
hopefully draws the audience in as well and puts them in the shoes of the
whales. Obviously, whales don't wear shoes, but puts in the mindset at least for
them to start thinking about, you know, how can we imagine the impact of what's
going on? That was Georgina Ranard and some very unusual polar sounds there.
Tamzin, what do you think, you know, you deal in the hard data and getting that
hard data into a form where we can, you know, really use it to work out how the
world is changing. What do you think of taking that very different approach to,
you know, where he's heard some sounds and treatments of sounds that I've
certainly never heard before? It's incredibly important. I absolutely place art
around science and understanding the world very, very highly. I come from a
family that has a lot of artists in and we need beauty, we need story, we need
imagination to really fully understand this planet. We've got some amazing
schemes where poets and artists can go to the polar regions, there are kind of
various expeditions that they can go on that come back and, you know, talk about
these places in ways that move us, that might move us to protect them, that move
us to understand them better, to think about the bigger picture, to think about
the long-term future, to think about the long-term past. One of my favourite
films, probably my favourite film ever, is Werner Herzog's Encounters at the End
of the World. Fabulous. I think he did go on one of these expeditions funded for
artists to go. Yeah. And he filmed talking about why scientists need to go, you
know, why we need to see scientists there. He went and filmed all these
scientists in Antarctica and it's just the most glorious film. It's not a
documentary. This is a kind of common misunderstanding that it's a documentary
about Antarctica and then I think some people get very cross when they think
it's not, doesn't stick to documentary style, shall we say. I've spoken to a
couple of Antarctic researchers who weren't a fan of the sort of slightly
eccentric way in which some of the researchers may have come across in that
film. I also think that's a wonderful film and a kind of an interesting
perspective on Antarctica and on that sort of remote field research that you
don't normally get. I suppose that's what this, you know, sound artist is going
for as well, a totally different point of view. Absolutely. The point is it's
not about documenting the kind of banal detail of the day to day. It's about
finding the deeper truth, you know, it's about constructing the story of
Antarctica and what it feels like to be there or what it means for humanity to
be there, to be trying to understand it. So it's not about let's just make a
video diary. Anyone can make a video diary. What you need is an artist to reveal
that deeper truth about a place, about our place in Antarctica. Well, Tamzin
Edwards, you have definitely constructed the story of Antarctica very
beautifully for us today. I really appreciate your time. Thank you very much for
joining us. Pleasure. Thank you so much. Well, that is all we have time for this
week. Inside Science is produced in collaboration with the Open University and
we will be emerging from the frozen south to be back with you next week. BBC
Inside Science was presented by Victoria Gill and produced by Emily Burt.
Continuing our celebration of the centenary of BBC radio drama. The Huntsman now
purposefully directed his footsteps. Analysing the most groundbreaking plays
from the vast drama archive. It's intensely physical. It's this room. You can go
to different places and tell the stories from different points of view. Dramatic
beats with me, Michael Simmons Roberts. Everything in British storytelling from
television owes so much to radio drama. On Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. On Saturday
night at eight. This is BBC Radio 4.