TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-18H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This is BBC Radio 4. It's five o'clock. Time for PM with Evan Davis. Hello. No
sign of the baby of Constance Martin and Mark Gordon. The search goes on and in
the last few minutes the police have been giving an update. We thank the public
for their support on this and we want to work diligently to see whether we can
still find this baby at this time. But they are extremely worried about the
child and have additionally arrested the couple on suspicion of gross negligence
and manslaughter. We'll bring you the latest. 24 hours from Windsor, the Prime
Minister is selling his Brexit deal on Northern Ireland. In fact, he's due to
address Conservative MPs right now. How is it all going down? Ben Wright is live
in the Commons for PM. So far not a single Tory MP has spoken out to criticise
the deal. Privately some Brexit purists are chewing over the detail and
reserving judgment but broadly Rishi Sunak's party seems to be on board. Still
no word from Boris Johnson. We'll have the latest from Ben at Westminster and
hear from two Conservative Party activists on what they think. Also on the
programme... Hi TikTok. Hi guys. Welcome back to my channel. That's TikTok.
TikTok. Governments in the West are banning Chinese-owned TikTok from staff
phones on security grounds. Britain's technology secretary has said she doesn't
think we need to do it here. And... Fancy working for the household of one of
the New York's regamich, mega rich, when a four-page job advert has shed light
on what can be involved. We'll hear from a former assistant who has seen it all.
But we'll start with the BBC News, read today by Tina Ritchie. Police in Sussex
searching for a missing baby. We've been questioning a couple about its
disappearance, have further arrested them on suspicion of gross negligence
manslaughter. Constance Martin and Mark Gordon went missing last month but were
located in Brighton last night. About 200 officers have been examining an area
of woodland on the Sussex Downs in the hunt for the baby and say they're
concerned because of the cold weather. Chief Superintendent James Collis has
just been updating reporters. We just encourage the public to be vigilant. If
you see anything, please report it. Our dedicated officers are working their way
through that and our focus really remains at this time, while there is still
some hope of finding this young baby, on doing so. Rishi Sunak is due to meet
the 1922 Committee of Conservative Backbenchers in Westminster to garner support
for his new post-Brexit trade deal for Northern Ireland. The Prime Minister has
spent the day in Belfast trying to sell the so-called Windsor Framework to
unionists. Our political correspondent Jonathan Blake reports. Having travelled
to Belfast overnight to talk up what he sees as the benefits of his deal with
the EU, Rishi Sunak is this evening engaged in a hard sell to Conservative MPs.
So far, they've broadly welcomed the agreement, with many significant figures
praising the Prime Minister's efforts, but others are withholding judgement for
now. After hearing Mr Sunak and other Tory backbenchers, the Eurosceptic
European Research Group will meet separately to discuss their response. The DUP,
whose backing is crucial to restore devolved government in Northern Ireland, are
still making up their minds. But Rishi Sunak said he was confident that all
parties there would support the deal. A double rapist who changed gender while
waiting to stand trial has been jailed for eight years at the High Court in
Edinburgh. Isla Bryson attacked two women in Clydebank and Glasgow in 2016 and
2019, while known as Adam Graham. The case sparked a major debate about whether
Bryson should be housed in a female prison, where the 31-year-old was initially
remanded before being moved to a male facility. In sentencing, the judge, Lord
Scott, said he took a number of factors into account. Despite some uncertainty
about the precise conditions from which you suffer, I proceed on the basis that
you are vulnerable in some ways. However, the seriousness of these crimes far
outweighs considerations arising from your circumstances. Your vulnerability is
no excuse at all for what you did to these two women. A woman who earns more
than a million pounds from the NHS while using a fake medical degree has been
jailed for seven years. Solia Elemi from Burnley worked as a psychiatrist for
more than two decades using the forged documents. A fake letter of verification
with the word verify misspelt was accepted by the General Medical Council, who
registered Elemi as a doctor. The GMC has since apologised. Opposition parties
in Nigeria have called for the country's presidential election to be annulled,
claiming the results have been manipulated. With 14 of the 36 states declared,
the governing party's candidate, Bola Tenubu, is in the lead with 44% of the
vote. The opposition PDP has 33%. There's been growing criticism of the delays
in announcing the votes, while international observers have warned of a lack of
transparency. A woman from Birmingham has used an 80-year-old piece of contract
law to represent herself in court against British Airways and win. She was
awarded almost Â£2,500, as Sally Johnson explains. In 2020, Jenny Barber was
looking forward to a trip to Japan. When British Airways cancelled her flights
because of the pandemic, she asked for a refund, but the airline refused. With
an A-level in law from 20 years ago, she found a piece of legislation from 1943
that stated she was entitled to her money back. She took BA to court and won,
but said the whole process was nerve-wracking. If you're kind of an ordinary
person who's not a legal professional going up against someone like British
Airways, it's scary and it's intimidating. BA said it was the first UK airline
to offer customers flexibility during the pandemic by providing vouchers for
future travel. Sally Johnson reporting. Thank you very much, Tina. Well, let us
just start with the latest on Constance Martin and her partner, Mark Gordon. You
might have heard this morning that they'd been found and arrested, but their
two-month-old baby was still missing. And then just in the last half an hour,
the police have said more. They have additionally arrested the couple, including
on suspicion of manslaughter. And in their update, which you heard some of in
the news bulletin, they said more about the search. Let's listen to some of what
they said. This is the Met's Detective Superintendent Lewis Basford and Sussex
Police's Chief Superintendent James Collis. I can confirm that they were
initially arrested on suspicion of child neglect. I can now confirm that they
have been further arrested on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter and
that they remain in custody at police stations in Sussex. The baby was not with
them and we have not found the baby at yet. The police helicopter, sniffer dogs,
thermal imaging cameras and drones are being used to assist officers on the
ground. We currently have over 200 officers from multiple units across the
Metropolitan Police and Sussex Police involved in the search. Throughout this
investigation, our key priority has been finding the baby. So the working
hypothesis still remains that we believe them to be and have been in the open
land and open areas. That is why our focus and our search is as where it is. We
are cognisant of the fact that our outbuildings, it's a vast amount of land.
I've brought my colleague in around the geography. So the location as you know
from being here today is vast. We're looking at a corridor between where they
were last sighted and here of about 7 miles by 13 mile length and duration, so
91 square miles worth to be searched. We just encourage the public to be
vigilant. If you see anything, please report it. Our dedicated officers are
working their way through that and our focus really remains at this time while
there is still some hope of finding this young baby on doing so. Well that was
just some of that police press conference. The search involving 200 people, you
heard that 91 square miles being searched but obviously massive concern about
the baby. No name or gender of that baby currently known. Now we have a reporter
down in Brighton. We'll talk to him just a little bit later in the programme.
Obviously the story developing as we went on air. The government evidently
thinks it is going well today as they sell that new Brexit deal on trade
involving Northern Ireland. Prime Minister's been busy in Belfast singing
praises of the deal. He's now back at Westminster to talk to Conservative MPs.
Ben Wright is our political correspondent and joins us from the House of
Commons. Ben, so far so good then as far as the backbenchers are concerned. Yes,
that's true Evan. Some of Rishi Sunak's recent predecessors have walked into
meetings of the backbench 1922 committee braced for a fight. You'll remember
that Theresa May had a wretched time trying and failing to persuade Tory MPs to
back her deal and the mood in the party was rancorous. But four years later with
the UK out of the EU, Rishi Sunak's adjustment to the deal that Boris Johnson
agreed has splashed down in Westminster with a ripple of approval across the
Tory party. And a few minutes ago the Prime Minister walked into that meeting of
Tory backbenchers to a sustained 20 seconds of table banging which is how
Conservative MPs like to express that they're content with the actions of their
current leader. It's early days, I think MPs are still digesting this but
there's no sign at the moment of any rebellion or mutiny and prominent
Brexiteers like Steve Baker who's in the government and Andrea Ledsom on the
backbenchers are delighted. Well the European Research Group, the Brexit team if
you like, among Conservative MPs, as I understand it a meeting at six so we
won't hear anything from that but is there any thought to be much chance they
could come out of that meeting and say they're going to oppose it? They are
keeping their heads down at the moment and they're meeting as you say in an hour
or so. The last time that there were big deals to digest and discuss they
appointed what they call a star chamber of lawyers to scrutinise the text before
as a group they decide whether to back it or not and in March 2019 the ERG star
chamber decided that Theresa May's attempt at a deal did not deliver a proper
Brexit but they gave the thumbs up to Boris Johnson's deal in December 2020 so
that group is being reconvened and I spoke to one of a senior Brexiteer this
afternoon who said that on the face of it the Windsor framework is in their view
significant progress and not as bad as the situation at the moment but they are
going to be going through the legal texts comparing to the the white paper that
the UK government put out yesterday with the Q&A document that the European
Union put out which stresses all the protections that are in place for the
single market and all the rest of it and they will come up with their own view
but it feels broadly that they are behind this at the moment as well. All right
Ben thank you for that update over in in Westminster. It is pretty clear that
the EU made concessions with that Windsor framework that was announced yesterday
concessions that were not available when the Northern Ireland Protocol was
originally negotiated. Now whether those concessions came because the UK
government had played hardball and threatened to unilaterally rip up the
protocol or whether they came because the EU just trusted Rishi Sunak more than
his predecessors well concessions came. So in light of the new UK EU love-in is
it worth looking at other areas where Brexit could be improved tidied up or
refined? Hilary Benn is Labour MP he was chair of Parliament's Brexit Select
Committee. Hilary Benn thanks for for joining us. Afternoon Evan. As you look at
it now I know that you'll be glad that this this agreement has been made this
Windsor framework has been agreed but what would be next on your list that you
think now in this if you like more cooperative tone that could be next achieved?
Well the deal is very significant both and above all for Northern Ireland but
because there was no chance of moving on to talking about other things until
this obstacle had been overcome and I hope very much that the the DUP will
support it so PowerShare can get up and running. Look we've left the European
Union and therefore there's a new question that we face what kind of
relationship are we going to have with our nearest neighbours biggest trading
partners and political allies and as we're beginning to understand just how the
Brexit trade deal is adversely affecting the British economy it was very
significant in November last year when Jeremy Hunt acknowledged that there were
problems that was the first time in six years any Conservative had suggested
that the deal with the EU was anything other than perfect. So where would I
start? I begin with performing artists musicians sound and lighting engineers.
Right now this has been a big issue for them because they say they can't make
convenient trips to play in on the continent because there are customs
regulations about their instruments and visa requirements for the work. Yeah and
cabotage to do with trucks which says you can your truck can stop at I think
three locations and then if you want to go on a multi-city tour you've got to
transfer all your stuff into a another truck that's registered in the EU. I mean
this is one of our great success stories one of our great export industries as a
country and we've made it more difficult for them to tour in Europe and
Europeans would like to come and tour with us and this was debated during the
negotiations and both sides blamed each other for the failure to do a deal but
let's just sort this out so that our wonderful musicians and singers can tour
many cities they like in Europe without all of this bureaucracy and wonderful
European singers and musicians can come and perform here in Britain and I would
have thought that would be relatively easy with the right will to tick off. That
would be number one if you like it's a fairly it applies to fairly few people
but would make a very helpful difference to their trade with the EU. Think of
bigger ones though are there things that you think Britain maybe didn't ask for
that things that we didn't ask for that we might have asked for if we thought we
would have got it? Well we didn't ask for example for an agreement on security
foreign policy cooperation I mean I was terribly surprised when the government
said we don't want this because as Ukraine has demonstrated we absolutely have a
shared interest as the United Kingdom with our European allies are working
together to support Ukraine in resisting the Russian invasion and you'll have
seen that David Lamy in his speech at Chatham House recently said that's one of
the priorities for an incoming government if we win the election. We have
cooperated anyway on Ukraine. Yes we have but I think a more formalized
voluntary cooperation framework which would be a good thing a veterinary
agreement. Ah now this okay this one would allow pet passports for those who
take their dog. Yeah but also the the the export and import of food and agri-
food products because the the standoff over this is the EU says sure we'll have
a veterinary agreement but it's got to be dynamic alignment that dreadful phrase
which means every time we change the rules you have to change them in Britain
and that has been an issue for Northern Ireland and the EU conceded at the
Stormont break which is a very very significant step. The UK says well why don't
we have mutual recognition because broadly speaking our standards are the same
as they were when we're in the EU and this does raise Evan a point about
divergence because there's been a lot of talk having left the European Union
well now we can diverge on a whole host of things and the EU retained law bill
is trying to force ministers to think about that but in practice we've diverged
on very very few matters and the EU does have a mutual recognition agreement a
veterinary agreement with New Zealand so it shows that they can't be opposed to
the principle that that is an example sorry I have to cut you off because we
need to move on but that that is an example of one that would be on your list
and just in in a sentence do you think Labour have been quite clear if we were
in government we wouldn't be re-entering the single market let alone the EU
itself do you think Labour will pursue a kind of a list a shopping list of this
kind yes I do and I think in the process we will be building a framework for a
new relationship and when we review the trade and cooperation agreement in 2025
this can form part of it Hilary Benn thanks for joining us 17 minutes past five
let's just get a quick look at some some other headlines here's Tina England has
recorded its first increase in fuel poverty for 13 years because of rising bills
the number of struggling households went up slightly to nearly 3.3 million the
Chinese social media company TikTok has accused Washington of abusing the
concept of national security after the White House ordered US government
agencies to wipe the app from federal devices and the BBC is allowing commercial
and community venues to screen the king's coronation for free even if they don't
have a tv license it's suspending the need for one during the coronation weekend
in May thank you Tina well let's go back to our top story the missing baby of
Constance Martin and her partner Mark Gordon two-month-old baby we heard from
the police at that press conference the BBC's Nick Johnson is in Brighton for us
and Nick give us a little more of what the police have said about their search
and their fears for that baby a very somber but but a positive note I think from
that press conference is fair to say officers saying that the temperature here
is dropping that that baby has not received any medical attention since since it
was born at the beginning of January and they have used this phrase a few times
today and that is time is against them um for for the cold weather and for the
medical condition of the baby however they have said a number of times as well
that they remain focused and they want to find this baby safe and well now the
area that they're conducting their search in is a very wooded one to the extreme
north of Brighton on one side of the search area where I am now there's a huge
undulating allotment and on the other side a nature reserve and a golf course so
police have been saying that this is a significant area actually more than 200
officers from both the Metropolitan Police and Sussex Police involved in this
search from last night into today and they say that that wooded area that the
nature reserve on the golf course is it's about 91 square miles that these
police officers are having to cover now having said that they don't know for
sure that the baby will be found here when they were updating journalists a
little earlier this afternoon they said they're not ruling out the possibility
that that the couple have a contact that might be harboring the baby but again
officers have said this police operation now is all about that baby they have
arrested Constance Martin and Mark Gordon last night they arrested them on on
suspicion of child neglect now they've been further arrested on suspicion of
gross negligence manslaughter. Nick thank you thank you for that update. Nigeria
had an election on Saturday it still doesn't know for sure who won at the moment
it looks like Bolotin Ubu will become president from the ruling party but the
two main opponents have called for the presidential race to be rerun. Julius
Obure chairs Nigeria's Labour Party. This election is not free fair and credible
it's clear to all Nigerians that this election is already compromised and
therefore if that is the wishes and aspirations of every Nigerian and is the
general opinion the best thing to do is for us to correct it and get it right.
Well Manny Jones is the BBC's West Africa correspondent and is in Lagos and it's
not just the Labour Party saying that other opposition candidates are saying
that that presidential election needs to be rerun Julian. Manny. Yeah absolutely
yeah the People's Democratic Party which is the other main opposition party and
is currently in second place in the count has also said they want the elections
to be rerun they haven't actually given any evidence specific evidence as to why
they think this needs to happen but they say they have evidence in their
possession that this new voting electronic voting system that's been used for
the very first time at a national level in this election they say they have
evidence that it hasn't worked that there's lots of mistakes with it and for
that reason they think the election should run again. Now the election is run by
an elections commission electoral commission and what are they saying about
these charges that it's it's not been it's been rigged? So they haven't actually
specifically addressed the latest requirements by the opposition parties that it
be rerun but yesterday when they started floating around the idea that there was
a fault with the electronic system they said they stood by it at the head of the
electoral commission he has said he stood by the results he was confident that
they were accurate and that he would continue with the count and at the moment
they're doing it they're currently counting giving out results for some of the
states coming out so it seems like they're continuing business as usual and
encouraging the opposition parties to take it to the courts if they disagree
with the final results. The public must be a bit suspicious or just a bit
worried because it's taken awfully long time for the results to be counted.
Absolutely I mean it's been a marathon it's been a marathon we've been at it
since Saturday just waiting for these results to come out and that of course has
fuelled lots of suspicion here people on social media and on the streets of
Lagos I mean we've been kind of crisscrossing the city today speaking to people
there's lots of anger they're asking why it's taking so long for results to come
out therefore this new electronic system meant that they would know who their
president would be on Monday it's now Tuesday very unlikely we'll get a result
today probably more likely tomorrow morning so lots of people feel very
suspicious and they're accusing the electoral commission of colluding with the
ruling party to break the vote now that's something the head of the commission
has denied but it's it's an accusation that's very much out there now all right
Manny Jones in Lagos thank you for that the European Parliament today added
itself to the list of state organisations in the west banning TikTok from staff
phones in fact and private phones of anyone with parliament email installed on
them TikTok is Chinese owned and the measure is being taken on security ground
now it's not just the European Parliament yesterday the White House gave
government agencies 30 days in the US to ensure they don't have TikTok on
federal devices and systems China has accused the US of overreacting but over
here we have a science innovation and technology secretary now it's Michelle
Donilon and she has said in an interview with Politico that she's not following
the lead from those others Zoe Kleinman is our technology editor so Zoe it is
turning into quite a wave of governments now saying do not have TikTok on your
phone if you have a government job I think what's really interesting about this
is you know at the heart of it it's all about who owns TikTok it's owned by
ByteDance which is a Chinese company and there's been lots of concern about how
much data is being harvested by TikTok while people are using it there's 3.5
billion downloads around the world apparently so lots and lots of people using
it and what TikTok says and actually has been backed up independently is that
it's not really collecting any more data than any of the other social networks
are which is kind of true it's things like your location the device you're using
what other apps on those device you know it's all been used to basically sell
ads to you and that is true that the other social networks do exactly the same
thing the difference is of course they're all US owned and there's a lot less
suspicion and scrutiny I suppose about what the US companies are doing versus
what this Chinese company is doing even though ByteDance insists that its TikTok
offering around the world is completely separate from its Chinese arm the data
is stored in US and Singapore it's not stored in China and it says it has it is
under no obligation to collaborate with the Chinese government but there is a
law saying any Chinese company does have to collaborate with the government if
asked. Now Britain is something of an outlier now it seems Michelle Donnellan
saying no we don't need to do that we believe in personal choice it's up to
individuals whether they want to share their data with TikTok. Yeah and I think
you know the point is that a lot of this concern is around but there's not a lot
of evidence there's a couple of things that I think have raised big red flags
number one there were a small number of journalists last year that TikTok
admitted their data had been accessed by a couple of employees in Beijing and
they said it was a mistake and that those employees had been sacked and there
was another incident where a US user had tried to upload a video which was
critical of the Chinese government in America and the video was taken down and
again ByteDance apologized and re-estated it but I suppose if you could look at
that and say well there you are you know there is a hand on the shoulder from
China there are two examples of it directly kind of intervening in a
jurisdiction that is not anywhere near it that was happening in America the
journalists were American a couple were British as well but other than that
there isn't really a great deal of solid evidence to suggest that that China is
taking any of this data or indeed storing it or using it in a nefarious way. All
right Zoe thanks for that Zoe Kleinman BBC technology editor. For many folks
2020 was the year of cancelled holidays thanks to Covid often vouchers or
credits were offered by travel companies and airlines rather than actual refunds
of money and this didn't always please customers one decided to take matters
into her own hands Jenny Barber was refused a refund by British Airways took
them to the to court where she represented herself armed with an A-level in law
and she's won and she joins us now well Jenny first of all just tell us about
your flights and what actually happened what you were what you're in litigation
over. So in January of 2020 I booked two flights to Japan then obviously Covid
hit and it became apparent that travel would not necessarily be easy but one day
Japan closed its borders completely and then literally the next day it became
illegal for us to even leave our own homes without an essential reason let alone
travel abroad. So BA cancelled the flights and gave you what a credit to book
another one later? Kind of I actually I had a non-choice I could either wait to
see whether my flight left without me or I could accept a travel voucher so I
actually did request that travel voucher from British Airways at the time. Right
and then you you're feeling cross so you basically thought I'm going to take
them to court over this I want a refund. Pretty much yeah I it just didn't sit
right with me you know I thought if it's illegal for us to go abroad why was
requesting a travel voucher my only option you know why does my money have to
sit with them when it wasn't my fault that I couldn't travel so I tried for a
year to I definitely hounded them to try and get a refund right down to offering
them a non-disclosure agreement if they would just give me my refund and of
course they actually responded by blocking my email address. So interesting I
mean there might be a good reason for them not giving refunds which was they
didn't have the money in the bank to give everyone refunds they rely on the next
passenger's fares to pay the last passenger's refund and there were no next
passengers in the queue and they just didn't it would have just been putting
them into into insolvency. Yes I think you know it was a very there must have
been a bright spark in BA who said oh you know all of these cancelled flights
will leave us with no money how about we persuade people to take travel vouchers
and then you know our capital will be safe which you know is a smart business
decision that's fine but it's depriving consumers of their rights in law. And
you had an A-level in law and it was it was it that that animated you to
actually go to court? A little bit I actually got my A-level 19 years ago so it
was a long time ago but I really enjoyed the subject at the time and I thought
do you know what I'm just gonna toddle on down to my local library and see
whether I can find anything to support you know how frustrated I was feeling and
you know I did I found something that I could use in court. Right and and and so
just tell us about the legal grounds on which you you finally prevailed. So I
used the Law Reform Frustration of Contracts Act 1943 which I know right back to
43 which states that if after a contract has been made performance of that
contract becomes illegal the contract is null and void and that's exactly what
happened you know to a lot of us during Covid we were not able to fulfill our
end of the contract and get on these flights. So at that point British Airways
should have been offering people the chance to request a refund up front which
you know as we know is not what happened which is why so many of us ended up
with a voucher. Well there you have it the Law Reform Frustrated Contracts Act
1943 was a good one for for you to know Jenny thanks so much. Jenny Barber there
who went to court and won against British Airways. Four months ago a 24 year old
professional rugby union player called Levi Davis vanished without trace in
Barcelona. The former X Factor star was on the brink of a new career as a singer
and voicemails he left for a close friend in the hours leading up to his
disappearance suggest he was in good spirits. He hasn't been seen or heard from
since. Phylon 4 traces the last known movements of Levi and hears from the
friends and family who are struggling to understand what has happened to him.
That's Phylon 4 looking for Levi with me Rachel Stonehouse tonight at eight.
It's 28 minutes to six now you're listening to PM we'll have a summary of the
news from Tina Ritchie. A couple who went missing with their newborn baby
several weeks ago and were arrested in Brighton yesterday are now being
questioned on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. A search covering more
than 90 square miles is continuing for the baby in the Sussex Downs. Police say
they're concerned about very cold conditions in the area and accept the child
may have come to harm. While we've been on air Ritchie Sunak has started
addressing backbench Conservative MPs as he tries to shore up support for
revised post-Brexit trading rules in Northern Ireland. Earlier the Prime
Minister held talks with the main political parties in Belfast making the case
for the agreements which he said marked a huge step forward. The Democratic
Unionists whose backing is crucial to reviving power sharing at Stormont said
they needed more time to look through the detail. An inquest has heard that the
husband of Epsom College's head teacher died of a shotgun wound to the head.
George Patterson is thought to have killed his wife Emma and their seven-year-
old daughter Letty before turning the weapon on himself early this month. All
three were found dead on the college grounds. Plans have been announced to shut
two depots used by the retailer Argos in the next three years which could affect
more than 1,400 jobs. Sainsbury's which owns Argos argued the closures in
Basildon in Essex and Hayward in Greater Manchester would make the business more
efficient. Unions said there was no economic justification for the move. In
Nigeria three of the country's opposition parties have called for the results of
last weekend's general election to be annulled because of concerns about
manipulation. The governing party's candidate Bola Tonobu is currently in the
lead with some votes yet to be declared. The Nigerian electoral commission said
the opposition should take any complaints to court. And the Canadian singer The
Weeknd has become the first artist to reach 100 million monthly listeners on the
music streaming service Spotify. He already had its most popular song Blinding
Lights which has been played more than 3.4 billion times. Good one, thank you
Tina. Now the Windsor Framework set out with a great deal of fanfare yesterday
as being posited as a reset moment in UK-EU relations. But as much as anything,
to many it looks like a reset for the Conservative Party. A break with the Boris
Johnson era, less conflict, fewer threats, more pragmatism, more results
focused. Rishi Sunak definitely different in tone and approach to Boris Johnson.
Does that move any political dials? We'll hear from a Conservative pollster,
Lord Hayward, shortly. But first let's talk to two Conservative Party activists.
Stephen James is Folkestone and Hythe Conservative Association chairman. Daphne
Bagshaw is chair of the Wealdon Conservative Association in Sussex. And Daphne,
I know you were a Rishi supporter. Yes I was. Are you proud of what your man has
done? Yes, I am very proud of it. I think he's achieved an enormous amount and
he deserves great credit, which to be fair, he is being given from all quarters.
So I'm very pleased about it. And others in the Wealdon Conservative Association
are saying, yeah, this is good, this is the right thing. They're not saying it's
another sellout to Brussels? Well, I can't speak for my association. I can only
speak for myself. But I will say that those people to whom I have spoken within
the association are very positive. I think he has created a positive mood. And
that is both because of what he's done, but it's also because of the way he has
done it. It's much more productive to be like this than to be constantly
aggressive. Right. Stephen, what do you make of where your party has arrived in
the last 24 hours? Look, I'm always looking for the blue skies. And I think
there's some really positive news in here that we're going to be able to
hopefully move forward. But as with all things, the devil is in the detail. And
I think yesterday's celebrations are going to quickly turn into people pouring
over the text and looking for meaning where there is meaning and where there
possibly isn't. But your party, Stephen, can you afford to spend another 18
months arguing about Brexit? No, absolutely not. So don't you just have to take
it? You just have to call it a victory and move on, don't you? You have no
choice at this point. Yeah, absolutely. Because I actually think the real
problems in front of us as a party are those real philosophical questions. What
type of party are we? Are we a high tax party? Are we a big state party? Who are
we? And I think at the minute, a lot of our members are maybe a little bit
confused because we all join because we want a smaller state. We want lower
taxes and a more efficient government. But we're not getting that at the moment.
So that's where the real juxtaposition is amongst my members. Daphne, is this
the end of the Boris Johnson Conservative Party? Well, I don't know that it's
the end of it because we are one party. I do agree with Stephen, you know, that
we need to progress as a party, though. But I think on the whole, we will. And
he's talking about lower tax. Well, we can have lower tax when we brought
inflation under control. And I think that Rishi is doing that as well. So I have
tremendous faith in him. And so far he has delivered. Yeah, but tell me about
Daphne. Talk about Boris Johnson. I know we spent years talking about Boris
Johnson and you want to talk about Rishi Sunak. Tell us about your opinion of
Boris Johnson. Is he now on the sidelines? Well, I wouldn't say on the sidelines
because he's an ex-prime minister with tremendous support. But I will say he
doesn't have tremendous support from me. So that makes it quite difficult for
me. Many of my members feel more favourably towards him than I do. I am glad
that he has been replaced by Rishi Sunak, but I don't speak for everybody.
Nobody speaks for everybody. All right, Stephen, do you think the Boris Johnson
holdover, so many conservative activists, is now going to be broken by the new
prime minister having snotched up something of his own? Look, absolutely not.
Boris Johnson is a tour de force. And this agreement that Rishi has got is built
on the back of previous prime ministers as well. And we need to show our support
and our favour for them too. Boris Johnson is going to be a shadow, I think,
looming over our party for many months and years to come because of simply who
he is. He's bombastic, he's enthusiastic and most people, they just want hope
and they want some aspiration. They want to be able to think about our country
and think about our place in the world. Maybe they want results, Stephen, and he
hadn't sorted this protocol bid out. He said he had achieved it all before the
last election, but actually there was this unfinished business, wasn't there,
which Rishi Sunak has had to pick up? Look, but also, you know, Rishi Sunak was
also in Boris Johnson's government as the number two. You know, if he had these
great ideas at that time, why wasn't he sharing them? And, you know, they were
all part of a team. And as a party, we need to pull together, absolutely, and I
support Rishi and what he's trying to achieve because I think we do need to move
forward with Northern Ireland. But ultimately, what I'm looking at here down in
Folkestone isn't in Northern Ireland. It's, you know, it's in Folkestone. It's
in front of my members. Just in a word, and a word each, does Boris Johnson need
to come out and say, we support, I support this, this is a great deal and
Rishi's achieved something? Do you think so, Daphne, just in a sentence or two?
Yes, I do think so. And I don't agree that we as conservatives just need to look
at our local patch. I care about Northern Ireland and I'm delighted for those
people there that their life will be so much easier when all these restrictions
and trading problems are removed. Good luck to Rishi. You're very consistent in
your messaging, Daphne. Good politics. Stephen, what about you? Does Boris
Johnson need to say something supportive now? I think he will. And he'll be
waiting for the right time. I think you've obviously got the backbenchers now
meeting and, you know, he'll gauge the feeling and, you know, we'll... And then
decide what he thinks? Yeah, absolutely. And I think he'll support. Stephen,
Stephen James, Folkestone & Hythe, Daphne Bagshaw from the Wyldon Conservative
Association. Thanks both very much. Well, I asked, does it move any political
dials? It was a question I put to Lord Haywood, Robert Haywood, a conservative
peer and a strategist. And I asked whether he thought yesterday's deal would
bring about an instant poll boost for Rishi Sunak. Not automatically, no. It
gives a sense of direction, which the Tories have been lacking for a fair period
of time. But to get a poll bounce, it's just not one day and one event. People
don't change their political views just because of that. The government will
have to deliver on questions like small boats, the cost of living and nurses'
strike. If they can deliver on some of those, then you begin to see a poll
bounce. There may be a slightly higher respect for Rishi Sunak, but nothing more
immediately. Do you think, though, it is an important moment for the
Conservative Party that it, if you like, cements Rishi Sunak's way of governing
very much in contrast to the way it has been governing over the last few years?
I think psychologically, yes, there's no question. It is key. The atmosphere has
changed towards both the Conservative Party and to Rishi. What about this idea
that Boris Johnson's moment has passed now, that the party will move on, and
that this is the point at which the party sees there's another way we govern,
and we can't go back to what was before? I wouldn't be certain of that. Boris
has the capacity to bounce back in any number of different ways. And equally,
the Conservative Party has been at war for a fair number of years. So peace
doesn't break out in a day. So there will be a need for clarity, progress on a
number of issues for people to stop the circular firing squad, which the Tory
party has seen for such a long time. But at least now, there is the opportunity
to build on something so that they don't continue to be at war. I mean, is it
your view that the best hope for the party is they rally around this and unite
around it? But another 18 months of arguing about this and other aspects of
Brexit, for example, will damage them electorally. I think the rallying round
started last year when Rishi became Prime Minister. It was notable that a number
of people who'd previously been openly critical of other people, they were
supporters of Boris or Liz Truss, suddenly decided that it was about time they
shut up. So what used to be a complete wing of the Conservative Party in the
form of the ERG is now relatively small groups, relatively. So it's not started
yesterday. It started a while back, but it needs to continue. Otherwise, we're
not going to see the opportunity either at the local elections or a general
election for Conservatives to make progress. Next event, though, we should just
look forward to the budget. March the 15th. Jeremy Hunt is going to stand up.
He's under pressure to give tax cuts on the one hand. Others say you've just got
to look after the government's finances. You mustn't splash the cash. I don't
know whether the politics of the Windsor framework affects the politics of the
budget as Jeremy Hunt sits down and finishes that. I think it does, because
given the success of yesterday, there's more room, slightly more room for Jeremy
Hunt to say, steady as we go, give us time. We're not going to do everything at
the moment. But it is just that extra bit of wiggle room that is afforded to the
Chancellor under these circumstances. But interestingly enough, I think that
isn't the next political event. My understanding is that the Prime Minister is
due to meet President Macron next week, and that again will be judged as a major
event. Is this an indication that the Prime Minister can make progress with
European leaders, somebody who was described as a foe by Liz Truss only a few
months ago? So there's a series of events, not just the high profile ones, that
could cause problems, but also provide the government and the Prime Minister
with opportunities. Robert Hayward, Lord Hayward there on the political
aftermath of the Windsor framework. North Korea seems to be dealing with serious
food shortages at the moment. One monitoring group, 38 North, thinks the
shortages are the worst since the 1990s famine that killed hundreds of thousands
or more in the country. Martin Williams is from that group. He's a senior fellow
at the Stimson Centre based in the USA. Martin, food is a problem in North
Korea, you know, almost regularly, isn't it, we should say? Yeah, it's a problem
that comes up every year in the country. It's unable to even provide basic
nutrition for most of its people. The government itself doesn't release a lot of
figures, but the World Food Programme has been in, and they estimate that around
40% of the population, over 10 million people, are undernourished and require
humanitarian resistance. So it's an ongoing problem. But this year it does seem
to be very much more serious than usual. Yeah, I mean everything was, you know,
looking okay until a few weeks ago when the North Koreans announced that they
were going to have a large political meeting, a plenary meeting of the Workers'
Party, which is the party that runs the country. These meetings don't happen
very often, but the last one was only two months ago, so it's quite unusual for
them to have one so fast. And they pretty quickly said that the theme of this
meeting was going to be agriculture, and that meeting in fact started a couple
of days ago. Right, and the agriculture is, it's essentially collective
agriculture, that's the way it's run in North Korea, as you'd expect presumably.
Yeah, collective agriculture, a lot of the things that are grown will go into a
central distribution system, so you know, farmers don't get to keep a lot of the
crops that they grow themselves. But that system itself has also been falling
down over the last few years. Bribery has become more rampant as the systems
have fallen down, and the food distribution system is a complete mess of the
country, which also exacerbates the problems that they're having due to things
like poor weather and lack of good fertilizers, and even farming equipment. A
lot of North Korean farming is still done with hand carts or with oxes and
things like that, not even tractors. So the North Korean agricultural sector
faces so many problems. What are people actually eating? What does an evening
meal in North Korea for a typical citizen consist of? Presumably they're not
eating meat every night, I mean, not remotely. No, no. North Korea is a sort of
country where the difference between cities and rural areas is very large as
well. So the evening meal is going to differ depending on where you are. Rice is
one of the staples, but also, you know, other vegetables, meat is something
that, and fruit as well, is something that's very rare. And as you get into the
countryside as well, you know, an evening meal might be something you have, but
lunch might be something you don't have because people aren't necessarily even
eating three meals a day. I mentioned earlier the World Food Programme
statistics. They have particularly said this is a problem for young children,
pregnant women, and breastfeeding mothers. Something like one in five children
in North Korea is stunted, which gives you an idea of the sort of scale of this
problem. There were some horrific accounts of life in North Korea during the
famine in the 1990s. I mean, it was a really very, very serious famine. I mean,
people were really scratching around to eat anything, grass, boiling it in
water, whatever. Yeah, grass, tree bark, the kind of things that, you know, it's
difficult, I think, for us to imagine the the desperation from the hunger that
led them to do things like that. We don't see North Korea at the moment as being
quite that desperate, but things could get bad. We think that this meeting
that's going on at the moment is going to try to solve some problems that might
be coming up this year, and then also, you know, try to put in some longer-term
solutions. But with everything in North Korea, you know, there's a lack of
electricity, a lack of money, a lack of technology. It's difficult to see them
solving this. It's extraordinary though, it's launching ballistic missiles and
has nuclear weapons. I mean, it's just sort of extraordinary contrast. Yeah,
exactly. That's where a lot of the state's money, a lot of the state's attention
goes, is in developing nuclear weapons. This year they've also said they're
going to launch satellites, and that's, you know, one of the things that the
North Korean people suffer from. It's the people that are the ones that suffer.
Martin Williams from 38 North and the Stimson Centre. Thanks both. Thank you
very much indeed. 11 minutes to six. Let's have a last look at some other
headlines. Here's Tina. The number of people sleeping rough in England rose by
more than a quarter last year compared with 2021. More than 3,000 people slept
outside on a single night in autumn. The RMT union has announced a strike on the
London Underground next month. They'll join Aslef union members walking out on
budget day the 15th of March. New technology has been developed to help children
living with a rare genetic condition. The smart suit helps people with muscular
dystrophy maintain the use of their arms even as their muscles weaken. Thanks
Tina. If you have a feeling that government doesn't work very well, you may be
interested in a new commission being launched by the Institute for Government.
I'll read some of the blurb because the commission on the centre of government
is being launched to examine why successive prime ministers have found that
number 10 at the cabinet office and HM Treasury do not help and sometimes hinder
the delivery of their priorities. So this isn't just railing at the elected
politicians for doing things wrong. It's about how government works or doesn't
work. Now PM is going to follow this commission with a keen eye mainly because
it matters a lot but the working of government is not one of those topics that
gets much attention is it? Well the commission is led by Hannah White, director
of the Institute for Government. Sir Anthony Seldon is her deputy and among the
commissioners is Baroness Morgan, Sally Morgan, who was chair of Ofsted and
worked with Tony Blair in number 10. And I spoke to Sally Morgan and Hannah
White and to kick us off I asked Hannah White what they were looking at. What we
want to do is really focus on the centre of government by which we mean number
10, the cabinet office and the treasury. And our question is, you know, the
centre can work well as we've just seen with the Windsor framework, you know, or
the integrated review or the COVID task force. There are instances of the centre
of government working well but too often we think it doesn't deliver for a prime
minister. A prime minister finds that, you know, the handles that they try to
pull at the centre of government turn out to be made of rubber and they, you
know, they can't deliver on their priorities. And we want to ask the question
why is that and how could things work better? Right and Sally you have worked in
Downing Street, you've been there. Yeah, eight years. Give us an example of
something where there was a frustration that you were pulling these rubber
handles and finding they weren't controlling anything. Oh, I think across public
sector reform really. I mean, I think when you first go into government, you
know, you pass your laws and or you have your policy papers and you think well
fine, so things are going to happen now and you realise that not very much does.
And so as Hannah says, the big gap, frankly, is between policy stroke, the law
and implementation, particularly on the ground and in a sustained way to get the
change. So whether it was educational health, we did face pretty big
frustrations about the slowness of delivery or in some cases, just the non-
delivery really of what we thought was happening. There are those, Hannah, who
think the non-delivery or the slow delivery is part of the system. It's a
feature, not a problem. It's what stops us doing crazy, crazy things sometimes.
Sometimes, you know, that's absolutely right. There's a need to pause and
reflect and to make sure that policy is made thoughtfully and the implementation
of policy is really thought through. But too much of the time, you know, there
just is number 10 and the Cabinet Office and the Treasury just don't work well
enough together to make things that ought to happen and that are decided and
have been thought through really happen as a Prime Minister would wish them to.
Sally, is this about the politicians being not very good or about the civil
servants not being very good? Or do you see this as just working out how all of
these things fit together? I think it's everybody. I mean, I think you've got to
have real clarity of what it is you're trying to do and particularly what your
priorities are. And there's a tendency to try and do too much. There's a
tendency to, I think, try and pass too many laws properly. When I think back in
the criminal justice system, I think we passed a heck of a lot of laws that
probably didn't make very much difference. And we would have been better
focusing on the tough stuff on the ground. But I also think there is, the civil
service is brilliant at making policy and indeed, giving words of wisdom and
holding you back sometimes. So I think that is true. But there is a real
weakness in terms of outside experience. There's not sufficient movement between
the civil service and outside, whether that's the private sector or public
services, for instance. And from my point of view, one of the things I really
hope we explore is how we get more movement between government and outside and
back into government, both between politicians and civil service, but the world
outside, because I think that's what we need. Baroness Sally Morgan and Hannah
White of the Institute for Government, and we will be following that committee
and that commission as it does its work. Now to finish, a job ad for a personal
household assistant has raised eyebrows in New York. The family looking for a
new member of staff are from the world of art. They're obviously very rich.
They're also quite particular. The ad for a household helper ran to four pages,
and I'll read you some bits here. Serve as the central point of communication to
household staff, including chefs, nannies, landscapers, dog walkers,
housekeeper, contractors, building managers. Coordinate all cleaning repairs and
guest stays. Manage dog systems, potty breaks, food, daycare, dog walkers, vet
appointment, and help studio assistant with in-studio cats. Organise closet
systems. Assist in content creation for social media. Manage all medical need
and requests. That's just a quarter of it. Well, it was all spotted and written
about in a blog called Filthy Dreams, and the ad has now been taken down, but it
made us wonder whether that was typical for those working in these modern
household appointments. Sadie Foster is the vice president of the Association of
Celebrity Assistants and has experience of working with high-profile rich folk.
And Sadie, thank you for joining us. We don't have long, but is that ad typical?
Is that what it's normally like? Yes, no, it is. It really is. I think
assistants are one of the industries where we are often overlooked of our
capabilities, and it is a real problem that we have in the industry that we
aren't financially valued of what we bring to the table. So, I saw the ad, I
laughed myself, and it's been really interesting seeing the reception from
others that don't actually have the insight to what we deal with. Yeah, I mean,
it was offering up to, at the top end, $95,000 a year. In New York, that doesn't
get you as much as it would in other parts of the US. But it really is a job for
a true professional because it would take a lot to organise your day around so
many tasks. Absolutely. And I think that that really is what separates those
working in the ultra-high net worth and high-profile world. I think working
within the ACA is we are a real elite group of assistants and we support each
other. But the role that it entails and the workload that comes with it is
exceptional. And if what we're doing is exceptional, that the salary should also
reflect that. We really do spin all the plates and wear all the hats. It's not
uncommon. I'm guessing when you've done this kind of work, you're always on
call, aren't you? Or do you get time off? Yeah, it's definitely a lifestyle, not
a career. You do it for the love. I love the challenge. I love being able to
achieve the impossible. But it has to come with boundaries, and it's down to the
individual on where they set those. But of course, we all have bills to pay,
Evan. So it does come with a line. On this one, it said there's two weeks
vacation built in. And I wonder whether that meant you're on vacation with them
rather than on your own. Well, there's always a grey area. So there are roles
where they do expect you to be on call and take your phone when you're on leave.
I've experienced that myself with my career experience. If there is an
emergency, it does normally fall on you. But there are great employers out
there. I don't want to tarnish the industry. There are great ones. But
unfortunately, sometimes it is the questionable ones that get the most coverage.
Well, Sadie, thanks for that. Sadie Foster from the Association of Celebrity
Assistants. There's a crisis in UK music education. In today's climate, there's
a lot less funding available to support many young musicians who would like to
pursue their interest. I'm Soweto Kinch, a musician myself. And in the new three
part series, I'll be finding out why the future of British music is under
threat. If you don't have adequate provision in our schools, that is going to
have an impact on the talent pipeline. And it is going to have an impact in
terms of the diversity of that talent pipeline. Is it in danger of becoming an
elitist occupation? Rethinking music on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds starts next
Tuesday morning at 11.30. I like that music in the background there. Let's get
some weather now. Susan Powell will give it to us. Susan. Evening, Evan. A big
area of high pressure sitting across the UK at the moment, and it ain't going
nowhere until at least the weekend. So there's plenty more dry weather to come.
There will be a lot of cloud hanging about. However, any changes in the next few
days will be pretty subtle, and they're most likely to be just in terms of our
wind direction. And it's whether we go from really a chilly north easterly,
which we've got at the moment, and it looks like we'll keep through Wednesday to
more of a northerly by the time we get to Friday and Saturday. To put a bit more
detail on what's going on underneath the high for everyone this evening, across
England and Wales, there's a lot of cloud around at the moment. There are also
some sharper showers just grazing southernmost counties of England, and they
will work their way along the south coast in the next few hours. Some of the
thicker cloud across the north east of England into the Midlands will continue
to produce some showery but mostly light outbreaks of rain. Any holes in the
cloud overnight, though? And the air is pretty cold. We could see some pockets
of frost developing. But as we look at Wednesday as a day overall, again, pretty
much dominated by cloud. For the lucky few, some breaks in the cloud across
England and Wales in the sunshine, we could get up to eight or nine degrees.
Very similar story for Scotland and Northern Ireland, but the breeze a little
lighter here. Looking at a frost more widely across Scotland overnight tonight.
More in the way of sunshine for Western Scotland tomorrow. A little bit of a
lighter wind. Highs again eight or nine, but feeling closer to five or six,
thanks to the wind. Thanks, Susan. That's it. Studio director, David Evans, and
our editor, Scott Adam.