TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-04-14H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Any.answers at bbc.co.uk. Lines open now. BBC News at one o'clock. This is
Charles Carroll. A senior Ukrainian official in the eastern city of Bakhmut says
that it's been cut off by Russian forces but has yet to fall to them. Unite has
defended its decision to press ahead with strikes by ambulance workers next week
when other unions have suspended the walkouts. And police in Australia say
they've seized cocaine equivalent to half the country's annual consumption of
the drug. The latest assessment by British military intelligence says the city
of Bakhmut in eastern Ukraine is under increasingly severe pressure from the
Russian army and the Wagner mercenary group. Intense fighting is said to be
taking place in and around the city. Our diplomatic correspondent James Landale
is monitoring developments from Kiev. For six months Russian forces have
struggled to seize Bakhmut. Thousands of their soldiers have died in the
process. But now their commanders seem growing in confidence. British military
officials said Ukrainian defenders were under increasingly severe pressure. They
said Russian soldiers and Wagner group mercenaries were making advances in the
northern suburbs. There were reports of Ukrainian troops destroying bridges and
digging trenches in western Bakhmut ahead of what the Institute for the Study of
War described as what could be a controlled fighting withdrawal. Alexander
Marchenko, the deputy mayor, told the BBC that Ukrainian forces still had
control of Bakhmut but said it was cut off with no communication and there was
fighting in the streets. It is very unsafe in the city and the entire population
that is staying there right now is living in the shelters. There is no water or
gas or electricity and we have given heaters to everybody who stays in the city
so that we can support the local population. Russia said its defence minister
Sergei Shoigu made a flying visit to eastern Ukraine to inspect troops at what
it called a forward command post. Seizing Bakhmut would be a rare victory for
him and the Kremlin but western analysts insist the city has little strategic
value and its capture would have come at a high and bloody cost for Russia.
Russia's veteran foreign minister Sergei Lavrov has been mocked at an
international conference while speaking about the war in Ukraine. He had been
asked a question by an audience member at the event in New Delhi about Moscow's
future energy strategy. The war which we are trying to stop and which was
launched against us using the Ukrainian people. Our international editor Jeremy
Bowen says Mr Lavrov would not have enjoyed the experience. For him, you know, a
man who has been in a very powerful position for a long time and stands on his
dignity, that would be a humiliating moment, no question about it, because he
was trying to say that, you know, square is round and white is black. While he
might have been ridiculed at that conference, around the world the message that
this is a really important thing and the world should oppose Russia has not got
through. The head of the United Nations nuclear watchdog says he's had
constructive meetings with Iranian officials during the first day of a visit to
Tehran. Rafael Grossi from the International Atomic Energy Agency travelled to
Iran after UN inspectors detected traces of uranium that had been enriched close
to the level needed to make a nuclear bomb. Tehran says it has restrictions on
enrichment but unintended levels of fluctuation may have occurred. Unite has
defended not joining other health unions in suspending strike action by
ambulance workers scheduled across England next week. Unison and the GMB called
off their walkouts after the government agreed to discuss pay for this year and
next, but Unite says it's planning to go ahead with regional strikes on Monday
and Wednesday. Oneke Sab is from the union and says they rejected the offer of
talks because they felt the government's expectations were unreasonable. They
have made clear that they will not talk about any permanent changes to pay as
far as the 2022 dispute is about. All they're willing to discuss is a non-
consolidated payment. It doesn't resolve the dispute. It's not going to resolve
the long-term problem in the NHS and you don't start negotiations like this. The
health secretary Steve Barkley has urged Unite to join the other unions at the
negotiating table. Sarah Gorton from Unison says while they do have some
concerns, any opportunity to pause strike action and take part in talks is a
good one. Critically, every single person taking strike action has wanted to get
into talks. Negotiation is about finding our way through these cracks. It's
emerged that the former health secretary Matt Hancock claimed that the eat out
to help out scheme during the Covid pandemic, which was promoted by the then
chancellor Rishi Sunak, helped to spread the virus. The latest leaked messages
obtained by the Daily Telegraph show that Mr Hancock said he'd kept it out of
the news, but it was serious. Labour's Jonathan Ashworth, who was shadow health
secretary at the time, has accused the government of a cover-up. Our political
correspondent Charlotte Rose reports. The eat out to help out scheme, which was
launched in August 2020, aimed to support food businesses by giving diners 50%
off their meal from Monday to Wednesday. The Treasury paid Â£840 million to fund
the programme to help firms bounce back after the first Covid lockdown. In
messages leaked to the Telegraph, Mr Hancock dubs the scheme eat out to help the
virus get about. He expressed concern to the cabinet secretary Simon Case that
it was causing problems in areas where the virus was prevalent and additional
government restrictions were in place. Mr Hancock now says the leaked
communications give a partial biased account and don't show what was being
discussed in official meetings. A government source said many European countries
experienced an uptick in infections at the same time as the UK, including those
without similar schemes. The European Union has announced a new scheme to
deliver aid to the conflict hit east of the Democratic Republic of Congo. A
statement says a humanitarian air bridge is to be set up to deliver medical and
food supplies to Goma. The city is home to more than 600,000 people and is close
to where the M23 rebel group has been carrying out attacks. Police in Australia
say they've made what's thought to be the country's biggest ever drugs bust. The
amount of cocaine seized in the joint operation with the United States is
equivalent to half the Australian annual consumption. From Sydney, here's Phil
Mercer. Australian police say the drugs were intercepted by US authorities off
the coast of South America in November. The haul of 2.4 tonnes of cocaine was
bound for Western Australia. Investigators substituted the illicit cargo with
fake drugs. The packages were dropped into the Indian Ocean 40 nautical miles
west of Perth and monitored by drones and helicopters. It's alleged a criminal
syndicate with links to a Mexican cartel used two boats to try to retrieve the
shipment. Twelve people have been arrested. A cross-channel ferry which suffered
a fire in its engine room yesterday afternoon has knocked in Calais after being
towed there overnight. The 94 passengers and 89 crew were then allowed to
disembark from the Isle of Innisfree. Its operator, Irish Ferries, said it would
carry out a full investigation and people due to take subsequent sailings would
be offered alternative travel arrangements. When our sport and Manchester City
are playing Newcastle United in the first of today's Premier League games in
Formula One, qualifying will begin later for the first race of the season in
Bahrain. With more on those and the rest of the sport, here's Sani Rudra-Vajila.
Only one place to start and that's with football as the Premier League champions
Manchester City host Newcastle United. It kicked off at 12.30. Phil Foden's
deflected effort after 15 minutes has put the hosts ahead 36 minutes on the
clock. It's Manchester City 1 Newcastle United 0. There's six other Premier
League games today. The leaders Arsenal are at home to struggling Bournemouth
and the Gunners manager Mikael Arteta wants more from his side despite starting
the day five points clear of Manchester City at the top. I think we can do
things much much better in many aspects of the game. We still have players with
immense growth potential individually and collectively and as a club as well. We
have still a lot of things that we can do much better and that's the end. We
have to be really seeking for that excellence and that perfectionism. In
athletics Great Britain's Laura Muir is aiming to keep up her exclusive record
of gold medals from the European Indoor Championships by winning the 1500
women's final in Istanbul today. Fellow Brits Ellie Baker and Katie Snowden are
also competing later this evening. Meanwhile the Olympic silver medalist and 800
meter European Indoors champion Keeley Hodgkinson will be competing in the 800
meter semi-finals today with hopes of making it through to the final to retain
her title. Today could be the start of a revolution for women's cricket as the
most lucrative tournament the women's game has ever seen starts in India this
afternoon. The WPL women's premier league sees five city teams competing across
22 days. England's Nat Siva Brunt's side for the Mumbai Indians for just over
300,000 pounds they face the Gujarat Giants in the opener. And in Formula One
third practice for the season opening Bahrain Grand Prix has finished. Fernando
Alonso for Aston Martin has topped the timesheets again having been fastest in
second practice. Red Bull's Max Verstappen was second with Sergio Perez third.
Britain's Lewis Hamilton finished fourth fastest qualifying for tomorrow's Grand
Prix starts at three this afternoon. Sanny Rudra Vajula. One of Hollywood's most
familiar supporting actors Tom Sizemore has died in hospital in California. He
was 61. His personal life was troubled. He had drug problems and served time in
prison for domestic violence. On screen he played hard-boiled characters in
crime dramas, war films and westerns. Among them True Romance, Wyatt Earp, Devil
in a Blue Dress and Heat. The headlines again. The deputy mayor of the eastern
Ukrainian city of Bakhmut says no building has been left untouched by the
Russian bombardment but the defenders are holding out. Unite has defended its
decision to press ahead with strikes by ambulance workers next week when other
unions have suspended their walkouts. And police in Australia say they've made
what's thought to be their biggest ever drug bust, cocaine equivalent to half
the country's annual consumption. BBC News. And the news was read by Charles
Carroll. On the subject of Ukraine, more than 110,000 Ukrainians have arrived in
the UK since the invasion last year. Later this afternoon we'll hear from one of
them, Olga Rybak, an English teacher trying to establish what she hopes is a
temporary life in rural Somerset. She tells us what it's been like for her and
asks what next for those refugees. We'll join her at half past three. On BBC
iPlayer. Step right in. Perfect timing. The east end is ever-changing. What is
this? Scooter. The order has entered the 1960s, barely eight years late. But the
midwives of Nenata's house are forever constant. You've a home here now and
purpose and people who love you. Call the midwife. We will be with you every
step of the way. Watch on BBC iPlayer. Now here on BBC Radio 4 it's time for any
questions. Here's Alex Forsyth. Hello and welcome to the Holbeck in Leeds, a
community venue run by volunteers which is thought to be one of the UK's oldest
working men's clubs. It's in a part of the city that was at the heart of the
industrial revolution, central in making Leeds the thriving West Yorkshire city
that it is today. On our panel we have Miriam Cates, the Conservative MP for
Penistone and Stocksbridge. Elected in December 2019, she's a member of the
Commons Education Select Committee and has become a prominent backbencher,
campaigning on issues including levelling up and online harms. Kim Ledbetter is
the Labour MP for Batley and Spen and she's lived and worked in her constituency
for most of her life. She was involved heavily with the Jo Cox Foundation which
was set up following the murder of her sister, the former MP for Kim's seat. She
was awarded an MBE for services to social cohesion and the community in Batley
and Spen. Wendy Chamberlain is the Liberal Democrat MP for North East Fife, her
party's chief whip and spokesperson for work and pensions. She has a degree in
English from Edinburgh University and before becoming a politician she worked
for 12 years as a police officer. And Lee Powell is the chief executive officer
of GMI Construction Group, a large construction company based in the Midlands
and north of England. Lee grew up in Leeds, he has qualifications in
construction from Leeds College of Building and on getting his current job he
said he wanted his company to be at the heart of plans to level up the UK.
Holbeck in Leeds, please welcome your Any Questions panel. APPLAUSE So let's get
going with our first tonight which comes from Jenny Parkinson. Hello Jenny.
Hello, what does the Windsor Framework mean for Yorkshire? Jenny thanks for your
question. The Windsor Framework, that is the latest iteration of the Brexit deal
which deals with post Brexit trading arrangements with Northern Ireland,
something that Rishi Sunak negotiated this week. So Jenny's question, what does
the Windsor Framework mean for Yorkshire? Miriam Cates. Thank you Jenny, great
question. I think the short answer is not a lot for Yorkshire specifically, but
an awful lot for the UK as a whole. And thinking back to 2019 when we were
campaigning in the general election, get Brexit done was the big slogan of
course and we quickly passed the withdrawal agreement and then had some more
painful negotiations. But I think many people in Yorkshire probably consider
that Brexit has been done, whether we've made the most of it yet is a different
question. But actually the situation in Northern Ireland has been very
difficult, very sticky, perhaps hasn't received attention across the country but
has been really, really important to get resolved. And I think the Prime
Minister has done a really good deal here, he's extracted some really good
concessions from the EU. Of course it's not perfect, of course not everybody's
going to agree with all of it. But I think it does allow us to move forward to
be able to say that Brexit is done and we can now focus on building our
relationship with the EU and taking advantage of those freedoms. Miriam, thank
you. Wendy Chamberlain. Well I think what's very interesting about the Windsor
framework is the fact that it's obviously a vast improvement on what was the
oven ready deal that the former Prime Minister Boris Johnson promised to deliver
in 2019. But really I think what we have to think about is the very serious
situation in Northern Ireland and the fragile piece that we saw shattered last
week by the attempted murder of a serving police officer. It's quite clear that
the protocol was not fit for Northern Ireland and I am pleased that we have got
a Prime Minister in place now who has done something about it. But this is
frankly a situation of the Conservative Party's own making and it has taken
until now to have somebody who is taking the situation in Northern Ireland
seriously. I think it's a much improved deal, Liberal Democrats will be looking
at it, we'll be working with our Alliance Party colleagues in Northern Ireland,
but I think it would be fair to say it's a better position than we've been in
previously. And do you think it will do much for Yorkshire? Well in terms of
Yorkshire, I think what we want to see is we want to see across the UK, we want
to actually improve our relationships with Europe regardless of where you were
previously. And so the fact that we're actually capable of having some grown-up
conversations now, I think that you've got to expect to see some benefit for the
whole of the UK as a part of that. Wendy, thank you. Kim Ledbetter? I think as
both Miriam and Wendy have said, I think this is a positive move, it's a
positive step forward. However, in terms of day-to-day life for most people in
Yorkshire, I don't think it will be a significant difference. I mean, what is a
very good thing is that now that we've actually got some movement on this issue,
the Government and the Prime Minister can start focusing on the issues that
matter to people in terms of the cost of living crisis, in terms of the NHS, in
terms of education, in terms of crime and antisocial behaviour. So it will
hopefully now enable them to move on and do other things. Setting aside the fact
that Rishi Sunak speaks to everyone like they're in primary school, I think
there's a whole, which I find quite amusing but also really annoying, that he's
doing this big thing in Parliament this week where he's telling us how fantastic
this deal is and Northern Ireland is now the world's most exciting economic
zone, but actually what he's doing is undoing the damage that the Tories have
done since Brexit. I can't say I've ever noticed that about Rishi Sunak, I
personally think he's an excellent communicator. But just to come back on the
points that Kim and Wendy made, of course it's been messy, of course it's been
difficult, and I think anyone who expected this to be easy was wrong. And if you
just think about Northern Ireland's history, its culture, the troubles we went
through, all the different things that Northern Ireland represents, it was never
going to be simple and actually to get to this point is a real achievement. I
mean not everyone thinks that, Boris Johnson said he'd find it very difficult to
vote for this. Yes, and the DUP have not yet said exactly what they think and
there will be a range of opinions, don't get me wrong, but I think it's
important to be able to have those policy disagreements whilst also hopefully
getting towards some sort of resolution. Miriam, thank you. A reminder of
Jenny's question, what does the Windsor framework mean for Yorkshire? Lee
Powell? Well I think that the Windsor framework overall I think has resolved
what looked like an impossible situation. You know everybody was looking at
Brexit and whether you vote for it or against it, you were looking at it
thinking how does this problem get resolved? And I think Rishi's been pretty
succinct and pretty good in actually resolving the Northern Ireland protocol and
getting something in place. And you know I always think that a complex situation
that when it gets resolved looks quite simple is usually a good and effective
resolution. And to have the green and the red lanes etc I think it's a good
resolution. What will it do for Yorkshire? I think I'm on board with some of the
other panels saying I don't really know what it will do for Yorkshire per se,
but for the country and being part of the UK I think it will finally put the
Brexit thing to bed and enable us to move forward. Lee, thank you. We got a
couple of questions on this. We got a couple of questions on this and I just
want to read another one that we were asked, something actually Kim that you
mentioned. So Des McClanahan said, on Tuesday Rishi Sunak boasted that by being
inside the EU single market Northern Ireland helped create the world's most
exciting economic zone. So can he now do the same for the rest of the UK? I mean
Lee... Lee, you did support Brexit. What do you make of that? I did. I mean I
was very marginal for a long time and I looked at it long and hard at the time
and I almost put my business head to one side because I knew that immediately
for business it wouldn't be a good thing. But I looked at it for the long-term
future of me, my family, my children and I actually thought that it would be the
right thing to do. And the reasons for that is because you know I looked at the
EU and I looked at places that sat outside of the EU, the likes of Norway that
had the oil, the likes of Switzerland that had the, and Geneva that had the
financial sector and I thought Great Britain had both of those and I thought
Great Britain can make this work outside of the EU. And now what do you think?
Well I think we've been waiting haven't we for the Northern Ireland Protocol to
be sorted out. I think there's a lot of infighting there's now between Boris and
Rishi. I actually think in the long term personally I think it will be a good
thing for Britain. I think Britain will become a manufacturing nation again and
will not rely upon European subsidies and European supply chains. What do you
make of that Wendy? Well I'm obviously sitting here in Leeds as a Scottish MP
and you know there's absolutely no doubt that I campaigned for Remain as an
activist then rather than an MP and also you know we know that Scotland as a
whole voted to Remain though I absolutely accept that it was an overall UK vote.
But I think you know what Lee has said there I think the real challenge is how
you reconcile for those areas who feel that they are going to be a competitive
disadvantage and you know there's absolutely no doubt that if you look at what
the SNP are saying for example they feel very much that Scotland is being put at
a disadvantage and so I think you know dare I say the Prime Minister in his
exuberance last earlier this week potentially got himself into a bit of trouble
because I do think it's difficult to reconcile that when Northern Ireland are
getting these different conditions what does that mean for the rest of us. I
think you have to keep at the forefront the particular political situation in
Northern Ireland. And the Lib Dems want a return to the single market but
there's no time frame on that. Well what I would say is well I'm a Liberal
Democrat I think we said bollocks to Brexit am I allowed to say that here? I
don't think there's any doubt in terms of what I stand for but I think what's
really important and this is where you know as I say and as Lee said you know
we've been chatting before we've come in here as a group of politicians and with
Lee as well and actually what's really important is that we improve our
relationships regardless of what you thought about leave or remain it's actually
about how do we rebuild those relationships with Europe no matter what the
future might have because that's actually the way to gain prosperity for
Yorkshire and beyond. Miriam on that point the question that I read from Des, is
the Rishi Sunak suggesting that Northern Ireland was in a good place because it
is in the single market? Well I think he was speaking specifically about
Northern Ireland and its specific political context so the difficulties
surrounding the Good Friday Agreement, the fact that it's the only part of the
UK with a land border with the EU, the fact that the terms of the agreement mean
that there can't be a hard border, all those factors, the fact that there is
already international involvement with Northern Ireland because of the Good
Friday Agreement so I think he was speaking specifically about Northern Ireland
that this is the best place for Northern Ireland to be. Kim? I'll just make
three very quick points, Lee as a businessman I'm surprised by your comments not
one single business in my constituency has told me that Brexit has had a
positive impact, not one single business. The second point I would make is that
when Rishi did this big thing about telling Northern Ireland how lucky they
were, did he think that England and Scotland and Wales weren't listening? Where
did he think we all were? You know was he whispering? So he thought no just you
guys have got it great don't worry about the others it doesn't matter. So would
you like to see the UK rejoin the single market because that isn't Labour's
policy? Labour's clear, we respect the result of the referendum and I make no
judgment on anyone what you vote in that referendum, I think there's a whole
piece of work to be done about what we were told and what the actual reality is
and I think for Miriam to say no one said it was going to be easy, that's
nonsense, they did say it was going to be easy, they said it was going to be an
oven ready deal, they said get Brexit done, it's simple. I think I said that we
shouldn't think it was going to be easy because it was very complex and I think
you know I had a similar view to Lee, I think long term we will be better off
out, that doesn't mean we feel like that yet but I think it's not just an
economic question, a lot of people voted for Brexit with their hearts because
they wanted control of our sovereignty, they didn't like the EU's model, they
didn't like how remote Brussels was, that is a big part of this, it's not only
an economic question, it's too early to tell on this, this is a democratic
question as well, that's why people voted for Brexit. Lee just briefly on the
point that Kim made about business. Yeah just a very brief one, I didn't say
that we've seen the positive benefits of Brexit to date, I said that I believe
that it will come to fruition and have positive benefits. Okay thank you all
very much. I suspect that some of you at home might have your views on this as
well, if you do we'd love to hear from you. The person you need to call is Anita
Arnand, the number you need is 03700 100 444 and lines open at 12.30pm on
Saturday for any answers. So we move on to our next which comes from Patrick
Moran. Hello Patrick. Hello. Was it wise for Kia Starmer to offer Partagate Pro
Chief a job as his Chief of Staff? Patrick thank you, you're talking there about
Sue Gray of course, the senior civil servant who carried out that investigation
into the so-called Partagate situation with gatherings in Downing Street, who
now has left her job in the civil service and has been offered a job as Kia
Starmer's Chief of Staff. Was that wise Kim Ledbetter? I think if, and it is an
if because there is a procedure to be followed, if we get Sue Gray coming over
as Kia's Chief of Staff I think that will be a fantastic appointment. She's
clearly got an excellent reputation for being a woman of integrity, she's got a
very good record within the civil service and I think what I'm finding quite
bizarre about this whole situation is that suddenly Boris Johnson and Jacob
Rees-Mogg who said that until 48 hours ago Sue Gray was a fantastic woman and
was the moral fibre of the nation and was fantastic at her job, suddenly they're
now trying to trash her and I think that's pretty disgusting actually. People
are allowed to change jobs and anything that happened with the Sue Gray report
and Partagate and all those other things that brought Boris Johnson's downfall
were his fault, they were not Sue Gray's fault, he did all that stuff, he was
involved in the Owen Paterson affair, he appointed Chris Pincher as Deputy Chief
Whip, his ethics advisor resigned, so all that kerfuffle that there was at that
time, Sue Gray did her job properly, the person who didn't do his job properly
it was Boris Johnson and she should be allowed to leave. Miriam Kate, some of
your colleagues, your Conservative colleagues have been pretty angry about this,
Kim says they're trashing Sue Gray, someone they've recently supported. Well I
don't think it's at all wise to trash Sue Gray, I think the question was, was it
wise for Keir Starmer to appoint her? As Kim said people are allowed to change
jobs, I think what maybe wasn't wise is to announce it before going through the
process that decides whether senior civil servants... To be fair to Keir
Starmer, I don't think he planned to. Oh I see, it was leaked, okay I didn't
realise that. I think someone found out. So I think it's really important, as
Kim said, there is now a process that senior civil servants have to go through
to determine whether they are allowed to take a different job and how long they
may have to wait to take it, so what kind of influence they had in the role
before, whether it's fair to take that to the next role, so we've got to wait
the outcome of that, it's only fair before we can comment, but no it's not right
to trash her reputation, but I do think there's a really important point about
the impartiality of the civil service, they must be impartial for our democracy
to work, that doesn't mean they can't have political views that they share in
private, of course not, but there has to be the semblance of and the reality of
impartiality in that post, that's what potentially is up for question here and
that's why this process is so important and must be allowed to go through to its
conclusion. Miriam, thank you, the process you're referring to is one of those
wonderful Westminster acronyms, it is the advisory committee on business
appointments and they're looking at this and they will issue advice, it could be
that Sue Gray should wait between three months and two years I do believe before
she takes up that post, but we're waiting to see what they say. Wendy
Chamberlain. Yeah and the ACOBA process, what's interesting about it is that it
is an advisory process, even the Prime Minister at the end of the day can't stop
this happening and the reason why we know it's an advisory process is because
there was a former foreign secretary called Boris Johnson who completely ignored
it when he left as being foreign secretary and took up some paid employment. So
I think that's the first element. But just to be clear, that isn't breaking any
rules, as you say this is an advisory process. It's not breaking any rules, it's
an advisory process. It's a sort of convention if you like. The former police
officer in me suggests that people follow the rules and follow the advice, I
have to say that. So I think there's that bit, so it's quite clear that whatever
ACOBA says, I think if I was Sue Gray and Keir Starmer I'd make sure that I was
following that process, but I think we have to be clear that what the Prime
Minister or the former Prime Minister, Boris Johnson is trying to do here is to
potentially undermine what is going on with the Privileges Committee just now.
And there's also just this bit for me that if Keir Starmer had secretly set up
Sue Gray, that kind of makes him a bit of a genius, doesn't it? So potentially
therefore I think that what has happened is this information has leaked sooner
than the Labour Party and Sue Gray have intended. It's important that process
and advice and guidance is followed and we'll see what happens with the
Privileges Committee. I suspect we might get a question about that as well. Well
you don't often hear a Liberal Democrat MP calling the Labour Party leader a
genius, but then anything can happen on any question. I said it might be if that
was the case. Might be a genius. The Privileges Committee of course is the
committee of MPs which is looking into the allegation that Boris Johnson
knowingly misled Parliament over the party-gate situation. Boris Johnson on
Friday did say that he hadn't. Anyway, back to the original question. Lee
Powell. As a non-political standpoint on this and just as a matter of principle,
I don't think it's correct. You know, as a company director and as a chief exec,
my contract says that I can't go work for any of the competition for a period of
time. And you know, just like a Member of Parliament, there is a certain period
of time, which I believe is two years before they can go into a conflicting
industry. And I think that should be brought to the front as well for civil
servants. I don't think it's right that somebody that has that intelligence and
that privileged information can lead a committee and then the next day go work
for the opposition. Came on that point. Yeah, but just to be clear, that isn't
what she's done. She wasn't working for the Conservative Party. She was an
independent civil servant and that's the whole idea. Now, again. Okay, thank you
all. If you want to have your say, the number you need on any answers 03700 100
444. Lines open 12.30pm on Saturday. Now, let's move on to our third, which
comes from Sharon Witton. Hello, Sharon. Hello. What have we learned since
lockdown? What have we learned since lockdown? Sharon, do you have any
particular reason or knowledge of this area? Any reason to be asking this
question? Yeah, I work with people with long COVID, so I see how the issues
remain. And you think they still do remain? They do, certainly. Sharon, thank
you very much for your question. What have we learned since lockdown? Wendy
Chamberlain. Thank you for that question, Sharon. I've got a friend suffering
from long COVID who has found out this week that she's going to lose her home.
She's going to lose her home because she's been out of work for such a period of
time. She no longer has sick pay, and therefore she can no longer pay her
mortgage. So I think when we think about all the stuff that we've heard this
week in relation to COVID, I think we think about the people affected by long
COVID and the families and loved ones of those who passed away during COVID. And
I think we need to keep that at the forefront of our minds. Interestingly, one
of the things that I think about is the fact that COVID or pandemics are always
on every organisation's risk register. I'm sure they were on Lees prior to
COVID, but they're on the risk register, but they're seen as unlikely to happen,
and therefore we don't learn the lessons that we should. And we know that there
were planning exercises that took place before COVID, and the right actions
weren't taken. I think in relation to what we've seen this week, it's quite
clear that the inquiry needs to move forward as quickly as possible, and I think
we need to ensure that the lessons are learned and acted upon. But I don't think
we're there yet. That's quite clear. Wendy, do you think there should be perhaps
a deadline for this inquiry? I'm always conscious of putting deadlines on
things, but I think we haven't got a great track record of timings for inquiries
in this country. They seem to go on for too many years. I think we were talking
about infrastructure before we joined here, and I think the Edinburgh Trams
inquiry is still going on. I think the inquiry has taken longer than the
construction period. So I wouldn't want to put a date on it, but I think we need
to ensure that the resources are in place so that the inquiry can report as soon
as possible. That's true for the inquiry here, and it's true for me in Scotland
in relation to the separate inquiry that's happening there too. Thank you very
much. Lee Powell. What have we learned since lockdown? We've all learned how to
use Microsoft Teams or Zoom, that's for certain. So technology certainly took a
step forward. I have a relatively strong opinion on this. I think that it was an
overreaction to COVID, and that doesn't mean that I'm insensitive. That doesn't
mean that I'm insensitive to the people that lost their lives or are severely
impacted by long COVID. I have sympathies for those people, but it was one way
to ruin an economy for a long time, and I do think it should have been more of a
focused solution. I do think they should have looked at the demographics and
looked at the people involved and the risk factors. But what we did is we shut
down a global economy, we shut down a national economy, we made sure people
couldn't go to work, we printed money, and we're reaping the benefits of it now,
or not, as the case may be. So do you think it was a good thing that we've seen
those WhatsApp messages come out this week then? Well, first and foremost on
WhatsApp, you know, yes, we have a WhatsApp account at JMI Construction Group,
and we use it, but we only use it for succinct logistical things like making
meetings. I personally don't think government should be operating through
WhatsApp and on the hoof. I think it's not very good at all. Thank you. A
reminder of Sharon's question, what have we learned since lockdown? Kim
Ledbetter. I think, I mean, first and foremost, Sharon, thank you for the work
that you do. Like Wendy, I also have a very close friend who's got long COVID
and her life has been turned upside down, and it will never be the same again. I
think there's two sides to the, well, there's lots of sides to the pandemic, to
be fair, but there's the people side and there's the economic side. And for me,
I was always heavily invested in the people side and how it affected people up
and down the country. That would tend to be my priority. I wasn't an MP at the
time. I was actually working for the Joe Cox Foundation, and we were one of the
community anchors, working with people in the community, trying to get food to
people, trying to get prescriptions to people, people who were very scared,
people who were very, very frightened, and many of whom actually haven't even
yet engaged with what you might call normal life because they're still very
scared. And it's had a huge negative effect. I think, I mean, first and
foremost, I feel deeply sorry for the families and the friends of people who
lost loved ones during that time, for everybody who was involved. I think what
we did learn from lockdown was how hard it is to be a teacher, anybody who tried
homeschooling. Lots of my friends were in that category. And I think in that
regard, the messages that have come out, the WhatsApp messages that have come
out, I find hugely disrespectful to various different professions and groups
within society to call teaching unions absolute arses and say that they just
hate work. And I think it's deeply disrespectful to anybody in the teaching
profession. And quite unbelievable to talk about people who were travelling, as
being locked up in shoebox hotel rooms, and to almost be laughing about this, to
tell the police that the plod got their marching orders shows a huge amount of
arrogance and a lack of respect. And again, Lee's point is very important.
Government by WhatsApp is very, very dangerous. Any big organisation, any
business would have a proper meeting, you have proper discussions, everything is
minuted, everything is written down, actions are followed up. That's how we
should be running the country. I'm... OK. Some of these WhatsApps, of course,
that we've seen, some of the people around those WhatsApp conversations have
said, of course, there are WhatsApp conversations that take place, but there are
also policy meetings that are minuted where decisions are taken. So they're
suggesting this wasn't WhatsApp by government, this was, in their words, a sort
of partial bit of what was going on at the time. Yeah, and that's absolutely
right. And that's why we need the full inquiry. I would agree with everybody. I
think we probably all on the panel agree with that. We need the full inquiry.
But also, what I'm interested in is the question of judgment from Matt Hancock,
who was in this very privileged, important position. I mean, where do we start?
Going on the jungle in I'm a Celebrity, thinking that was a good call when he's
trying to be supposed to be a member of parliament on a full salary? Outrageous.
His own personal behavior during lockdown and that of the government during
lockdown, which we've now seen with Patrick. He did resign for that. He did
resign his position. Quite right, too. But also, how naive, arrogant or stupid
was he to have a conversation with a journalist and reveal all his deepest,
darkest secrets and then be mortified when she decides to tell people about it?
Matt Hancock was writing a book, just for a bit of context here, with the
journalist in question. And he shouldn't be doing that either. Isabelle
Oakeshott. A journalist that has a form for doing this as well. Matt Hancock
isn't here. Matt Hancock isn't here. So I just want to make the point that he
says he's disappointed and sad at the betrayal and breach of trust by this
journalist. He's disappointed and sad. He's also said he'll respond to the
substance of these allegations in the appropriate place during the course of the
inquiry. Miriam Cates. Well, it's easy to bash Matt Hancock, isn't it? And Boris
Johnson. But I mean, put your hand up if you'd have liked to be in their
position during lockdown, because I wouldn't. And I oppose lockdown. I oppose
school closures. I still don't think there's any clear evidence of how much
difference lockdown made, whereas there is ample evidence of the difference that
lockdown made to children's lives, to businesses' lives, to our economy. Many of
our children suffered catastrophe that they will never, ever recover from. And
while I oppose those policies, I still don't wish to be in Boris's or Matt's
shoes. And I think, yes, we can bash them as individuals, but I think the
lessons we need to learn are much broader than the personalities involved,
because none of us in this room can say how we would have acted in those
positions. And I think what's clear from the WhatsApp messages is that
government by a small group of people that don't accept challenge and don't
accept alternative viewpoints does not end well. And I think that is the biggest
problem this showed. And I think what started out as a very reasonable, laudable
attempt to keep people safe in very difficult circumstances turned into much
more of an attempt to gain control, really, rather than to listen to challenging
evidence. And I think that's where the mistakes were made. We can make all other
points about whether he should have given the WhatsApp messages away, whether it
was wise, all valid points for discussion. But I think, for me, the takeaway is
this is not how you make good decisions. That's why we have a parliamentary
democracy. That's why we have free speech in this country. And that's why we
have a free scientific community. Quick thought, Miriam, do you think the
inquiry should report, say, by the end of the year? I don't think a time should
be put on it. I think it has to be quick enough for people's memories. But I'm
concerned about the breadth of it. For example, when the scope first came out,
it didn't even mention children. Now, for me, the biggest harm that has been
caused is to children. And I visit schools and I visited a playgroup this
morning in my constituency. The harm, the permanent harm that has been done to
children by lockdown is immeasurable. That should be top of the list at the
COVID inquiry, not the bottom. OK, thank you. That inquiry is being led by Lady
Hallett. She has said there will be no whitewash in this inquiry. It is
underway. They've set out modules for elements of this that they're going to
look at one after the other. And she's made it clear that this inquiry, she
says, will not drag on for decades. If you want to have your say on this or
anything else that we're discussing during the course of the programme, we'd
love to hear from you. Give any answers a call 03700 100 444. Now, on to our
next, which comes from Louise Ducks. Hello, Louise. Should the poor be expected
to pay more for their gas from 2023? Louise, thank you for your question. So we
have learnt, of course, we know the current situation is that energy bills for a
typical household are going to go up to Â£3,000 a year in April from about Â£2,500
a year, although we're told that the government is looking at this. So Louise's
question is, should the poor be expected to pay more for their gas? Leigh
Powell. I think the price guarantee and the price cap should actually be
extended as current. I really do. I think inflation is rip roaring through the
economy. It's causing problems for everybody, not just for business that I
represent here tonight, but also for individuals. And I do feel for people.
There is a cost of living crisis. And I think that the government should
continue with their assistance until inflation does start to come down, which I
do think it will start to come down at an appropriate point in time to then
remove that guarantee. Miriam Cates, we're told that this is something that the
Treasury is keeping an open mind about. They're not committing to anything,
won't comment on any reports. But what do you think? Do you think that that
should be extended? Well, the wholesale prices are coming down, which is good
news. And I think the estimate is that from the summer onwards, that the cap
will come down to about 2,500, which is great news. So obviously, the price
guarantee would be less needed in that circumstances. But yes, I think it should
be extended for at least a short time to ease that transition back to the lower
wholesale prices. And I think the energy price guarantee has been phenomenally
expensive. And when wholesale prices are high, somebody pays. It's either the
individual or it's the taxpayer or both. I think what the government has done is
good. But I don't like the lack of targeting. I don't like the fact that people
who earn less than average are paying through their taxation for people who earn
a lot more than average to have their energy bills subsidised. Now, that may be
unavoidable because it's so difficult to means test. But I don't like that. And
I do think this is going to be extended for any considerable period of time. We
need to look more closely at means testing. Thank you. So as well as the energy
price guarantee, which is keeping bills at a certain level for the typical
household, then the government is giving the 8 million lowest income households
Â£900 in 2023. I mean, Wendy Chamberlain, the point that Miriam makes, this is
very expensive, isn't it? It's very expensive, but it's actually proving not to
be as expensive as the government has planned for because we are seeing the
wholesale price of gas coming down. So actually, we've calculated as Liberal
Democrats that the government could actually reduce the energy price cap back to
Â£1,971, which is what the off-gem cap was last April. And actually, it'd be cost
neutral because of the fact that wholesale prices are coming down. So I
certainly think they should be looking at that. I think they should be looking
at the warm homes discount and the winter fuel allowance. But there's just a
couple of other items I want to raise. I mean, maybe not such an issue in Leeds,
but in other parts of Yorkshire, alternative fuel payments. That scheme has been
delayed by months and months. And only now are people being able to apply for
that. They've been without support the whole winter. It's certainly true in a
rural constituency like mine of North East Fife. Pre-payment meters. We've all
heard about the scandals about the warrants that have been applied to people.
And people on pre-payment meters pay more for their gas. So surely we should be
doing something about that. What kind of thing? Because of course, some people
say that pre-payment meters, for some people, are something they want to keep.
They can actually be useful for some people. Absolutely. So why are the energy
companies charging more per unit of gas or electricity for those on pre-payment
meters? And then the final thing I want to say is, this might be good that the
government is planning to extend it for domestic users. But what about
businesses? I'm assuming here the Holbeck will be impacted by the fact that
support for businesses ends at the end of March. And they're going to be falling
off a cliff edge. And so why are they not doing something for businesses as
well? Because that is going to, the cost of living that Lee referred to, you
know, there will be businesses that potentially have to shut their doors,
schools, leisure centres, because of the fact that there is not the right
support for businesses going forward as well. Wendy, thank you. Lee, you do run
a business. I mean, the Chancellor has said, he is, of course, they've kept
prices lower for businesses. That support is halving, I think, around in April.
But the Chancellor makes the point that there isn't a sort of bottomless pit of
money that they can keep pumping billions into this. I mean, you're a
businessman. What do you think? Well, the energy cost is critical to either
going into a recession or staying out of a recession. And when you look at the
actual price of energy and gas and electricity compared to where the price cap
is, there's a huge difference still. And I honestly believe that if they don't
legislate and extend the price cap, that we could potentially go into a
recession because everything is fuel dependent. Okay, Lee, thank you. Kim
Leapeter. I mean, the short answer to Louisa's question is no, poor people
shouldn't be paying for this situation. And I'm sure there'll be communities
across Leeds, across West Yorkshire, and indeed across the country like my
constituency where people are really struggling. We've got, you know, food banks
busier than ever, more food banks in my constituency than ever before. We've got
people, I spoke to somebody yesterday who said their staff, and ironically it
was a care home, are staying at work to keep warm because they can't afford to
put the heating on when they get home. We've got food prices going through the
roof. So people are really, really struggling, and it is the poorest in our
society who are struggling the most, and they shouldn't be expected to pay. I
mean, as Wendy has already alluded to, because this wholesale energy price has
come down, the government now has an extra, I think it's something like Â£15
billion on what they budgeted for. That money should be used to support the
poorest in society and make sure that they can get through the next few months.
So it should definitely be extended. The other problem that I have with this is,
I think it was Graham Stewart was on Question Time last night, the Tory minister
on this, you know, oh, we're having a look at it, it's under review. But every
time the government have to be dragged kicking and screaming to do the right
thing. They never just do it automatically. Right, what's wrong? Well, the
government did obviously introduce the energy price guarantee in the first
place, didn't they? Yeah, they did, and fair play to that. But again, this
should be a decision that can be made quickly because what you've got is people,
families, pensioners living in uncertainty. Am I going to get through? How are
the next few months going to be? And that's really, really unfair. I mean, the
other important point, obviously, is the fact that we need a proper windfall tax
on the energy companies. It is. Okay. We are waiting for the budget, of course,
which is coming up pretty soon. Let's have a look what the Chancellor, Jeremy
Hunt, does. I think the words that the energy minister you referred to were,
watch this space. So we shall. Right, let's move on to our next, which comes
from Colin Eliff. Hello, Colin. Colin's got a fan. Thank you, Sally. Good
evening. What do you think the integrated rail plan and HS2 will do for
Yorkshire? And do you think they are worth the 100 billion or more that is
planned to be spent upon them? Colin, thank you. So, of course, HS2, the high-
speed rail network, which is going initially from London to Birmingham. I think
there are plans for the second leg up to Manchester. Although I think I'm right
in saying, this is quite complex, but I think I'm right in saying the bit to
Leeds has been scrapped and that bit is now forming part of the integrated rail
plan, which is more about existing lines, upgrading capacity on the existing
lines. So, to Colin's question, Miriam Cates. Thank you. Well, there are
obviously mixed opinions in my party about HS2, but my personal opinion about
what is happening in Yorkshire, particularly my part of Yorkshire, South
Yorkshire, is that it's a great improvement on the plan that was before. So for
Sheffield station, which is obviously my closest station, the electrification of
the line and the reduction of the time, the travel time to London by a quarter
delivered rapidly, for us, is a big win. It's far cheaper than what was planned
before, and it's going to be delivered before I get my senior rail card, which
wasn't the case for HS2. So, personally, I think for my part of South Yorkshire,
I think it's a good plan. I think it saves an enormous amount of money and
delivers it quickly. I am more concerned about buses, because I think
particularly in rural areas, most people are not near a train station, and buses
are far more important. And I think we've got a problem at the moment, that
we've got a bus system that works okay in urban areas, but really does not work
in rural areas. We need a better model. I've got some great ideas in my patch,
but we do need our big mayoral authorities to see the potential. There we are.
There's the call from Miriam Cates. I mean, we know, of course, the government
is spending about Â£100 billion on HS2 at the moment. The question, Lee Powell,
is what's it going to do for Yorkshire? Well, the HS2 is not going to do
anything for Yorkshire, because it's not coming to Leeds. So... APPLAUSE I mean,
the government is looking at options, I think, to link HS2 to the Leeds
stations. They're spending about Â£100 million on scoping the options. Yeah. I
mean, listen, I'm a fan of the government's levelling-up agenda. I'm a fan of
the Northern Powerhouse, and I think there are some great initiatives, and we're
seeing the fruit of that, certainly up in Teesside, which is outside Yorkshire,
or some of it is. But when it comes to HS2, I can't help but feel disappointed
with the government. And I think they've actually looked at it the wrong way
round. I think it should have started in Leeds. I think it should have then gone
across to Manchester, then down to Birmingham, then to London. I think they've
done it completely the wrong way. APPLAUSE Lee, thank you. I mean, Kim
Ledbetter, Miriam makes the point that actually sometimes upgrading the existing
facilities is a lot quicker, if nothing else, than a project like HS2, which we
already know is running over time and over budget. Yeah, I mean, the
mismanagement of the project is why it's running over time and over budget. And
I think the problem we've got is you've had 13 years of the same government in
power, and we've got a train system that is absolutely off the rails. You've got
a bus system that... Sorry, dreadful...that doesn't work for anybody. And people
are struggling with the infrastructure of getting around the north of England
and elsewhere in the country. And the government have to take some
responsibility for that, and Labour have said that we would support HS2 and we
would reinstate the link to Leeds, which I think is really important. Really
important. You know, because we always miss out. We miss out in the north, we
miss out in Yorkshire, and it's not fair. And I think you need to have MPs who
represent this area who are going to fight to get us... So how much would that
cost? Oh, I mean, it's going to cost a lot of money, there's no two ways about
it. And we have to budget for it, and we've said we will budget for it. But I
think in terms of infrastructure across our country, there is economic growth to
be felt from that, so it's one of those things that it is worth investing in.
But we've also got to look at transport across from east to west, which is an
absolute mess. You know, trying to get a train across... OK, it's the wrong side
of the Pennines, but trying to get a train across the Pennines... So there's so
much more that could be done. And as I say, after 13 years in power, to have
things in such a mess, the government have got to take some responsibility for
that. OK, I just want to bring you a quick... The business secretary, Grant
Shapps, told the BBC last November when he was talking about the integrated rail
plan, so this is the bit of the government's plans for the rail networks, which
is about expanding and upgrading the existing lines. He says, the line itself
could deliver a 33-minute journey from Manchester to Leeds, quadruple the
capacity of that line, and do so without having to wait an extra 20 years beyond
the delivery of what the upgrade can do. So that's Grant Shapps' case on it.
Wendy Chamberlain. Well, the question for me is, why wouldn't you be looking at
doing all of these things? I'm very conscious... I guess money might be a big
factor. As an MP coming up and down from Scotland, I'm very conscious sometimes
that it's actually easier for me to get from Edinburgh down to London than it is
for MPs coming across the country. And indeed, I was in Staffordshire a few
weeks ago, and actually it was most cost-effective, and frankly, about the same
amount of time for me to go back to London and then back up to Scotland. So I'm
very conscious of that. I think the other thing for me is, you know, Kim's
talked about mismanagement, but it feels like we've added stuff and added stuff,
and now we're cutting it right back again. And that's why things have become
more expensive in relation to the scheme. And indeed, when you think about the
south-east of England and think about some of the real complaints that have been
about HS2, they've kind of done the hard work in terms of the development of
that first link... Because the network is well under way already...and where
people potentially don't get the benefit. So why not maximise the benefit and
move forward as much as possible? Where I do agree with Miriam is around local
bus services. There's no doubt COVID has a huge impact on that, but frankly, we
end up in this vicious cycle where I'm sure we've all, as MPs, stood sort of,
you know, please don't cut our local bus services. But we cut the services,
which means that they become impractical for people to use, they become too
expensive, then they get cut, and we just end up in this vicious cycle. We will
not get people out of their cars if we do not think about better ways for them
to travel and incentivise it accordingly. APPLAUSE Just a quick thought, Miriam,
on criticism that's been levelled by Kim and Wendy about the idea that the
government has been in power for a long time, it's been talking about HS2 for a
long time, and, I mean, there's still no trains on the lines, are there? There's
still no lines for the trains yet. I think it's really tempting to think, well,
why shouldn't we have HS2? London's getting HS2, Birmingham's HS2. Yeah, fair
question, but it costs a heck of an enormous amount of money. And we're paying
for that. And I think the question is, yes, it would be great to go to London a
bit quicker, but actually, we are the most regionally imbalanced economy in the
Western world, and what we need is for our local economies to be revived, to
increase our productivity locally. And one way of doing that is to help people
to get from A to B more quickly locally. And I've got people in villages in my
constituency that can't get into Barnsley and Sheffield, and that's a better use
of the money. And our resources are finite. We can't have everything. And so
we've got to pick the things that are going to be pro-growth and not necessarily
the shiniest projects. OK, thank you. Have your say on HS2 and that integrated
rail plan, if you'd like to. The number for any answers is 03700 100 444, and as
ever, the lines open at 12.30pm on Saturday. Now we have time for one more I am
pleased to say, and that comes from Michelle Rose. Hello, Michelle. Hello.
People change their minds all the time, for example, about Brexit. I'd like to
know which major political policy or issue have the members of the panel changed
their minds about? Michelle, thank you very much for your question. In our final
minutes, Kim Ledbetter. Oh, thanks. So... LAUGHTER So, changing your mind. Well,
the fact that, as an MP, changing your mind is something which you really don't
seem to be allowed to do was one of the reasons that I said I would never enter
politics. The other reason was because I swear too much. Thank you for not doing
that on the programme. Wendy's trumped me on that! But changing your mind is one
of those things that we all do every day, day in and day out, and there is a lot
of pressure in this job. If you've got something wrong, you're not really
allowed to say that you got it wrong. As long as you can explain why you did
that, that's important. So I guess my biggest mind change in my life, and I've
only been an MP now for about 19 months, was choosing to become an MP. After my
sister was killed, I'd always said, this wasn't the world that I wanted to be
in, this wasn't something I wanted to do, but actually, I remember her saying
very clearly to me that if good people don't step up and put themselves forward,
you've got to be careful what you end up with. So that was my biggest mind
change. APPLAUSE Kim, thank you for that. Miriam Cates. I think that was a
brilliant answer, and I really agree that we should be able to change our mind,
particularly in response to new evidence, and on that, I've got a long list. I
voted Liberal Democrat once, I changed my mind. I voted Remain, I now support
Brexit. I'm sure I can think of many others. Oh, I used to support HS2. LAUGHTER
This is it, we've got a whole load of the panellists admitting to U-turns, it's
what we like. Lee Paham. I'm quite a black and white character, to be honest, so
there's not a great deal that I've changed my mind on. It's my determination to
follow things through. I think, as I mentioned earlier, Brexit, I was very, very
marginal. I was Remain, then I was Leave, then I was Remain, so I changed my
mind probably five times before deciding that I was going to vote in the way
that I did. But apart from that, I'm quite a determined and headstrong type of
person, so I don't change my mind. Do you reckon you might change your mind back
again on Brexit at some point? No. I'm not as... LAUGHTER Probably not, but I am
interested and looking forward to seeing how it's going to pan out. I'm not
belligerent to the point where if it is incorrect and it does cause problems, I
won't say that I personally got it wrong. I'm not that way inclined, but I don't
think I will. Lee, thank you. Michelle's question, people change their minds all
the time. What major political policy or issues have you changed your mind
about? Wendy Chamberlain. As a Liberal Democrat, we kind of pride ourselves on
not agreeing with everything. If you agree on every Liberal Democrat policy,
frankly, even a Liberal Democrat is sometimes the way that we work. It's
interesting, the three MPs on the panel tonight, we're all being elected either
in 2019 or since then, and actually we've not been in politics that long either.
I think the only thing for me, and maybe you would expect this as somebody who's
done a lot of voting as a Scot over the last 10, 12 years, but I have kind of
gone off referendums. It's a little bit like first past the post, winner takes
all. I think there's much better and consensual ways in which we can make
agreement on big subjects. Lovely. Thank you for your question, and thank you to
our panellists for actually providing some answers to it. It's something that we
love. Now, we're looking for venues to come along to, particularly on the coast,
the north, east or north-west coast of England. If you fancy hosting us, drop us
a line. The email you need is anyquestions at bbc.co.uk. We're out of time from
here. Next week we'll be in Birmingham. The week after we'll be in East Sussex,
but from Holbeck in Leeds, thank you to my audience, thank you to my panel, and
thank you at home for listening. APPLAUSE Any Questions was presented by Alex
Forsythe. The producer was Camilla Sinclair and the lead engineer was Phil
Booth. And there's, as ever, the chance to share your views by ringing any
answers now on 03 700 100 444. That's 03 700 100 444. We'll join Julianne
Warwicker after the news. Welcome to The Spark. When we're in the midst of it,
we're going to make decisions. We are making changes to the way BBC live streams
are distributed via third-party services and platforms, and the BBC stream you
are currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an
internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the
manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to
stream on BBC Sounds. The work I've made in my life was making that step. The
Spark starts this Tuesday morning at 11 on Radio 4.