TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-04-21H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Series 2 of I'm Not a Monster. Listen on BBC Sounds. BBC News at 8 o'clock. The
Russian army alongside Wagner mercenaries are putting increasing pressure on
Ukraine's soldiers in the city of Bakhmut, which has seen fierce fighting for
months. Ukrainian officials say they still control the area and British military
intelligence says defenders have been fortifying their positions and elite units
have been brought in. UN member states are still trying to reach an agreement to
protect the world's oceans. Delegates at the gathering in New York worked
through the night as the latest round of talks overran. The environmental group
WWF has previously said the framework is critical to achieving the global ocean
conservation targets. Mina Epps from the International Union for Conservation of
Nature is at the talks and hopes an agreement can be reached soon. We've been
talking about this for almost 20 years and the negotiation has been going on for
five years. So we are hoping that shortly the member states will convene and
basically go through a text that they can land on, which can be adopted at a
later stage and hopefully be brought into force relatively quickly. Iran has
agreed to give UN inspectors more access to its nuclear facilities. The head of
the UN's nuclear watchdog has been holding talks with the government in Tehran.
He made the trip after the discovery of traces of uranium that had been enriched
to near weapons-grade level. Police in Australia say they've made what's thought
to be the country's biggest ever drug bust after cocaine worth Â£800 million was
seized. In a joint operation with the US, the drugs were seized not long after
leaving South America, replaced with fake packages and tracked. Twelve people
linked to a Mexican cartel were arrested trying to retrieve the cargo in Perth.
The Ministry of Defence says RAF Typhoon jets were authorised to fly at
supersonic speed after contact was lost with the pilot of an unidentified plane.
People living in Leicestershire, Northamptonshire and Oxfordshire reported
hearing a sonic boom, with some saying their houses shook. The aircraft is
escorted safely to Stansted Airport. BBC News. Now, Archive on 4, and another
chance to hear Clare Prentiss' historical exploration of one of the most
notorious and controversial of surgical procedures, the lobotomy. The programme
includes descriptions of some of the operations, with surgeons making the bold
claim that serious disorders would simply become, in their words, easier to cure
than toothache. Ladies and gentlemen, you're about to witness history. I present
to you the lobotomy. Juvenile distraction, lesbianism, mania, all of these
maladies can be reversed. But then, aren't we playing God? A trailer from the
Netflix series Ratchet gives a flavour of the enthusiasm and the excitement
which greeted the invention of the lobotomy. Seen in the beginning as a
scientific breakthrough, it became a byword for medical overreach. Even today,
there are people living with the devastating consequences of lobotomy. Out of
all the things that a psychiatrist could do, you know, let's try medicine first,
let's do this, let's do that, the first thing he comes up with, we've got to
stick ice picks in this guy's brain, you know? To me, it's insane. Today we
think of lobotomy as an almost medieval horror, but this was a 20th century
innovation, hailed as a game changer in the treatment of mental illness. In a
lobotomy, or leucotomy as it was known in Britain, surgeons drilled holes into
the skull and severed the connections between the frontal lobe and the rest of
the brain. It was an attempt to treat mental disorders through a physical
intervention into the most miraculous organ in the human body. On the surface of
the brain, particularly if you look at it under a microscope, because most brain
surgery is done with an operating microscope, it's very beautiful. It glitters
with the cerebrospinal fluid and you have the pulsing rib, arteries and veins,
well the veins are the same pulse. And it's very beautiful. Once in the brain,
if you have to say operate within the brain on a tumour or something like that,
it is just white, sort of white, it's a bit like thick white cream cheese. And
the idea that this is thought itself is just crazy, you just can't, you can't,
you can't understand that. Millions of signals received by your nerves are
conveyed to your brain every second. Imagine the whole of your body's surface,
every point on your skin, containing millions of nerve endings, like the aerials
of a million wireless sets receiving signals from the world outside. And
coordinating and controlling it all is nature's masterpiece, the brain.
Lobotomies were performed around the world. In Britain, tens of thousands of
people were encouraged to submit to life-changing surgery, which was often
portrayed as routine and carrying minimal risk. I had no reason to suppose that
these operations had any particular dangers or hazards. Can you remember
changing as a person? Yes, I do. Was there anything you could do about it? No,
what could I do? Half cracked. I'm going to die. Did you regress it? With
hindsight, no, but one can't go back once one's had this operation. It's
irreversible. If ever we did make any inquiries regarding the operation, our
minds were immediately put at rest, you know. One got the impression, you know,
that there's no more serious than having a tooth extracted. To understand the
rise of lobotomy, you need to picture the overcrowded asylums which warehoused
the long-term mentally ill. Patients with few prospects, suicidal, violent,
despairing, contained but with no hope of meaningful treatment. For over a
hundred years, Britain's mentally ill were hidden from society in vast Victorian
asylums. Those who were locked away have left their own testimony. I remember
getting the first glimpse of the hospital, this big looming place with a clock
tower and that, and I remember then thinking, oh, my goodness, what am I letting
myself in for? But just by virtue of being in one of these enormous 19th-century
madhouses, I mean, they're horrible places. If you ever looked, they've all gone
now, of course. Retired neurosurgeon Henry Marsh worked in one of these
hospitals. If you look at a large single-page map of London, there's a sort of
circle of big black blobs all around it, which were the enormous psychiatric
hospitals built in the 19th century, Fry and Barnet, which was said to have the
longest corridor in Europe, and the Springfield where I worked, and Houghton.
And this was where the sort of 1% of the population who have schizophrenia badly
were put. It was just massive. You could walk round all day and never walk round
all of it. I think that word dumped, it's an awful word, isn't it? But you could
think, and I think rightly, that a lot of patients were dumped here by their
relatives, by the community. They weren't wanted. Doctors were desperate for
solutions and experimented with shock treatments like electroconvulsive and
insulin therapies. But one treatment was more drastic than all the others.
Lobotomy. Operating on the brain to deal with mental illness was pioneered by a
Portuguese doctor, Igaz Moniz, in the 1930s. The surgical techniques were rather
crude, characterised by the operation called a lobotomy. The major criticism of
the lobotomy was that its results were far too drastic, often leaving the
patient as much a mental cripple as he was before. It's been estimated that more
than 20,000 lobotomies were carried out in the United Kingdom. Well the patient
sits here, under general anaesthetic of course, and the principle is that we
want to make a small area of destruction deep in the brain, without actually
exposing it and without damaging any other structures. An area of destruction,
that's this lesion. This is the lesion which we talk about, which we make with a
probe as you'll see later on. Basically the principle is to apply this steel
frame with pins to the skull so that you can more or less neglect the shape of
the skull, because heads come in all sizes, fat, round, tall, thin, and you
can't relate to bone. We then take a series of very accurate x-rays with this
machine here. We introduce into the cavities of the brain a radio-opaque
material and take this film in the lateral position. We then simply swing the
patient round, still asleep remember, on the table, like that, and do almost
exactly the same thing in the anteroposterior plane. That's to say, two sets of
x-rays, both comparable, both of a high degree of accuracy from which we can
calculate where we want to make our area of destruction. We make a lesion or an
area of destruction with a fine probe like this, which has got a
thermostatically controlled temperature arrangement at the end. It goes in like
that. That's a stop to prevent me going too far. And it goes right into the
brain. Oh gosh, yes. In this case, let's see how far it goes in. This was
actually as it was this afternoon. And there is no possibility of you destroying
more brain than you need to or want to. Exactly. Whether I destroyed enough
always to get the maximum effect is what is difficult to always decide. This is
from a television documentary, Cane on Friday, filmed in 1979. The doctor
describes a patient he considered suitable for a lobotomy. He was mentally
backward. He was incredibly aggressive. He could only be managed by his father
and mother, and then with great difficulties. Nobody dared come to the house
without him lashing out and causing trouble. He was self-destructive also. He
would smash windows and bang his head against the wall for no apparent reason
whatsoever. And the alternative was either to sedate him so heavily as to keep
him asleep most of the day, or else try something like this. And he agreed, as
far as he was able to understand, to have this done, as did his parents. And
this is psychosurgery? Indeed, yes. This is psychosurgery, surgery of the mind.
I'm going to give you a local anaesthetic. It won't hurt. You'll be able to talk
all right, but you won't feel any pain. There's an unusual hush. Though this
operation's been done before, it's still uncommon, and few people have seen it.
There's still a lot to be learned. The surgeon quietly talks to the patient. My,
quite still. Then listen to me talking to you. And talk to me if you want to. Do
you feel all right? Yes. Quite comfortable. You won't feel anything? The surgeon
makes an incision in the side of the man's head, just above the temple. Quite
small. Oddly enough, this miracle of modern surgery is only a minor operation.
I'll only keep you about 20 minutes, and then you'll be able to go back to bed.
I mean, lobotomy was a product of its time. It was born out of desperation,
where mental health issues were a massive problem for both patients, families,
and society, at a time when there were no medications available, when
psychotherapy was either in its infancy or non-existent, and people were
grasping at straws. Ludwig Srinzow is professor of neurosurgery at the National
Neurosurgery Hospital, University College London. I think the problem with
lobotomy is that very often it was performed, or sometimes it was performed,
without the ethical framework that of clear we have now, and that widespread
areas of destruction of the brain caused a situation where the treatment was
sometimes worse than the disease. Say, doctor. Hello. That's a wonderful
operation they did on that chap, Philip. Yes, he has tears, doesn't he? Will he
be all right? Oh, he'll be like you. Will he feel as well as I do? Oh, yes, yes,
he'll feel quite all right. Psychosurgery provides no miracle cure, but where
the operation's been carried out successfully, patients have reported a
lessening of pressure and tension. John's had two lobotomies under Mr Weeks. He
was a volunteer. His problems of violence and aggression before the operations
were out of control. Can you be sure that in destroying whatever it is that you
seek to destroy, to remove the violence or whatever, the conditioning, whatever,
you're not going to destroy something else in that person's makeup and
personality? Oh, but you're bound to destroy something else, aren't you? I mean,
aggression doesn't come alone. The aggression that we are destroying is the
aggression which in a normal person would get them to work on time and get them
thrusting and achieving, but you're not working on normal people. So you accept
that in order to achieve the end of the operation, there will be a price to pay?
All of them may well be. If it's only a scar on the head, there's always a price
for surgery. Yes, but the price in personality? Oh, yes, to some extent, to some
extent. In one boy that I did this on, he became much more tractable, much more
quiet and quite happy apparently, but he lost his ability to play music, having
amused himself with an organ in his home. And this was a loss, and I think one's
got to accept that there are gains and losses. And as long as the balance is on
the side of the gain, that's all right. Nobody thought that the risks were
greater than the benefits. And most times, however, the patient ended up coming
out of this surgery, and each result was different because they were, you know,
patients had different diagnoses and different, and they had different
procedures performed on them. Most times, however, the patient came out, there
was a way in which to interpret this in a positive manner. Sometimes it was seen
that it hadn't done enough, and then a patient might go for a second or
sometimes even a third lobotomy. It doesn't always work, but sometimes it's the
only hope. And it's changed that man from a hopeless mental case into a
contented person. That's wonderful. At its peak, up to 1,500 lobotomies were
carried out every year in the UK at centres in Dundee, Bristol, London and North
Wales, among others. One of Britain's most prolific lobotomists was Sir Wiley
McKissack. For decades, Wiley McKissack dominated neurosurgery at the Atkinson
Morley Hospital in Wimbledon. The building's now closed, but I got permission to
enter. If I remember correctly, the next door you're coming up to was where
McKissack had his first operating theatre, just here on the right. I can think
of McKissack smoking a cigar on the right-hand side there between cases. My
guide was Terry Gould, who worked as an anaesthetist for McKissack in the 1960s.
He remembers his former boss as a tough but brilliant surgeon. So how busy was
this? Oh, it was very busy. When McKissack was here, he set up a system whereby
patients were brought in to be operated on, and the next day they were
transferred back to the hospital where they'd been referred from. So there was a
constant turnover upstairs. So like a production line? It was a production line,
very much so. But even though it was a production line, there was tremendous
care and attention paid to each individual patient. A production line indeed. I
heard endless stories about him, because the people who trained me had all been
trained by him, and he was a right old tyrant. Again, there were days when the
senior surgeon made you or broke you, and if you did things his way, he would
get you a job as a consultant. He was a very fast surgeon. I think he did not
respect the brain. He regarded the brain as just another organ. Tremendous
emphasis on speed and neatness, but on how you actually handled the brain, less
so is my impression. Henry Marsh is one of the small number of British
neurosurgeons alive today who conducted psychosurgical operations. I didn't like
doing them, and I was probably glad to give up the practice fairly shortly after
I became a consultant. I didn't like my role purely as a technician, without
having any idea really myself as to how they did afterwards. I inherited from my
boss, whom I replaced when he retired, an operation he called a limbic
leucotomy, which was a sort of microscopic version, much more refined, of the
sort of lobectomies people had been carrying out many years earlier. But this
was only for obsessional compulsive disorder. That was the only indication, and
it was an indication accepted by the Mental Health Commission. All patients had
to have been reviewed by the Mental Health Commission. Aneurysm can be a fatal
condition. It can so destroy people's lives. They sometimes commit suicide. The
few I did, it probably was only half a dozen, they were all suicidal. They'd
failed all other treatments. So, you know, I didn't feel particularly anguished
about it. In 1949, Egas-Monez was awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine for his
development of lobotomy. But in the years since, there has been a vocal, and so
far unsuccessful, campaign to strip him of the prize. 1949 was also the year in
which the use of lobotomy peaked in Britain. But 30 years later, the operations
were still being carried out. This Radio 3 programme, Surgery on the Mind, was
exploring the ethics of lobotomy as late as 1979. Let me offer you some
signposts, some things to watch for. First, the condition psychosurgery is used
for. As I've said, it's used on a wide range of psychiatric illnesses. This
leads to a second point. What are these psychiatric illnesses? Are they
illnesses at all? Is the use of the word illness appropriate when we're talking
about someone who's depressed, or obsessed with some fear, or is given to
uncontrollable rages? Next, why do the surgeons operate on the patient's brain?
Is the brain damaged? And if it isn't damaged, this looks like an odd form of
surgery, cutting into healthy tissue. You'll be able to spot the ghost of
Descartes as we explore the relationship between mind and body. Then there's
another question which at first seems quite outrageous, but it isn't. Do the
surgeons really know what they're doing? It was a disaster. There was a blind
operation. They made a hole in the skull over which the so-called probe went
into the brain, and it waggled it a bit, and that was it. There was no, until
much, much later, any attempt to refine exactly where the cut was made. There
was really very little science to it, and it was painfully apparent to me when I
was a nursing assistant on this long-term psychogeriatric ward that there was no
proper follow-up of these patients at all. And on the whole, at least where I
was, there was a selected group of patients who were the worst, most apathetic,
sort of ruined patients are the ones who had been labectomised. But because it
was such an imprecise procedure with no proper landmarks, no brain scans in
those years, so you couldn't see before or after what you were doing, probably a
few people benefited. And of course, the other point was, this was before the
introduction of phenothiazine-major tranquilisers in the 1950s. Until then,
there really was no treatment for severely psychotic people. They had insulin
shock therapy and giving people a fever to provoke epileptic fits. There was a
muddled idea that after epileptic fits, people were a bit better. And then of
course, there was ECT, which is again, lots of disputes about that, how well it
works or not. But these are all very crude, unattractive procedures. But at the
same time, long-term psychiatric hospitals full of raving psychotic patients are
terrible places as well. I mean, I think my criticism of it is not just being
wise after the event, but as far as I can see, there was really very little
proper scientific follow-up and that's what condemns it. If it had been shown to
work very effectively relative to the fact there was no other treatment for
acutely psychotic schizophrenic patients, there might be a justification for it.
But it wasn't. It was applied very, very crudely. And I think that was a major
failing. There's only one little operation they perform here. It's on the brain.
It's called a lobotomy. You may have heard of it or read about it. I have. It's
that nice young doctor's specialty in cases of hopeless lunacy. He bores holes
into the skull and operates on the brain. Oh, honey, please don't talk about it.
Please. You can't. You can't. I said... Stop carrying on like this into the
world. You can't. I said... What's all the fuss? I said you don't hurt at all.
Don't touch me. How is it having your tonsils out or something? Oh, I think
people would not put their heads into this sort of machine, likely. And I do
explain what we do. I don't think anybody would subject to psychosurgery simply
as a way to get a ticket out of jail or mental hospital. I can't see it
happening. Not in my experience. It's never happened anyway. There might be the
odd one. Yes, but if you could remove a criminal impulse, and you believe you
could. I don't think you can remove a criminal impulse. I think the instinct to
criminality is something which is, as far as I'm aware, not subject to control
by the brain quite in the way that aggressive impulses are. I certainly would
not consider undertaking this sort of surgery on criminals simply because they
were criminals. Yes, because in America there's a waiting list of convicts who
regard psychosurgery in the same way as we regard parole as a way of getting
out. Well, I'm glad I don't live and work in America. The popularity and many of
the excesses of lobotomy in America stem largely from the work of one man,
Walter Freeman, who devoted his career to promoting the surgery. In the 1940s,
he made a tour of British hospitals and praised the work being done here. Michal
Raz is a physician and a medical historian at the University of Rochester, New
York. Walter Freeman was an aspiring neurologist who trained in France, which
was the most prestigious place to train at the time, under classic French
neurologists, came back and had a very successful career and was looking for
ways to treat psychiatric illness, even though he was a neurologist, but there
was a lot of overlap at the time. And when he read about the early results of
Igam Moniz in Portugal with the psychosurgery, he was interested in performing
that himself. He was based in Washington, D.C., worked at St. Elizabeth
Hospital. He called himself the Henry Ford of lobotomies. He could do it as an
assembly line, and he would go to places that did not have the facilities or did
not have a provider who could perform this operation. He would teach this to
other practitioners and perform multiple lobotomies in a day. And that way, he
was trying to scale this across the country. But we have to think that, you
know, if this was a procedure we think today is valuable, we would have think,
wow, this guy was so great. He was out there, you know, making this accessible,
advocating for patients, going to far-flung areas to provide care. But because
we don't think that today, we interpret this in a different way, then, of
course, we judge him quite harshly. Freeman was a very American mix of
advertising man, huckster, and propagandist. He was also an innovator. First, in
partnership with James Watts, he developed the prefrontal lobotomy, in which
access to the brain was made through the skull, an operation lasting hours. On
his own, Freeman innovated again, developing the transorbital lobotomy, in which
he hammered steel leucotomes into the brain through the thin bones of the eye
socket, an operation which became known as ice pick surgery. The new procedure
took under 10 minutes and was portrayed in a phrase which echoed the breezy
advertising slogans of the era as easier than curing a toothache. The New York
Times hailed Freeman's procedure as... History-making, a shining example of
therapeutic courage. A brain operation so simple that 15 can be done in one and
a half hours may help to clear the back wards of our mental hospitals. Freeman
courted the press, staging operations before an invited group of journalists and
doctors. His medical students even took their dates along. And if an onlooker
fainted, Freeman was thrilled. This is a clip from a film Freeman made to
promote his work. For centuries, mental disorder was considered to be due to
possession by devils, and sick people were chained in foul dungeons from which
few escaped alive. Guards were brutal and treatment was non-existent. Now, about
150 years ago, struck off those chains and began the medical treatment of the
insane. Only in the past 20 years, however, have physical methods been developed
for treatment of the mentally ill. In 1936, Agash Moniz of Lisbon reported 20
cases of prefrontal leucotomy. Many types of operation for the relief of mental
disorder have since been devised, the simplest of which is transorbital
lobotomy. This operation can be performed by the psychiatrist himself.
Transorbital lobotomy is a major surgical procedure. Pre-fine openings are made
close to the coronal suture, either laterally or superiorly. Transorbital
lobotomy has further advantages in that it leaves no scar, it is performed
through an operating field that is normally sterile, and the stiff tarsal plate
forms an ideal reinforced dressing. Transorbital lobotomy can therefore be
performed without the need for elaborate precautions against hemorrhage and
infection. Steadying the patient's head, he then moves the handle of the end of
the tube about 20 degrees medially and 30 degrees laterally. I think he was
motivated by the helpless cases he saw of chronically ill psychiatric patients
with no other hope. He was also enmeshed in this idea of medical showmanship.
Students would come and see Walter Freeman's classes and it was kind of a thing.
He was quite a showman. In plain language, my ice pick technique severs the
nerves that deliver emotional energy to ideas. Along with the cure comes a loss
of affect, a kind of emotional flattening, with diminished creativity and
imagination. After all, it is their imaginations and emotions that are
disturbed. However, this patient here will soon be leaving the hospital.
Lobotomy gets them home. A scene from the 1982 film Francis, which featured
Freeman's catchphrase, lobotomy gets them home. But behind Freeman's marketing,
Michael Raz sees a genuine concern for patients. His dedication to patients is
remarkable and you can see that also in the long-term correspondence he had with
patients and family members, including family members of patients who died and
even those who died from the procedure and still loved him and stayed in touch
with him. Michael Raz is the author of The Lobotomy Letters, a book bringing
together the correspondence between Freeman and his patients. I was blown away
by the letters and they were so touching. Some of them were, even though she
died during the surgery, you were the first person who really tried to help her.
So it really showed the desperation at the time of family members who were
really trying to help their loved ones and did not have a lot of options. And in
this way, Freeman gave them hope. And I found some cases that were just
dramatic, a request to undergo a third lobotomy to relieve a patient of the
crippling anxiety she experienced. When are you going to perform a third
transorbital lobotomy and cure me? In one month, two months, or perhaps in three
months? I must have asked you this question a dozen times, but the answer still
remains elusive and I want to know it so much. For I am just human enough to
wish to be cured of this paralyzing anxiety as soon as it is convenient for you
to re-operate. Tell me when you will do it and I will purchase a calendar and
mark every day off and I will do it every day off until the time arrives. That
is what prisoners in jail are reputed to do while awaiting their freedom. But in
a way, I am not unlike them, for their bars are composed of steel, while mine
are composed of anxiety. However, they have one advantage over me. They know how
much longer they have to serve. How much longer must I wait before an operation
releases me? Never was he criticized by other professionals and that would
happen later on. He would come with a stack of letters and throw them on a table
at a conference and say, you know, you see my patients love me. I do such a
great job. They are appreciative. That was really the driving force of Freeman
doing something that he believed helped the patients and receiving the input
from the other, from the patients that this really helped and that he was
beloved and admired. Kennedy was lobotomized. Did I do something wrong? Was it
because I trapped and fell? The surgery did not go well. They cut too deeply
into the brain fibers and Rosemary became disabled. As long as she keeps
singing, we keep drilling. She did eventually regain her ability to walk and
talk, but she lost a lot of what was in her personality. There should have been
a terrible setback for lobotomy. It wasn't. With Rosemary Kennedy's failed
surgery hidden from the public, Freeman would ultimately break with his surgical
partner and take the procedure even further. Walter Freeman had been a
revolutionary. He had invented a procedure that he thought was going to save
many ill and injured people. Over the course of several decades, he performed as
many as 2,500 of these ice pick lobotomies, visiting psychiatric hospitals,
visiting prisons. And gradually he was more or less disgraced. His theories were
debunked. Whatever popularity or enthusiasm there had been for the ice pick
lobotomy disappeared, and he was brought to reduced circumstances where fewer
and fewer hospitals were allowing him to work, fewer and fewer areas were
licensing him to work, and he had difficulty finding patients. Freeman decided
to move to Los Altos, California to resurrect his career. Far from the
reproachful Eastern medical establishment, he could try to bring lobotomy to new
categories of patients. If housewives found their early 1950s existence too
depressing for words, why Freeman had a solution that would get them through
their day happy as little clams? If children were misbehaving, conditions we
might now see being called hyperactivity disorder, why they might need a
lobotomy? And the list didn't end there. The New York Times enthusiastically
reeled off all the ailments that Freeman's technique could relieve. Tension,
apprehension, anxiety, depression, insomnia, suicidal ideas, delusions,
hallucinations, crying spells, melancholia, obsessions, panic states,
disorientation, psychoalgesia, pains of psychic origin, nervous indigestion, and
hysterical paralysis. Howard Dully, who had a troubled relationship with his
stepmother, was lobotomized by Freeman in 1960. I spoke to Howard from his home
in California. Well, actually, I was 12 years old when I met him, or 11,
actually, because I think I had the lobotomy at 12, and it was after November
30th, my birthday. But I met him the first time that I recall meeting him, and
the records say it was September at 11 years old. And it took him three months
to get me into the operating table was all it took. So I saw him maybe three,
four times, one or two times casually, you know, walking down the street or in a
parking lot or something like that. He was a very personable gentleman. My
understanding of what brought Howard Dully and Walter Freeman together has more
to do with Walter Freeman's career in my mind than it does with Howard Dully's
problems. Charles Fleming co-wrote Howard Dully's autobiography. When he met
Lou, Howard's stepmother, he saw an opportunity, you know, from a dwindling
field of opportunities, he saw one more opportunity to do what he thought he did
best, and perhaps overlooked the fact that Howard, you know, technically might
not have qualified for the surgery or needed the surgery that he was about to
perform. She apparently had some problems with me deeper than I had with her. I
mean, I didn't like her, but, you know, I mean, I wasn't looking to get rid of
her or anything like that. Apparently she was looking to get rid of me. They
took me to several different psychiatrists and clinics and stuff, and they all
said that, not all of them, four of them said that she was the problem, and she
didn't want to hear that. And the other two just said there was nothing wrong
with me, and that was pretty much it. I'm not saying I was an angel. Reading the
case backwards and learning what one can learn about Howard and his stepmother
and his father and his siblings, it seems perfectly clear to me that he was no
candidate whatsoever for anything other than perhaps a few psychiatric sessions
and perhaps a little distance between him and the stepmother with whom he had
the most difficult time. I knew that there was a problem between me and her, and
since I had seen previous counseling, you know, and my assumption was that if
they found that she was the problem, that they'd do something about her, not do
something about me. Little did I know that that isn't the way the system works
necessarily. The rather bittersweet and sad truth is that he was delighted at
the adventure that awaited him. He was living in this rather hellish environment
at home where he was constantly being yelled at and criticized by his
stepmother, constantly being punished by his stepmother and his father, forced
to take his food and eat in the other room because his stepmother so objected to
it, and he was constantly being told that he was going to be taken to a hospital
for some tests with friendly, bearded, bespectacled Dr. Freeman, who had invited
him on, you know, hiking expeditions. He viewed this as a great holiday. You
know, I just remember that my dad taking me there that day and I was just so
excited. I was so excited. I was so excited. I was so excited. I was so excited.
I was so excited. You know, I just remember that my dad taking me there that day
and I was happy. I missed school and all that. I mean, anytime you can get out
of school, no matter what you're doing, it's a good day. They gave him special
foods. He got to eat all he wanted. They gave him jello for dessert. He got to
watch any television show he wanted. So he thought the whole thing was rather a
lark, and he was having a pretty good time. That night they came and they did a
couple of tests. They drew some blood. He thinks they might have given him
something to sleep, but he's not really sure. He doesn't remember. And the next
day he was taken into a place. He was worried that they were going to hurt him
with needles, but Dr. Freeman told him, no, no, you're not going to get any more
shots. That, I think, turns out to have not been accurate. They strapped him to
a gurney. They put him on a table. They gave him electroshock therapy. Dr.
Freeman later decided that the four jolts that he was given were perhaps one too
many because Howard was somewhat unresponsive after the fourth one. And then
they began the procedure. They lifted up the eye, went into the corner, tapped
it through, wiggle it around. It is an egg beater thing. And to me, that's, it's
insane. I'm sorry. It's just, I mean, you're talking about a brain. Shouldn't
there be some precision involved? Not, I went in 100 centimeters and just
scrambled eggs, you know? Chief, is that him? Charlie, we're supposed to be in
bed. That ain't him. It says it's him. Jim McMurphy. Randall Patrick. Post-
operative prefrontal lobotomy. So they'd done it to him. An excerpt from One
Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest, the searing portrait of life on a mental hospital
ward presided over by the sadistic nurse Ratched. By then, lobotomy was no
longer seen as a miracle cure, but as something much darker. Nolan Lewis was
director of the New York State Psychiatric Institute until 1953. He said, It
disturbs me to see the number of zombies that these operations turn out. It
should be stopped. One former advocate for lobotomy stated that, Lobotomy was
really no more subtle than a gunshot to the head. And of course, those who had
undergone a lobotomy had to live with the damage for the rest of their lives.
Two very bad things happened to Howard as a result of this operation. The first
was the physical medical thing that happened to him. His brain was damaged in
ways that compromised his ability to function in the world. As he grew through
his teenage years and then as he grew into manhood, there are certain things
that to this day Howard can't do very well that have to do with processes that
take place in the frontal lobotomy area. He's very poor at calculating
consequences, at understanding A will lead to B will lead to C and that will
lead to D and D is bad, so I must think differently about how to do A and B.
That sort of an equation is very difficult for him. In fact, often doesn't even
occur to him. And that's landed him in some difficulty over his life. The other
thing that this surgery did to him was it convinced him that he was defective,
that he was bad, and that there was something wrong with him that would be wrong
with him forever. And I think in a sense, as a 12 year old boy, he kind of gave
up and decided, well, that's me. I'm just the, I'm the kid, you know, his father
called him big enough and ugly enough to qualify for a medical operation. I'm
just the kid, as he said, as he said to me one time, I was trapped in a play and
the play had me in the role of the bad guy. I've tried to piece my life
together. It took a long time, a lot of trouble. I got in a lot of trouble as a
young adult drugs and alcohol and criminal activities, so to speak, you know,
trying to steal and make money and make a living. And it's very hard to do. You
don't walk up to people and say, hi, I had a lobotomy because if you do, you
ain't gonna, ain't gonna be around you long, you know. Howard Dully visited the
archive in Washington, D.C., which holds a collection of Walter Freeman's
surgical instruments and his patients' case notes. Dully told us about the
moment when he held the steel leucotome, which Freeman used to perform his
lobotomy. Empowering in a way, believe it or not, it kind of took the power away
from the instruments themselves, made me feel powerful because I lived through
it. You know, that's pretty much how I tell myself I won is because I lived
through it. By 1967, Dr. Freeman had personally performed more than 2,900
lobotomies. In February, at Herrick Memorial Hospital in Berkeley, he performed
his last when a patient died of a brain hemorrhage. Freeman was stripped of his
hospital privileges and soon retired from his medical practice. The fact that he
was able to do all of this reflects, you know, the state of the medical
profession at the time, where you didn't need to be licensed as a surgeon in
order to perform this procedure in which you cut brain tissue, in which you
could publish your results, which were not, you know, not randomized. It was
just, you know, case studies. And these case studies of, I judge this patient as
improved, would seem to be scientific evidence. So it's more a question of, you
know, what went wrong in our profession or where in our profession, as in
psychiatry, were we able to accept these results as better? What does that tell
us about our profession? What does that tell us about society? Then what's wrong
with this individual guy? I mean, he was a rough character. People had strong
emotions to him. He certainly was not easy to get along with. But the story
here, of course, is not whether he was a hero or a villain, in my mind, but
rather, how was he able to do this and being seen in such a positive way at the
time? And how can we think about now, today, we think about this as, you know,
as severe human rights violation. At best, one can excuse him for being a man
with a vision that was so narrow that he didn't see the damage he was doing. At
worst, he's simply an example of medical human evil. And his behavior is
inexcusable on any level. Although lobotomy casts a long shadow, today, a small
group of surgeons around the world believes there is a role for neurosurgery for
mental disorders. Something they stress is very different from what went before.
They are using treatments like deep brain stent stimulation for patients with
severe depression and obsessive compulsive disorder. Neurologist Dr. Helen
Mayberg of Mount Sinai Hospital, New York. Deep brain stimulation is a medical
procedure that involves the implantation of a small wire, an electrode in the
brain, attaching it to a battery pack that allows you to deliver very precise,
small amounts of stimulation to a particular place in the brain. It's designed
as a technology to treat several very intractable medical conditions,
neurological conditions. And it's been around since, well, it's been around as a
concept for, you know, since the 40s, since the 1940s. But in contemporary
times, it was really reintroduced for the treatment of neurological disorders in
the 80s to treat Parkinson's disease and tremor. So in my own work, I study
depression and have looked to map out brain regions that aren't working, that
evolved with the different methods to think about a circuit that is
dysfunctional in depression. So our entry into this field was to take what we
knew about circuit physiology, nodes in the brain, and actually to say, we know
how other treatments work and we want to affect that specifically by targeted
modulation of the brain. So our patients are basically at the end of the line.
As an experimental treatment, they were enrolled to see if it was safe and then
to see if actually, if it's safe, does it do anything that's useful? When
patients are truly refractory to the very best psychiatric treatment or non-
surgical treatment that we have to offer, the alternative is either to not offer
these patients and their families therapies or to consider performing surgery.
So this gentleman has a very severe obsessive compulsive disorder, OCD. The
rituals are ruining his life. He spends hours every day going through rituals.
Neurosurgeon Ludwig Zrinzow recorded a recent operation for us. This is one of a
small number of operations carried out every year in the UK for patients with
Tourette's, obsessive compulsive disorder and depression. Essentially taken over
his life. He's gone through everything that medicine has to offer in terms of
medical therapies for OCD as well as psychological therapies for OCD. And
nevertheless, he remains severely disabled by this. So he's inquired about
surgery and we've gone through the usual routes of getting permission through
the Mental Health CQC, the Care Quality Commission, to ensure that he has
exhausted all other therapies. And we are now performing surgery for OCD. In
fact, we're going to perform a radiofrequency ablation of the internal capsule,
what we call a capsulotomy. What we do nowadays is completely different. There's
absolutely no similarity on any level as to what used to happen with lobotomy.
Very often performed freehand without any sort of imaging to see which part of
the brain was being damaged, without the rigorous framework of multiple
psychiatrists being involved in patient selection or even follow-up, without
highly trained surgeons who are very, very specialized at delivering very safe,
very precise, targeting of the brain structures that are causing the symptoms.
So despite this, I do think that there is a fear of lobotomy that means that
there's a fear of surgery, which I think is important. It is important to
understand that surgery is a big thing. It's a big step and it needs to be
regulated. It needs to be done in a way that is not just a matter of a few
minutes. It's a matter of a few hours. It needs to be examined and it needs to
be studied and it has to be done with the best interests of the patients in
mind. But the flip side is when we do see patients who have exhausted absolutely
every other therapy, it would be remiss of us not to pursue promising therapies,
even though some of them might be surgical. So as we enter the brain, you can
start hearing the impedance. The number of patients so far is small. In contrast
to the many people who have OCD and those that reach a point of being resistant
enough to consider surgery, it's modest. And that the total number of cases is
in the hundreds, if maybe up to a thousand worldwide. So now we're looking at
the post-operative MRI. And we do this to check where the lesions are. And we've
done all the measurements and the calculations. And we see we're less than one
millimeter away from where we intended to be. So the perfectly placed lesions
without any complications on the scan. So job well done. Every time now knowing
that I can do a scan, we can predict with millimeter precision that when we turn
it on in that place, there will be an effect in real time. And we can see the
same thing with a millimeter precision. So we can predict with a millimeter
precision that when we turn it on in that place, there will be an effect in real
time with a predictable effect in the operating room and stimulating there will
have a person evolve and return to who they are. It doesn't get old. Get some
scientists to agree to do some mapping of Howard's brain and to look at, you
know, physically what had been done and how the brain had reacted and where
there was scar tissue and where there was growth where there shouldn't have
been, or there wasn't growth where there should have been. The strange and
touching moment that came out of it was Howard felt a sense of immense relief
looking at the images because he saw, because he saw that he had a brain. The
pathways in my brain have grown around the damaged areas and to parts up here.
And they're pretty little colored or red and green and all that. And, you know,
I sit there and gaze at them, I have no clue to what each one means, but someone
must. My concern there is, is, you know, you say the brain repaired itself, but
to what extent? In other words, did every part that I got taken away from me
replace itself? And does it work as well as it would if it wasn't damaged
before? It would be easy to think of lobotomists as cavalier monsters. In fact,
perhaps more challenging for our assumptions, many were doctors trying to
innovate, trying to help. You have to put it in the context of people that were
being treated, were agonizingly ill with delusions, hallucinations, there were
no medicines, there were barbaric things done in asylums. This seemed amazing.
I'm sure they felt as confident in what they were doing at the time as we like
to think we are confident now. But iteration and follow up and seeing what you
did right and seeing what you did wrong, making sure it continues to be safe
over days, weeks, months, years, and changing if what you thought well
intentioned and well regulated and well studied, you will learn something new
that actually may change your whole formulation and you have to be open
scientifically for those shifts. And if you're not, we'll be looked upon, you
know, 100 years from now and going, what were they thinking? I was like a zombie
for four years.