TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-22H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
... on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds on Saturday night at 8. BBC News at nine o'clock.
President Biden has used a speech in Poland to insist the United States and its
allies won't waver in their support for Ukraine. Speaking ahead of the first
anniversary of Russia's invasion, he said Vladimir Putin's lust for power and
land would fail. In his own speech this morning, Mr. Putin blamed the West for
provoking the war. The main nursing union has suspended a planned 48-hour strike
in England next week after agreeing to resume pay negotiations with the
government. The health secretary Steve Barkley is due to meet bosses of the
Royal College of Nursing for discussions tomorrow. Our health editor Hugh Pym
has the latest. We learned in a joint statement from the government and the
Royal College of Nursing that they were about to start intensive talks over what
would aim to be a fair and reasonable pay settlement. Now that sounds quite
anodyne, but I think you can assume that the Royal College of Nursing wouldn't
have agreed to these talks if they hadn't felt assured the government was
prepared to talk about pay in this financial year, potentially adding to the 4%
already awarded. That's been the sticking point up until now. The National
Education Union has rejected pleas from ministers to call off its own strike
next week. Teachers across the north of England are due to walk out next
Tuesday. The government has indicated that a 3% wage rise for experienced
teachers next year would be reasonable, but the NEU says that would amount to a
pay cut because of soaring inflation. ASDA and Morrisons are limiting purchases
of some fruit and vegetables, including tomatoes and cucumbers, because of a
shortage of fresh produce. It's been blamed largely on extreme weather in Spain
and North Africa, where floods, snow and hail have affected harvests. A British
army officer who made a record-breaking trek across Antarctica has collected her
MBE at Windsor Castle. Captain Preet Chandi, known as Polar Preet, completed the
longest ever solo polar ski expedition in January. Two years earlier she made
what's thought to have been the first unsupported expedition across Antarctica
by a woman of colour. BBC News In half an hour here on Radio 4, Jim Alkaliwe
will be talking to a world expert on dust. The cosmic kind. The astrophysicist
Hayley Gomez will be discussing her life scientific at half past nine. But
first, it's time for Inside Health. Tonight, James Gallagher is getting his
sperm checked for a special edition about male reproductive health. Hello there
and welcome to Inside Health. For this edition, I'm doing a test that I'll be
honest is both intimate and intimidating. Can I get you to confirm your name?
Yes, we're talking sperm counts and whether they're falling. Basically, just to
say that you must produce your sample via masturbation only. Try not to use any
lubrications or any saliva if possible. If you do need lubrication, give us a
call and we can provide you with a sperm-friendly lubrication. Just a couple of
things to note on the form. You will need to confirm whether you've had a fever
in the last three months. I have not. Perfect. You will need to state your
abstinence, which should be between two and five days. It is between two and
five. This is the specimen pot. Once you're done producing your sample, just pop
it into the clear specimen bag there and then you can give us a call. Thank you
very much. So I'll leave you to it and don't forget to lock the door behind you.
Thank you. That's a good tip. Hello. Hello. How are you? All done. You good?
Right, so if I could just take your sample, so time of production, I'll just pop
that on there and did you manage to get the entire sample into the container?
Yes, I did. Okay, I'll show you the way out when you're ready. I'm ready.
Perfect. Thank you very much. Take care. We'll find out my results in a moment
because today we're investigating what's happening to our sperm and whether it's
getting harder to have children. Professor Cheryl Homer from the Fertility
Clinic is going to do the analysis, but first we're joined by a couple that
she's helped. Susannah Richard, welcome to Inside Health. So take me back. When
did you first start thinking about having children? Richard said, I've been
thinking about it. Given our age, why don't we both just go and get tested?
Because if there are any challenges, that it'd be good to know because then we
can get them addressed. So we were trying to be proactive about it, I think. And
Richard, what were the results for you when they came back? So I remember where
it was actually. I was walking to the car and it was Professor Homer. She said,
oh, I've got your results and there's some good news and some not so great news.
And I was like, OK, you know, and it was that awful. Suddenly I didn't turn the
ignition on in the car. And I was like, well, what's the not good news? She told
me my count was no, my mortality wasn't that great. And she explained everything
in great detail. I was like, this is not what I was expecting. And my mind
started racing and I message Suzanne. And Suzanne, what was going through your
head at that moment? I kind of feel punched in the side. I just remember that I
still look lurching, my heart dropping. They said it so low that there's almost
zero chance of you conceiving. And that only chance would be through IBF. But
that was very slim. This is not what I wanted to hear. You know, having had that
conversation with Suzanne, having realised I'd met the love of my life and I
wanted to have a family and we were that little bit older. Did you really feel
the burden of that? Yeah, I did. And I think as a man, we all think we're a bit
of a stud and, you know, we will spend our youth trying not to get anyone
pregnant and everything. And then actually doesn't always mean that you can get
someone pregnant because you might have an underlying problem that you are not
aware of. And I thought as a man, well, what can I do? We're going to hear from
Suzanne and Richard again shortly. But for now, Professor Cheryl Homer from
Andrology Solutions and the University of Kent has come into the studio. So
we're investigating where the sperm counts are falling. And Cheryl, you've got
my results. Shall we go through them? Oh, I'm delighted to do that. So from a
sperm point of view, the three main things we're looking at is the count, which
obviously... That's just the total number. Funnily enough, you'd think it was
just the total number, but it's the parameter that seems to be more related to
your fertility for some reason is the count per milliliter of ejaculate. OK, so
like the concentration. The concentration, exactly. And your concentration is
borderline. It's not what we would call low, but it's borderline. Not the right
line. On the lower end of normal. We also report the total count as well, which
is the total number of sperm in the entire ejaculate. And that was also
borderline. So what that immediately tells me is that your testes might be not
functioning 100 percent because that's where your sperm are made. They're going
OK, but they could be doing better. Now this isn't crushing me because I've had
my children. And so kind of like, but I can imagine that you would have
conversations where this is really relevant to people's lives. So when you have
a borderline count, the thing about sperm parameters is that they aren't a sort
of cliff edge where you have a reference value. And if you're at that level or
above, everything's fine. And if you're below it, it's a disaster when you're in
fertile. It doesn't work like that because a lot of people have sperm counts
that are below the reference range and are perfectly normally fertile. And then
there are a lot of people who have counts in the normal range and they can't get
their partners pregnant. So I think we have to get it into proportion. Don't
panic. But I think it is very important that if we start to see something that's
a little bit borderline or not quite right, we need to start asking questions.
Why is it that the testes aren't functioning 100 percent? Now, are you looking
at things in my life that I might be doing that could be the reason for that? Or
can I go like I'm in the twilight of my 30s now? I'm not 18 anymore. Does that
have an impact? So I think age does have an impact. There are some papers that
have reported that semen quality can decline with age. I don't think 30 years
old would be considered the point at which we would expect to see things
deteriorating. Twilight of 30s. I wish it was 30. No, absolutely not. And I
mean, theoretically, men should be fertile their entire lives. I see plenty of
cases where that definitely happens late into old age rock stardom. But I think
if I were to be presented with a person who was having difficulties conceiving,
I wouldn't want to put this on the back burner. I'd want to know why. With this
one in particular, with the count, you need to be very scientific about this and
say, what is causing this? And there could be a lot of things that are causing
this. Yes, of course, your lifestyle is important and it is a factor, but it's
rarely the sole problem. So when you're looking at me and those results, what
are you thinking? Well, first of all, one of the things that's really important
about a semen analysis is that it is a marker of your general health. If you are
unwell, one of the first things that happens is your fertility starts to
decline. Certainly infections can have an impact, particularly if they raise
temperature in the body. So high temperature would also be a potential cause of
a low sperm count, which is why you read a lot in the media about wearing cotton
boxer shorts because you don't want to wear tight underwear to heat your testes
up. You don't want laptops on your laptops on your lap cycling, which I know
that you do. Not everybody is affected by these things. But if you are heating
up your testes, depending on your physiology, it can possibly affect your sperm.
Because of course, why are your testes outside your body? Because they need to
be a little bit cooler. That's right. So even just heating them up a couple of
degrees causes potentially a huge problem for sperm development. Do you know
what the leading known cause of male infertility is? I don't. So strangely
enough, a lot of people think it's lifestyle, but it isn't. What is it? The
leading known cause is varicoseal. I don't know what that is. So that is
literally, it's like a clump of varicose veins in the testes. And what it does
is it impairs blood flow in the testes. So you get an engorgement of blood from
the body, which is at 37 degrees and it heats the testes up, which should be at
33 to 34 degrees. So it heats the testes up to 37 and it causes a lot of heat
damage. So we're aware of the heat damage impairs sperm, but when you have a
varicoseal, that's it. I'd say he likes to come out. Well, as you can hear,
Richard and Suzanne Story had a happy ending. You're a little chatty chappy,
aren't you? So how did they get there? I read everything and I found out through
Sherem as well that it not has to do with the temperature of your testicles. And
at the time my lifestyle was very healthy, so I had not huge worries there, but
I was consuming a lot of coffee. I was biking a lot. Then I thought, okay, well,
what are we going to do? And I saw putting peas on your testicles was a great
thing. So I went and bought some bird's eye peas. I was to say, I've put frozen
peas on many parts of my body, but... Exactly, yeah. That's a new one. I mean,
these peas stayed with us right to when we had Freddie, actually. I hope they
just got binned at the end. They were loyal. Yeah, they did get binned. They
weren't cooked and they haven't gone into any of the street. So the peas are
there and it was summer, so it was really hot. And I suddenly realized that
actually tight boxer shorts are really bad for you. So I changed all my boxer
shorts. When did you find out you had a varicoseal? I actually did know I had a
varicoseal. I remember a doctor years ago saying, you know, you should keep an
eye on that because you might need to have it operated on in future. But it
never changed in shape or size. So I just kind of ignored it, really. What was
the varicoseal like? Was it something you could notice, something you could see
or feel? Yeah, you could see it and you could feel it. Naturally, if I'm honest,
it's like a bag of worms with one particular large worm underneath the skin.
Suzanne, had you ever heard of a varicoseal before? No. It transpired that it
was a grade three varicoseal, which is quite high grade. And that was
contributing to the heating of the testicles. So for the majority of the day,
when I didn't have a pair of like ICPs on my testicles, they were actually
getting heated. And the fact that it's such a major contribution to my old
infertility. Was it easy to have it removed? Yeah, it was over in a blink of an
eye and cut off the blood supply to this particular vein. And then he asked her
to spring, which he looks at, and he described it as the spring that you find in
a pen. And then tell you to lead a normal life. I remember the rich to come in
and super excited because he felt we'll be back in the game. With a bunch of
flowers in one hand and a bag of frozen peas in the other, right? Exactly,
James. How long did it take after you had the operation and you're doing all
those other things? I was having cold showers. I was jumping in cold plunge
pools. There wasn't a thing I didn't try. Suzanne, correct me if I'm wrong. It
was just over six months, wasn't it? Just over six months that we can see
naturally. Yeah, yes. Which was pretty special. I wish you many nights full of
sleep and rest. Well, thank you, George. Knowing that you won't get them. Well,
I will tell you the one we've got then. Thank you very much for inviting us. If
you do have a varicoseal and you have fertility problems, it's present in about
40% of infertile men. You need to get it checked and you need to discuss with
your doctor whether you can get it repaired. What I find fascinating about that,
Cheryl, is that it's something I have never heard anyone discuss. Exactly.
Cheryl, when I did the sample, I had to have abstained from any form of
ejaculation for a very set period of time. It had to be at least two days in the
clear, but no more than five. Why that window? If you have a short period of
abstinence, your testes don't have enough time to output more sperm. So when you
actually come to produce your sample for analysis, it's too low count. So we
need to wait two days for it to recuperate. And what about at the other end? The
other end is also very important because sperm don't live forever. You're making
sperm. Every time I'm talking to you now, every second you're making a thousand
sperm. A thousand? A thousand sperm a second. Can't help looking at my watches
the second hand takes round. Would that be just then a load of dead sperm?
Exactly. So we need to get it just right. And again, it's important for white
people who are infertile. A lot of people are not having regular intercourse.
They're saving it up for ovulation because they think the more they save it up,
the better it is for ovulation. But of course, you're removing about 50% of what
you have inside you every time you ejaculate. So you are basically clearing them
out. So the more often you ejaculate, the more you get rid of the dead sperm and
the more fresh and alive they will be when you want them to fertilize your
partner's eggs. There are a couple of other things though that you look into on
there because it's not just the sheer number of sperm in there. It's kind of
like what the individual sperm themselves are looking like. So it's about what
they're looking like and also the way they're moving. Now your motility, the
percentage of sperm that are moving looks very good. It's well within the normal
range and they're moving what we say is progressively they're progressing,
they're moving forward. So they're getting somewhere. The problem is that
they're not moving fast. If you look at the comments... Oh, they go forwards but
slowly. They're sluggish. So that's one issue that I'm thinking, they're not
happy chappies, are they? And the other thing too that's quite telling is the
shape of the sperm, the morphology is not great. Yeah, I saw that headline on
the report. The phrase 98% abnormal is one to terrify anybody. I think a lot of
people are absolutely terrified by this and they absolutely focus on this as the
main thing. One thing to understand is that morphology is probably the least
correlated with your fertility out of all the parameters that we look at. The
other thing is that the reference value is only 4% normal forms. I find that
remarkable. Take any man off the street, the most fertile person you'd come
across and you'd be like as long as 4% of your sperm are okay, we think that's
normal. But think about it, you're producing millions and millions of sperm. Why
do you produce millions of sperm? One of the reasons could be that the majority
of them are pretty ugly. They're not able to get in. So when we do the shape
analysis, and again, it doesn't mean they're abnormal inside. It doesn't mean
they're genetically abnormal. We're talking about just the shape. So it's like
looking at a car and if it's a bit bashed in, it still might be able to drive.
Although I do have to say that there are certain types of morphological defects
that we know are associated with genetic abnormalities. And actually, your type
of morphological defect can be associated with stress to the testes, including
heat damage. I'm suddenly thinking about that our New Year's episode of Inside
Health when I was submerged in 40 degree water. Doesn't help. Well, it may have
helped other parts of my body. It's a great one if you want to see more of the
episodes on BBC Sounds. How much can you trust a snapshot at one moment in time?
Like how variable is someone's sperm quality? Like if we did this in six months,
would you expect it to be identical? We wouldn't. If you've got a borderline
value like this, I would probably say to you, let's just make sure you're not
doing anything silly in your lifestyle and let's just recheck it again. And it
does take three months for the sperm to recover to anything that you're doing to
it. Cheryl, I'm curious, because how many years have you been looking at sperm?
Oh gosh, I'm ancient, so at least 30 years. And you're very much at the sharp
end of it, so you're not looking at what's happening to the general public.
There's this big debate and argument about whether sperm counts are going down.
What does your experience tell you? I think that there still seems to be a trend
for decreasing sperm counts. I think from the literature that I've read, that
appears to be the case. Professor Homer, thank you. Now, whether sperm counts
are actually falling feels like a real really important question and one that we
should have the answer to. And yet it's the source of massive debate. So let's
thrash it out because I'm joined by two people who really don't agree. Professor
Alan Pacey from the University of Sheffield and Professor Richard Sharp from the
University of Edinburgh. So Alan and Richard, welcome to Inside Health. Thank
you. Thank you. So I'm going to ask you first of all, let's try and get this as
simple as possible. Alan first, are sperm counts falling? I think the case
currently is unproven. Richard. On balance, I would say that they are, but I
recognise that we can't prove it conclusively one way or another. And Richard,
when we say sperm counts are falling, do we mean they're falling for every
single person or is it just a small group that having really big drops in their
sperm count and therefore that's bringing down the overall average? The best
evidence we've got is that it's a change affecting the whole population, not
just a subset. Okay, so let's try and tease apart why you've both looked at the
same evidence and come to slightly subtly different conclusions. Like, Richard,
do you think there is a case? So just describe it for me. The number of studies
over the past 15 years or so have all shown that when you analyse sperm counts
from men unselected for their fertility status, sperm counts appear to be lower
now than they were in the past. And that's based on many thousands of individual
men. And when you say unselected for their fertility status, that means this is
just when you're looking at Joe Public? Absolutely, because if you were focusing
on men who had fertility problems, then you would expect that they would have a
lower sperm count than the male population. Alan, you look at those same bits of
scientific research and don't come to the same conclusion. Well, I see the lines
on the graph going down, but what I find really difficult is the fact that over
time we've changed our technique. And there's been a lot of emphasis over the
last 20 or 30 years to improve our sperm counting or our sperm quality
measurement technique. And of course, if we haven't kept our technique the same
over time, then you have to ponder whether it's technique rather than biology.
I'm not going to lie, the moment I opened my report and found out that 98% of my
sperm were abnormal, I was having a bit of a moment. I think that's perfectly
natural. And I've seen many, many hundreds of men that have had the same
reaction. I think that particular measure of sperm health and assessment of size
and shape is so terribly difficult to do. Okay, but if I were to just look at
the study that came out towards the end of last year, it was published in Human
Reproduction Update, and it was a big study looking across 53 different
countries across multiple continents and seemed to come up with this consistent
pattern. And the numbers in it feel terrifying, like concentration of sperm
falling from 101 million per mil down to 49, so more than halving, total sperm
counts falling by 62%. I mean, probably terrifying lots of couples trying to
conceive. Yeah, it's scary. But we haven't seen in that graph that people have
moved hugely from the normal to the abnormal, where we might have clinical
concern. And that's why for me, this is still within the realms of measurement
error. I would disagree, because although I recognise what Alan is saying, and
there is truth in it, the way that people first came to wanting to measure sperm
counts to determine if there had been a fall with time was to do with other
aspects of male reproductive health changing for the worse over a similar time
period. And the leading such change was in testicular germ cell cancer, which
has increased progressively across the board in many countries, and it is a
disease of young men remarkably. So when people then put their focus on sperm
count, it was in that context. And Richard, we've heard a lot about varicoseal
today, or something that was really new to me, but do we know if that's going up
in incidence over time as well? It's a condition that's actually quite poorly
diagnosed and not reliably diagnosed in every centre. So you would need very,
very good data to actually evaluate whether there had been any change. Well, let
me ask a completely different, well, subtly different question then. Are we more
concerned about male fertility today than we were 20 or 30 years ago? Richard?
I'm concerned because leaving aside whether sperm counts have fallen, the
situation that we have today is that in men of reproductive age, there is
something like one in five, one in six men, depending on where you live in
Northern Europe, who has a sperm count that is low enough to negatively impact
their fertility. It doesn't render them completely infertile necessarily, but in
a modern context of where couples are only starting to try for a family when
they are in their mid-30s, and I'm particularly focusing now on the female
partner being in their mid-30s, her fertility is in progressive decline and is
already reduced by 30 to 60% compared with in her 20s, early 20s. Combine that
with a partner who has a low sperm count, which will mean that it will take him
longer to impregnate his partner than if he had a higher sperm count. That's a
recipe for increasing infertility because time isn't on their side. Alan, do you
share that analysis? I do. We should absolutely be concerned because the example
that Richard gave about increasing incidence of testicular cancer, the data is
really clear and there's no way that you can argue your way out of that one, and
that concerns me greatly. So it suggests that something is happening to the
testis or the developing testis to mean that in older adult life, there are more
likely to be fertility concerns. Whether that manifests itself in dramatic
changes in sperm count, I don't think is the important question because of all
of the reasons that I think that that data is difficult to understand. The aging
stuff's really important, but I wanted to slightly put it to one side because
that's people's choice and what often guided by society is not always a choice,
but I'm just slightly more interested in whether there are environmental factors
or the things that we're either doing to our own bodies or are being done to our
bodies that are affecting our fertility. It depends at what point those things
are being done. Adult men, couples interested in their fertility always focus on
the question about what they are doing now and what they can change now in their
lives. And actually the evidence suggests that there's actually very little in
terms of lifestyle influences on adult fertility. Where it gets more interesting
and where I'm going to hand over to Richard because he's done my work in this
area, are potential exposures of the foetus before the male was born being a
really sensitive part of that process. So Richard, when I'm thinking about my
fertility, do I really need to be thinking about what my mum was doing, you
know, 30 plus years ago? It does appear to be that. And of course, there's
nothing that you can do about that in retrospect. So the best evidence that we
have is that there is a critical period during early foetal development. So when
the foetus is tiny, just a few centimetres long, that the foetal testes at that
time start to produce testosterone, the male sex hormone. And it's that that
brings about the masculinisation of the body. Otherwise it would develop as a
female. And it's that process that appears or maybe going wrong. And we know
that if it does go wrong, then it results in a cascade of changes which can
increase the risk of having one or more male reproductive disorders later in
life and potentially sperm count reduced fertility in adulthood, although that
is the one that's the most difficult to study. Of course, if we're talking about
consequences in terms of sperm count in adulthood, we've got to wait 20 or more
years before we see what has happened. You can start the study, Richard, then
your grandkids could finish it off. Best of luck with trying to get funding for
that. I read a lot as well about kind of like endocrine disruptors, kind of like
the fact that we live in a far more chemical world. And it's those things that
are getting inside our bodies and affecting fertility. I think the jury is very
much out on that. The majority of the people who work on this are absolutely
sold on this being the case. I am far from convinced. In fact, I've become less
and less convinced as time has gone by that that is the primary mechanism that
we should be looking at. Alan, if you were to take a pair of 25-year-olds today
and a pair of 25-year-olds in the 1960s, does it take longer for them to get
pregnant now? The basis of your question is at the heart of what we call a time-
to-pregnancy study. And one would predict the 25-year-olds in modern times today
would take longer, but that might be due to a variety of reasons, including
sexual frequency. And we know that sexual frequency in people today is lower
than it was 30 years ago. And there's data to show that. So I'm not sure that
that will necessarily give you a handle on the sperm count question. I can't
help but be struck, though, by it feels like the consequences of not knowing the
answer to this are huge. Like if sperm counts are falling as precipitously as
some of these studies claim, and that was projected out into the future, a
journalist like me would be forgiven for writing end of human race type
headlines. It's going to take more than just good science. It almost takes a
good political will to get behind this. Do we need to know the answer to whether
sperm counts are falling? That's a really good question. I would like to know
the answer because I think it would give one more element of evidence to whether
male reproductive health is under the level of crisis that we think, but
arguably we might be able to answer that question through other means. So
fertility rates, disorders of the male reproductive system such as testicular
cancer, we could look at how the uptake of assisted reproduction is around the
world. So there are big, big, massive hundreds of thousands of pieces of data
that doesn't rely on the sperm count that are proxies of male fertility. And we
could be doing more with those. And we can never go back in time and check sperm
counts from the past using modern techniques. So I think that to some extent,
it's a question that we are always going to be debating and never completely
resolve. Richard Sharp, Alan Paisley, thank you so much for coming on the
programme. Thank you. Thank you. And thanks as well to Professor Cheryl Homer
and especially to Suzanne, Richard and baby Freddie. Everyone at the Inside
Health team wishes you years of parental joy to come. I think the debate about
sperm counts is going to continue to rage, but it's clear male fertility is
something we all need to pay more attention to. See you next time. Inside Health
was presented by James Gallagher. The producer was Erica Wright. Now on Radio 4,
we have a look ahead to The World Tonight at 10. We're joined by Ritala Shah.
Hello, Amanda. Tonight, two presidents, two speeches. President Putin says he's
suspending participation in the last remaining nuclear arms control treaty. So
how serious is this and what's the mood in Russia? We hear from a former senior
leader of NATO. Meanwhile, President Biden's reaffirmed his support for Ukraine,
but is there a real US strategy for ending the war? Also, the government here
has published its public sector pay recommendations for the coming financial
year. Could this mark the beginning of the end of strike action? The SNP
leadership contender Kate Forbes has denied her campaigns been derailed by her
comments on gay marriage. But is there any way of gauging public reaction in
Scotland? That's all coming up on The World Tonight at 10. Thanks, Ritala. Now
on Radio 4, it's time for the Life Scientific. Here's Jim Alkalili. Hello and
welcome to the Life Scientific. Today, I'm in the Pierhead building in Cardiff
for the Cardiff Science Festival. And I'm talking to an astrophysicist who grew
up just down the road from here in Barrie. Both her parents left school as soon
as they could, but she stayed on in education as long as possible, studying for
a degree and PhD at Cardiff University, where she's now a professor of
astrophysics, specialising in cosmic dust, those small particles of matter
spread out through interstellar space. For centuries, cosmic dust was nothing
more than a source of irritation for most astronomers, because like smog, it
prevented them from seeing the stars. A bit like the foggy view I saw here
across Cardiff Bay when I arrived this morning. Now, cosmic dust is challenging
some deeply held assumptions about the physics of stars. And being able to see
through it has revealed a lot more of the universe. Professor Haley Gomez from
Cardiff University, welcome to the Life Scientific. Thank you. Thanks for having
me. Well, Haley, I should perhaps have introduced you as Haley Gomez MBE,
because in 2018 your work was recognised by the Queen. That must have been a
nice surprise. Yes, it was surreal. I still remember the day I was changing
nappies on parental leave. Very glamorous. Yeah, very glamorous. And yeah, the
letter came and I had to read it out to my husband and say, is this a parking
ticket or is this something else? And it was very strange. And I suddenly
thought, oh, I still got to change the nappy. I've got to carry on doing that.
It was for services to physics and in particular all the work you've done to
inspire the next generation of physicists and astronomers. Which outreach
project would you say you're most proud of? We did a project called Universe in
the Classroom, which I'm really proud of because it took physics and astronomy
and excitement of space into primary schools. So it kind of looked at talking to
very young children and even those children already had ideas about who could be
a scientist. So they often drew a male scientist, a white scientist, lab coat
and glasses. And we found that after kind of working with them a little bit and
telling them about space, they ended up thinking of a wider range of scientists.
They drew themselves as scientists or they drew people that were like
themselves, which was really lovely to see that even though those old fashioned
thoughts of science and who could do science at such a young age could actually
be turned around. So I feel really proud that we managed to do that in Wales. Of
course you yourself are a shining example of how you don't have to be a certain
kind of scientist. So Hayley Gomez, let's talk about what got you into
astrophysics. You grew up in Barrie in South Wales and I understand both your
parents were unemployed for most of your childhood. Is that right? Yeah, we had
a very nice childhood, but it was very noisy. There were five of us in a kind of
council house and yeah, there was nobody around us that had any desire to go to
university or even do A levels. It was kind of, that wasn't the path that
everybody took. Everybody just took the leave school when you can, get a job,
settle down. But I've always found learning is quite a calming, quiet process.
And I think part of it was an escape from that kind of loud, chaotic family. My
producer tells me you spent a lot of time at the local library. Yeah, that's
right. I had a lot of freedom as a child. So one thing my parents were really
good at is that they would just let me walk down the bottom of the street, go
around the corner local library. And I would sit there all day, every day. And
is that for the peace and quiet or for the books? Peace and quiet and the books.
But I love the fact that you could find out anything. So books for me were a
huge escapism. So it was wonderful. And I remember reading such a wide range.
I'd read asterisk comics, even though they were in Welsh and I couldn't speak
Welsh. I would still read them. And then I read lots of stories and I kind of,
it sounds very cliche, but I stumbled upon a book, which was an encyclopedia of
space. And I remember opening it and there was this really badly drawn sketch of
a black hole. And I remember just being caught up in that. How can there be a
hole in space? How can there be a black hole in the universe? How do they even
know that exists? And I remember from that point on, I just thought I need to
know what's going on here. And that's what that's, that's been your journey,
hasn't it? Because you're now a professor of astrophysics. So tell me, Haley
Gomez, were you a stellar student at school? No. How should I be here? I liked,
I did well in physics and maths. I didn't really enjoy them, but I did well in
them. So I kind of chose to take them on. I loved learning. So I knew I wanted
to do A levels. And for your A levels, you actually had to switch schools
because you went to an all girls school. But then to do it, you had to go to a
boys school. That's right. It sounds very old fashioned. I was in a girls, all
girls, comprehensive school, and they didn't do physics in the girls school at A
level. And I had to go to the boys school and, you know, walking, walking down
the atrium of the boys school, thousands of boys kind of kept calling and wolf
whistling and shouting at you, walking through the atrium to get to the sixth
form room. And there were about 12 girls in this school, compared to a thousand,
a thousand, over a thousand boys. It's quite, quite tough. So how did you cope?
I had, you know, I didn't cope that well, actually. I had some very good
teachers. I had a math teacher who really encouraged my interest in space and a
physics teacher who did the same. But I actually I kind of got a part time job
and most of my friends were just dropping out of school. And I just kind of
thought maybe learning isn't my journey. Maybe I should just get a full time job
and leave. And I didn't I didn't do very well. You'd also left home by this
point. That's right. Yes. Yeah. So I'd left home by 17. Again, it's the noise.
And I shared a room with my sister and to 17 year old girl sharing a room is
just so yeah, I left home and I had to pay bills, you know, so I had part time
jobs. You didn't get high A level grades. No. But you still managed to get into
Cardiff. That's right. So I, yeah, I did very well. Very badly. I mean, I'm not
ashamed to say I had to see and do these at a level. And normally that wouldn't
get you into an astronomy degree at university. But I only applied to Cardiff
because it was the local department and also because I knew some of the research
they were doing. I was interested in it. And I got I got accepted after an
interview, which was wonderful. They let me in even though I hadn't got the
grades expected, but they could see I had a passion. And so yeah, I got in, I
somehow scraped in. And since then it's been you know, I've never left. I love
it. Was it plain sailing as a as an undergraduate? No, no, no. A year one was
fine. A year two I found that I actually I have a letter home from one of one of
my now colleagues, a professor in the department who wrote me a letter home
saying if you don't back up your ideas, then we're going to have to kick you
out. You know, you're not coming to lectures, you're not, you're not doing what
you're meant to do. But this was because you were working. I was working all
night in a petrol station in Barrie. And so I just didn't go very often to uni
and I'm still getting okay grades, but I just I just wasn't going. And when I
got that letter, I thought, okay, I either now leave or I stay. And if I stay, I
have to make it worth my while. And I kind of felt a little bit, you know, a
professor telling me that I'm not turning up to lectures in a letter was quite
scary. So I did decide to actually focus on the studies. And then, you know, I
just loved it. Working fewer hours at the petrol station. Yes, absolutely. Yeah,
yeah, a little bit more sleep. Always good. Well, Haley Gomez, after your
degree, you stayed on at Cardiff to do a PhD. Was this the point when you became
interested in cosmic dust? Yes, I had a wonderful PhD supervisor called Mike
Edmonds. And Mike was kind of had these crazy zany ideas where he kind of wanted
to challenge the status quo of science. And he said to me a very simple question
at the beginning of my PhD, he said, look, everybody thinks cosmic dust comes
from a star a bit like the Sun. And they think that this pollutes the universe
with dust grains, which can go on to form rocky planets and can form life
itself. I'm not sure it can. So these were, we say, smaller stars, like our sun
that when they when they die at the end of their lives, they sort of shed their
outer layer as they cool. And it's a quite a gentle process. But that's what was
thought that was the consensus, the textbook description explanation that that's
how dust is formed. Absolutely. So these these kind of fading, small stars
produce all of the dust that we see in the universe produce the building blocks
of planets and so on. And he just kind of had this idea that they're not that
many of those stars, but we find that the universe is polluted with a lot of
dust. So could it be that we're missing something here? So we just made kind of
mathematical models and showed that yeah, actually, it can account for it a
little bit of it, but nowhere near enough. So what was the alternative
explanation? At the time, we we put forward the idea that it could be stars that
are very massive. So stars that we know when they die, they explode quite
violently. These supernovae. Supernovae. Yeah. So these explosions of huge
stars. And we know in that explosion, you get a huge amount of material, metals
that gets flung out in space. But one thing was thought at the time is that that
couldn't make dust. Or if it did make dust, it would be vaporized because the
explosion is very hot. It's not very not very hospitable place for dust grains,
little particles of carbon or silica. So we kind of thought, well, okay, nobody
believes that dust is formed in these supernovas, these big explosions. But
actually, if we model it, can they explain this shortfall that we have in the
dust budget? And they do, they easily explain it. You need a little bit of dust
per supernova explosion. And you can explain all the dust you see in galaxies.
So this was your PhD work. You wrote up your findings in a paper. This is in
2003. Yes. How was that paper received? We had a very nasty referees report for
that paper, actually, it was very, it was very critical. But we were able to
answer that referees questions and criticisms and it made the paper a lot
stronger. So I believe actually that that process was really helpful. And then
we, we kind of went away and we decided to look at a supernova and to see if
that's how there's a big difference between solving the equation and developing
a computer model that makes a prediction and actually looking out there in space
to check. Yes, you need to you need to see it with your own eyes, as it were, or
with your telescope eyes. And so we decided to look at a supernova nearby
Cassiopeia A, and we wrote a paper in nature to say that, hey, there's a lot of
dust in this supernova. Maybe our theory is correct. And maybe the consensus
everyone has where dust isn't produced by these stars is absolutely not correct
or misleading. And that, that kind of got quite a lot of attention, that paper.
I mean, not bad for a 24 year old who'd spent her student years working in a
petrol station to have a paper in nature. So earlier in your career. Yeah, I
mean, I, the thing is, I was really lucky enough to have such wonderful people
to work with. So it was, you know, not only Mike Edmonds, but also a colleague
of mine, Laura Sedern, who, who led that work. And, you know, I did the modeling
for it to show it, it would work, it would fit everything. But it kind of our
high became a low quite quickly because soon after we published that paper in
nature, a German team published a paper where they said we were wrong. And that
was, that was quite interesting. It was just literally our, our paper dusting
supernova remnants and their paper was no dusting in supernova. Okay, that's
quite clear what you mean by that. So what was their argument against your, your
prediction? They argued, and I think it's a really good argument that what we
were seeing was not dust in the supernova explosion, but dust between us and the
supernova explosions. If you imagine you look out with your telescope, you look
for the glow from dust and it's, you can pick up all the dust between you and
the supernova. Okay. So they thought it might be a dust cloud in the front that
just happened to look like it was in the supernova. And, you know, they made a
good point, except the, the measurements weren't quite right. So we now know
after other teams have got involved and so on that actually the, we were right.
But at the time, how did it feel then to be, to be shot down? You'd had to argue
against the referees for your first paper. Now you have this big paper in
nature, the most prestigious science journal in the world. And soon after they,
they, you're told you're wrong. I mean, you must've felt a bit down. Yeah. I, I
kind of felt, I don't really care who's right. I care about the science and what
it shows. I mean, I'd be happy to say it was wrong if it was wrong. So I didn't
take it too personally. And of course it must've felt good when you were. Yes.
Proves correct. Yeah. Yes, it was very good. So we had a 2009 paper and since
then other groups have also verified that yes, there is a huge amount of dust in
the supernova. And you know, here you were still, you know, in your mid twenties
mixing it with the world's top astrophysicists and astronomers. Clearly you've
made it as a scientist now. How did your parents feel? Were they very proud of
your achievements? Yeah, they're very proud. I don't think they quite understand
when I'm talking about papers and referees are just okay. That's, that sounds
strange. I don't think they quite understand but they've always been really
proud. They understand things more like the MBE and things like that. They can
kind of grasp that more. But yeah, they're very proud of me now. Okay. Let's
talk a little bit about the astronomy and how we detect this cosmic dust. Of
course, everything we know about stars and galaxies, we learn from capturing
light from telescopes. There's no other way we can learn about the universe. We
can't see this dust, however, using optical telescopes, visible light, because
obviously the light doesn't get through the dust. But we can detect it directly
in the infrared part of the spectrum because these dust particles radiate heat.
That's right. Yeah. Even things that we think of as cold still have heat.
Everything above absolute zero has heat. And all we need to do to see the heat
is use infrared cameras or goggles. So, you know, we're used to kind of seeing
infrared images about houses maybe to look at where heat is escaping. The
thermal imaging. Thermal imaging, yeah. Thermal imaging, infrared cameras. We
radiate in the infrared. Our heat glows in the infrared. So we had the challenge
as a community to try and build telescopes that can see this heat from dust
grains and see them glowing in the infrared. Well, in mind, the Herschel space
telescope was launched. And that was hugely for because that's an infrared
telescope. So that must have made a big difference for how you could see this
dust. Yeah. We had very little idea of what the infrared universe was like. And
the reason I say that is because what makes Herschel special is its ability to
see large bits of the sky, large bits of space. So instead of just looking at
one small patch, you can map a whole area. So instead of 100 galaxies, you know,
have orders of hundreds of thousands of galaxies. So you're opening a new window
really on the universe. And not only that, but it was able to see different
infrared colors. So what I mean by that is it didn't just look at one type of
infrared light. It looked at a huge range of infrared light. And so it could
capture the glow from very cold dust at minus 250 degrees. And it could capture
the glow from very hot dust. So you could see all the dust for the first time.
And it turns out 90% of all the dust in the universe is actually cold. And no
telescope before Herschel saw that. And of course, it provided a lot of data, a
lot of work for astronomers around the world. You focused in particular on one
object in our own Milky Way galaxy, not a distant galaxy, the Crab Nebula. Why
did you focus on the Crab Nebula? Well, I love the Crab Nebula, and I've always
loved it. You know, if you imagine the famous image from the Hubble Space
Telescope of these incredible filaments of gas, this star exploded a thousand
years ago in our own galaxy. It was thought to be seen with the naked eye. And
the imagery of it is just incredible. Always has been incredible. It was quite
an accident that I managed to analyze the Herschel observations of this object.
It was actually the person who was supposed to be leading that work didn't get
around to it because of other work constraints. And so they asked me to look at
it. So it was a bit accidental. And I looked at it and I remember getting the
data from Herschel, it emails you and says, oh, your space telescope has taken
your data. You're the first person to see it, you open it and you just think, oh
my gosh, this is the first infrared view of all of the dust in a supernova
remnants. So it was so it really is very visual. That's not like you're dealing
with numbers. It's there. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You literally press a button and it
comes from the pipeline from the telescope and you open it up and you can see
the Crab Nebula. You can see the dust in the Crab Nebula at all different
temperatures and you can see where it is. And yeah, it was quite a surprise. So
what do you do then once you see this picture? Well, first thing I did was think
there's a lot of dust. There's a lot more dust there than I'd expect. And
there's a lot more dust there than anybody would expect. So I made a measurement
of how much I thought was there. And it's really amazing that people think this
is complicated, but it's literally year one undergraduate physics. You take the
image of the Crab in different wave bands that Herschel saw and you put a circle
or an aperture down and a lit down and you say, how much dust is in this
ellipse? And you do that in all the different wave bands. And that tells you how
much you have to make it glow the way that it glows. So black body physics
basically. And I did that and I thought, oh, that's quite a lot. That's a lot of
dust. That's 200,000 worth of rocky planets worth of dust. That's about 200,000
more than people expected. And I just presumed I'd got it wrong. So I presumed
I'd made some mistake. But I mean, this was really confirming the work that
you'd done over the past, how many years, I mean, your PhD work, making that
prediction that supernovae, these large stars exploding produce dust. It was
your nature paper that then got criticized. He were looking at data from this
Crab Nebula, the remnants of a supernova. So I mean, you've confirmed what you,
what you would hope to find. Why were you still doubting it? Because it was such
a big number. You know, I expected, I hope to find some dust. I didn't expect to
find this much dust. And if this is true and all stars explode like the Crab
Nebula, then you know, we've got loads of dust in the universe. And that's
great. That solves all our problems, but it is different to what the textbooks
say. So I asked my colleagues to recalculate it blindly. So I gave them the data
and said, you do whatever it is you do to get the amount of dust and we'll
compare it. And they got the same answer. And you published this work in 2012.
Yes. Has this now changed the textbooks description of how dust is made?
Somebody needs to write this textbook actually, because the original textbook,
the original textbook has not changed. It was in 2003 and it hasn't been updated
there. But I am very pleased to see that now papers and publications are now
starting to say just comes from stars like I'll send and massive star
explosions. I guess the moral of the tale is if you don't look, you don't find.
And also that sometimes scientific consensus can be wrong. Not always, but
sometimes, or to be more precise, the scientific consensus is often only part of
the truth. Yes. And I think the lovely thing here is that Herschel opened our
opened our eyes, as it were, into how rich the infrared universe is. And that
allowed us to have a different view on things. So we were able to partner that
up with the theory and the maths. Now, clearly, Haley, this has been your life.
I, as a fellow physicist, find it tremendously exciting. But I suspect that
there might be people who are thinking, so what? Who cares how much cosmic dust
there is in the universe? And certainly, why does it matter where it's made?
Yeah, I think that's a valid question. And what I would say to those people is
that if cosmic dust is really important for assisting stars forming, it's also
important for assisting complex chemistry, things like DNA and so on. You kind
of need some molecules and dust grains in space to form those things. And so it
really is a question of the origin of us, of life and the places where life
could potentially exist. And the thing about the textbook explanation of dust is
that would mean the first stars after the Big Bang, you would need to wait a
billion to 10 billion years before you have those raw materials ready for life.
Because stars like our sun live so long. Live so long, exactly. And it takes
such a long time to get to their death phase, their stellar death. Stars like
the ones that we're looking at, supernovae, they are within 10 billion years of
the first stars in the universe, you have the materials for life. So you're kind
of changing the timescales it takes to build up those raw materials for life.
That's kind of what I would say, it's a question of our origin as well as those
little rocks in the space between stars. I mean, to take a line from Bob Dylan,
the answer, my friend, isn't blowing in the wind. It's hidden in cosmic dust.
Oh, yes, great. But it is quite something, isn't it, to think there's all this
cosmic dust out there that we didn't know about before and how much we've learnt
from it thanks to work of you and others just in the last decade or two.
Absolutely. And it seems like a long time ago now, 2009 to 2013. But people are
still going through the data, the rich data that Herschel has taken. And we've
been looking at the half a million galaxies it discovered that were not seen
before. They have seen the first time. You see, that is the other thing, isn't
it? Not just are we learning how this dust is made, but now that we have the
instruments that can see the dust, we can sort of see through it. And so much of
the universe was hidden before. Yes, and I think that what Herschel has done is
not only show, reveal this part of the universe we didn't see before, so we're
seeing things that are odd and strange and then need to be explained in some
way. So, yeah, it's completely changed our view, I think, of the universe. And
what's lovely, you see these pictures, astronomy pictures now of, say, a galaxy
or supernova, invisible light. And now you can see the same thing but infrared.
And you can put those two together. And it's basically giving us a much richer
description of the universe than we've had before. That's right, yes. And the
thing that I always kind of think about is that dust grains are so small, you
know, we talked about a foggy day in Cardiff Bay, that's what dust is like. It's
little tiny particles, a bit like a smoky room or foggy room. They are tiny
size, they're a tiny mass of a galaxy. And yet they can block out 90% of the
total starlight of a galaxy. So they profoundly change our view of everything.
With Herschel, we kind of get that missing puzzle back. It's like now suddenly
we can see the universe in a bright sunny day rather than through the fog.
That's right, exactly. The fog is clear, yes. And all this because you and other
scientists started to ask questions to challenge the consensus and find answers
about cosmic dust. Well, now it's time for some questions from my audience here
in Cardiff. And so if you would like to ask Hailey about her life or about her
research on cosmic dust, raise your hand and we'll get a microphone to you very
quickly and don't be shy. And what are you interested in researching next? What
are some of your big questions? Oh, that's a really good one. I've kind of moved
back towards the 2003 work, kind of gone full circle there. And we are trying to
work out what's making these very extreme galaxies that Herschel has discovered,
what makes them tick. So we don't know why, but they form stars thousand times
faster than our galaxy. So something is different in those, is it the gas, is it
the more stars form, is it that there's more dust, what's going on? So I kind of
want to know, I want to pin down why those things are so weird and so extreme
and why we don't see them in the universe today. I would like to know, what
would you say to a young counsellor state girl from multiple generations of non-
working families who would love to be a scientist, but don't think they can
because of where they come from? Well, you can. You definitely can. And I feel
like not being upset by things that go wrong actually has made me push through
areas where people might go, you don't belong here. I have had that. I've had
those experiences. And I think you kind of use your hard notes kind of like, you
know, I'm a camp counsellor girl or I'm a counsellor boy and you kind of go,
yeah, I can take it. And you just, you can do it. If you like maths, if you like
physics, you could be a space scientist, you could be an astronaut. Yeah. Hayley
Gomez, thank you very much for sharing your life scientific. And thank you too
to my audience here at the Pierhead Building in Cardiff. I'm Jamal Khalili, my
producer was Anna Buckley. And of course, you can listen again on BBC Sounds.
Thank you. Thank you. And the life scientific will be back next Tuesday. Now,
just before the world tonight, let's take a quick look at the weather. Tonight,
a lot of the UK will be cloudy with spells of rain pushing east. These could be
heavy. Northern Ireland, Scotland, Northern England and North Wales could see
some snow on the high ground and it will be breezy in the far west. Tomorrow,
much of the UK will see cloud and spells of rain clear east to leave sunny
spells but also showers which could be wintry on hills. However, east and south
east England will remain mostly cloudy all day without breaks of rain. On 92 to
95 FM, on 198 Longwave, on Digital and on BBC Sounds. This is BBC Sounds.