TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-14H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 FM, 198 longwave, digital radio and BBC sounds. This is BBC Radio 4. Hello and
welcome to the World at One with me Sarah Montagu. Three men are arrested after
a police officer is shot at football practice in Northern Ireland. He was
accompanied by his young son and in fact putting footballs into the boot of his
car when two gunmen appeared, fired multiple shots. John ran a short distance
and as he fell to the ground the gunmen continued to fire shots at him. Police
blame dissident Republicans. We'll hear why. A year on from Russia's full-scale
invasion of Ukraine we have an eyewitness account of what happened in the city
of Mariupol as it was overrun. We organised a shelter in the kids' room with
lots of mattresses. We just managed to get there and then I heard a very strong
explosion and that was exactly in the same spot when I was cooking the food.
With the United Nations preparing to vote today on whether to demand that Russia
immediately withdraw from Ukraine, we'll ask the UK's United Nations ambassador
if that isn't too little too late. And we'll be remembering the voice of BBC
football, John Motson, who has died at the age of 77. It was voted the goal of
the season and for me it was the goal of my career. One of the many commentators
he inspired, Clive Tilsley, will tell us what made Motti so special behind the
mic. The BBC News is read by Vigie Allis. Three men have been arrested in
connection with the attempted murder of a senior police officer in County
Tyrone. Chief Chief Inspector John Caldwell had been coaching football at a
sports centre in Oma when he was shot last night. He remains in a critical
condition in hospital. From Oma, our Ireland correspondent Chris Page has the
latest. All morning police officers in white forensic suits have been carrying
out searches in the car park where their colleague was shot. John Caldwell was
putting footballs into his car with his son when he was attacked by two gunmen.
He ran from them and when he fell on the ground, the men continued firing at
him. Eyewitnesses have said the sports complex was busy with children at the
time. The investigation is at an early stage but police have said they're
focusing their inquiries on the group known as the New IRA. It's thought to be
the largest and most active of the dissident Republican organisations who are
opposed to the peace process. Three men have been arrested in County Tyrone.
They're aged 38, 45 and 47 and are being questioned in Belfast. The leaders of
the five biggest political parties at Stormont have issued a joint statement of
condemnation. The Irish Prime Minister, the Taoiseach Leo Varadkar, said the
shooting was a grotesque act. Rishi Sunak described it as appalling and
disgraceful. New figures show that the number of asylum seekers waiting for the
Home Office to make a decision on their claims has reached record levels. There
are now about 166,000 people on the list with the majority of those waiting at
least six months. The Prime Minister has pledged to reduce the asylum backlog by
the end of the year. Our Home Editor Mark Easton reports. Rishi Sunak has vowed
to stop the migrant boats crossing the Channel by swiftly returning asylum
seekers arriving by irregular routes. But his hopes of speeding up the asylum
system by eradicating the backlog of cases have been dealt a blow by new figures
showing the numbers awaiting even an initial decision from the Home Office has
risen by 60 per cent in a year, topping 160,000 for the first time. Ideas to
clear the backlog include granting asylum to migrants from five countries with
high acceptance rates without the need to attend a face-to-face interview.
Instead, they must complete a ten-page form in English. The number of individual
asylum claims in the UK was 89,000 last year, the highest number for 19 years,
but still well below the numbers applying in Germany, France and Spain. The
Labour leader, Sir Keir Starmer, has promised that if his party wins power at
the next election, the UK will have the highest growth in the G7 by the end of
its first term. He's been setting out five missions that his government would
prioritise in a speech in Manchester. Our chief political correspondent Nick
Ardley was listening. These pledges, Labour says, will be the guiding missions
of a future government led by Keir Starmer. You can expect to hear a lot about
them in the next 18 months or so, and were promised more tangible targets in the
coming weeks. The key economic pledge Labour is making is a bold one, to ensure
the UK has the highest growth in the G7 by the end of its first term in power.
It's a sign of confidence that the party is already engaging with what it would
do in a second term, part of a so-called decade of renewal. But a list doesn't
provide results on its own. Just ask Ed Miliband, whose famous six priorities
were written on a stone and didn't lead to an election victory. The
Conservatives, said Sir Keir, lacked the principles needed to lead and was
offering no new ideas. Scotland's chief constable has announced he will retire
in the summer after nearly six years in the job. Sir Ian Livingstone said Police
Scotland had delivered best value to the public purse and praised its work
through the COP26 climate summit in Glasgow and events which followed the death
of Queen Elizabeth at Balmoral. He had recently raised concerns about financial
pressures facing the service. Kate Forbes, who is vying to succeed Nicola
Sturgeon as Scotland's First Minister, has said she is greatly burdened and
heart-sore about the reaction to her comments on gay marriage. The finance
secretary, who is a committed Christian, said she would not have backed same-sex
unions if she had been an MSP when the legislation was passed and some of her
backers withdrew their support as a result. In a lengthy Twitter post, Ms Forbes
said she never intended to cause hurt and would protect everyone's right to love
without harassment. The Premier League has given a cautious welcome to
government plans to establish an independent regulator for men's football in
England. It was recommended in a fan review last year with the aim of making
clubs more financially resilient. The League said it appreciated the move but
stressed it was vital that regulation did not damage the game or its ability to
attract investment and grow interest. The legendary football commentator John
Motson has died at the age of 77. Known affectionately as Motti, he started
working on Match of the Day in 1971 and commentated on nearly 2,500 games,
including 10 World Cups, before his final match in 2018. Our sports
correspondent Andy Swiss looks back on his 50-year career with the BBC. With his
infectious enthusiasm and his trademark sheepskin coat, John Motson was one of
football's most famous voices. He joined the BBC in 1968, but his big break came
four years later in an FA Cup tie between Newcastle and non-league Hereford.
That commentary on Ronnie Radford's goal turned Motson into a household name. He
went on to cover 29 FA Cup finals and more than 200 England games. Paying
tribute, the director general of the BBC, Tim Davie, described him as a
legendary figure in British sports broadcasting. John Motson, who's died aged
77. Fiji, thanks very much. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell is currently
in a critical but stable condition in hospital in Northern Ireland. He'd been
coaching a young sports team in Oma last night and was with his son when two
gunmen attacked him. At a press conference this morning, Assistant Chief
Constable Mark McEwan described what happened. Around 8 o'clock last night, we
saw that John was finishing up from coaching an under-15s football team. He was
accompanied by his young son and in fact putting footballs into the boot of his
car. When two gunmen appeared, fired multiple shots, John ran a short distance
and as he fell to the ground, the gunmen continued to fire shots at him. We'd
like to acknowledge the assistance and the quick, brave actions of one member of
the public who gave first aid and the actions of our partners in the ambulance
service. At this time, there were many other young people, children, awaiting
pick-up by their parents and those children ran for cover in sheer terror
towards the centre. Three men have been arrested. The Assistant Chief Constable
explained the focus of their inquiry. Our primary focus of that investigation is
on violent dissident Republicans and within that a group called New IRA. We
continue to work against these groups. We know that they have a level of
capability and as we've seen this horrific attack play out last night. As I say,
we're keeping an open mind. That's where the focus of the investigation is at
this moment and you will understand why I won't be drawing on further detail at
this time. Well, the attack was condemned across the political spectrum. A joint
statement from all the party leaders in Northern Ireland said there was no
tolerance for such attacks by the enemies of our peace and those responsible
must be brought to justice. The Reverend Graham Hare is Rector of St Columba's
Church in Oma and he was giving a service as the attack happened. Last night
actually, with it being Ash Wednesday, the beginning of Lent, we had a service
in church and actually during that service some members of the family became
aware of the events unfolding and had to leave that service and at the
conclusion of that service then the news began to break across the congregation
of exactly what was unfolding on the other side of town. Do you know how the
family are? The family are in an enormous sense of shock and disbelief and I
think due to the reality for anyone who goes through trauma like this, there's a
sense in the immediate days of disbelief. We're dealing primarily here with a
husband and a father and so our immediate thoughts and our prayers are for John
and for his family. Did you speak to some of those who were there? I have been
in contact with parents who were collecting the children and I mean the tragedy
here is that here we have a public servant, a man who put his life on the line
day and daily in the pursuit of justice and the pursuit of peace and here he was
serving his community as a football coach alongside his son and friends and it's
in that environment that these evil cowards choose to come and gun them down in
front of children and it is that barbaric evil that I think has shocked this
town to its very core. Reverend Graham Hare, Liam Kelly's Chair of the Police
Federation in Northern Ireland. Good afternoon. Liam Kelly can you hear me?
Sounds like we have a problem with the connection to our guest. Liam Kelly can
you hear me? Lines, I'm told the lines dropped. Listen, we'll try and sort that
line out and we'll get back to hear his thoughts but let's move on to another
news story today which is that there are currently a hundred and... ah, before
we move on I'm told we might have the line up again. Liam Kelly can you hear me?
Liam Kelly? I can hear something. Liam Kelly can you hear me? Yes, sorry. Hello.
Great stuff. Good to talk to you. Sorry, the line dropped just as we were coming
to you. We were just hearing from the Reverend Graham Hare who's Rector of St
Columbus Church just about the response to this group, the dissonant group
that's behind it. You know people, you know there are so many different groups,
we've heard about obviously the real IRA critical to the OMA bombing back in
1998 but now this, the new IRA, can you just give us an explainer of who they
are? Well firstly good afternoon and the first thing I want to do is absolutely
condemn what has happened last night to one of our off-duty officers. Again John
Caldwell is a dedicated, experienced senior detective and is a professional
police general but also he's a decent hard-working family man who's committed to
improving society both personally and professionally and last night he was
involved in the little spare time he has in providing voluntary coaching for
young people and community service. So I mean it's absolutely abhorrent that he
has found himself in the position that occurred last night. In relation to the
new IRA who are the main line of inquiry that Pias and I are following for this
attack, they have been what are termed a dissident Republican group of small
numbers but in that part of Northern Ireland they do have obviously a dedicated
resource, albeit small they have showed they have deadly intent and that has
manifested itself before, most recently before Christmas when we had a gun
attack or we had a vehicle attack on police officers in Derry City in Srebrenica
both on a patrol vehicle and with a bomb being left outside a police station. So
this group are real, they exist within Northern Ireland context and my appeal
today is for the public to come out and give the police the information to get
these people put before the courts and put behind bars. Are they an increasing
threat do you know? Well they have had a diminished threat because the security
services in conjunction with Pias and I and our partners have been able to
infiltrate the group and we have had a number of successes over the last few
years in relation to them but they still have a cohort of support and experience
so in relation to whether they are growing or not I really can't comment on that
but what I can say is they are clearly still here and they are obviously posing
a threat and that manifested itself last night. In terms of their motivation is
it possible to say to what extent it is political, ideological or even criminal?
I have no idea what their motivation is because they have never come out and
said that. I can only speculate as to previous groupings that they seem to think
particularly in operating in a political vacuum that violence is the answer to
get whatever their warped ideology is over the line. So it will be interesting
to see in the coming hours and days whether or not any particular group actually
claims responsibility for the attack on John Caldwell last night and what
ideology they are going to attach to that but ultimately the ideology that they
may or may not have is doing nothing for our society. It just creates misery and
heartache and it is bereft of any humanity. I mean we had a man providing a
community service last night, shot multiple times in front of not only members
of the public and children but his own son. I mean that's absolutely abhorrent.
Do the police have the resources they need to deal with it? And the reason I ask
is that in 2019 the head of the police service of Northern Ireland Simon Byrne
asked for more funding to help deal with an increase in paramilitary activity.
Is it still a challenge? Well it is absolutely a challenge and again because of
devolution and reducing budgets for our government in Northern Ireland the
policing budget has unfortunately been slashed over the last number of years and
I mean the projection for next year is that it is going to be cut by a further
£100 million. That's not going to help the police in dealing with this. So I
mean I would call today that those in power, particularly in Westminster at the
moment because we've no devolved government in operation in Northern Ireland at
the moment, is that they actually give the Chief Constable both the funding and
the resources that he needs to keep our community and to keep our police
officers safe. Liam Kelly, thank you very much. Now then let's move on because
there are currently 166,000 people waiting to hear if they will be granted
asylum in the UK. That's how big the backlog is according to the latest data out
this morning. Of those, 110,000 have been waiting for longer than six months.
While they wait they can't work and they need to be housed which is why hotels
across the country have been booked up and paid for by the government for some
of those. Madeline Sumption is Director of the Migration Observatory at Oxford
University and it's across all the numbers Madeline. Good afternoon to you. Good
afternoon. Just first of all the size of that backlog, it's just been increasing
year after year hasn't it? Yes, the backlog is big. As you said, 160,000 people
and it's increased by around 60% over the last year alone. But this actually is
a long-standing problem that we've seen much slower processing of asylum claims
over the last five, almost ten years and that has allowed the backlog to build
up steadily, particularly over the last five years, even before the recent
uptick that we've had in asylum applications. Okay, why is that? There's no
single explanation for it. I mean the key thing that comes out of the data is
that fewer decisions are being made per decision maker in the system. One of the
factors that's often been identified is the high staff turnover and low morale
among decision makers and so you have a situation when if you have newly
recruited people it takes them some time to get up to speed. We've also seen
some other factors like additional steps that have been inserted into the asylum
process as a result of policy changes that may have contributed. Okay, well we
have this idea of fast tracking some. Given that the Prime Minister has promised
that the backlog will be gone by the end of the year, 12,000 people who are from
countries like Afghanistan and Syria and who applied before July will have the
option, well, will be able to fill out a ten-page form in English within a
certain time frame and to be granted asylum potentially without an interview.
There's been a huge amount of criticism from all sides. What's your view of it?
I think this is an interesting one. I mean different people, some people have
said, you know, this is a very permissive policy, some people have said this is
a crackdown. I think it's probably neither. I think it's actually relatively
uncontroversial in principle. We're talking about a group of people here who are
effectively guaranteed to be given asylum eventually. So the question is, is
there any point in having people sit in the backlog for a year and a half, often
more, during which time? We know that being in that backlog hurts their
prospects after they do get status. So I think it's more just a process designed
to make the system a bit more efficient. It's been used, similar types of
processes have been used in a number of other countries. There are of course
some questions around the details of how it's done. So one of the concerns, for
example, has been, you know, it's not just sort of checking, are you in fact
Syrian or Afghan? There's quite a lot of information that's being requested in
the questionnaire. And so I think one of the concerns has been, will there be
any support for people to fill it out, especially since it is in English and
that there's a lot of information that they're going to have to provide.
Madeleine Sumption, thank you very much. Well, the Prime Minister has made the
stopping of small boats of migrants crossing the Channel one of his five key
pledges, setting out his priorities. So what difference would it make to those?
Natalie Alfix, the Conservative MP for Dover and Deal, where many migrants come
ashore. Good afternoon. Good afternoon. What do you make of this fast tracking
idea? Do you think it's going to make any difference? Well I think as we just
heard, one of those ideas is perfectly sensible in terms of administration
within the Home Office, which certainly needs to be more efficient and speeded
up. But there is a serious risk of sending mixed messages to the people
smugglers and indeed emboldening them. And that's my real concern with this
development. Because on the one hand, we say if you come into the country
illegally, you can't stay here. And now on the other, we're saying unless you
came in before last summer, in which case just make sure you get your paperwork
straight. So I am concerned that this will send mixed messages in an arena where
we need to be very, very clear about the fact that we do not think people should
be coming into the country illegally. Well, you think it will make a difference
to those now because it's only going to apply to people who came before July and
only from certain countries and who would, as you say, probably get asylum
anyway. And we know that the people smugglers, they're not concerned about
backlogs, they're not concerned about the time it takes. What they sell is when
you get here, you can stay here in the UK. And that's at the very heart of their
business model. And that's why stopping the boats, particularly leaving France,
making sure we have returns and all those other measures are so very important.
So I do think there is a serious risk of mixed messaging and that we'll have to
see what happens in the next weeks and months. And most importantly, what
happens in that March summit with President Macron in terms of whether we see a
real breakthrough in practical action on the ground to stop the small boats. I
mean, with 166,000 people in the backlog now, I mean, something needs to be done
to speed it up, doesn't it? Well, there are lots of areas where there are
backlogs and those need to be addressed. So if we take the 100,000 households in
temporary accommodation, many who've been in temporary accommodation for many
years, the NHS waiting lists and so on, there are a number of areas where,
particularly because of the Covid pandemic, there are backlogs which need to be
addressed. I think what's really important when it comes to the small boats
crossings is that these are incredibly dangerous. These are criminal gangs and
they have cost lives. And it's absolutely imperative that we take steps to make
sure that people are not making these crossings in the first place. So I am
concerned that the latest developments on the fast tracking of particular claims
can lead to this emboldening of the people smugglers and ultimately could be
counterproductive in our efforts to end it. Are you frustrated that there hasn't
been a plan released by the Prime Minister yet on dealing with this thing that
he says is his priority? Well, I've met with the Prime Minister a number of
times, the Immigration Minister. In fact, I've met, had a very good meeting with
the Immigration Minister on Monday. So I know a lot of work is being done across
government and it is a key priority of the Prime Minister. But the bottom line
is the boats are still coming. And I think, you know, representing Dover and
Deal, people are fed up. They really want to see an end to these boats arriving.
The pressures on local services, on housing, on education, on healthcare are
considerable across Kent. I was in a meeting with Kent leaders only last week
and there was real anger about the impact that this was having on their
communities right across Kent. So I think those pressures would ease if asylum
seekers were allowed to work. Is that something that you think that could make a
difference and possibly ease some of the pressure as well that's growing with
far right groups who are gathering to campaign against asylum seekers? Well, I
think at the heart of the difference that this will make is that people will
still need to be housed somewhere. And what we will see as people go through the
processing system is that their responsibility within the Home Office family of
accommodation will come to an end and that will become a responsibility where
people need housing with local authorities. And that is an area that is already
causing considerable strain. OK, but what about working? Just in a word, are you
opposed to asylum seekers working? I think it's really important that everyone
who can work does work. And I think it's very important that we do encourage
people to play a full role while they're waiting for asylum and contributing to
their communities. Natalie Alfick, thanks very much. An island in North Wales
has been officially recognised for having one of the best night skies in the
world. We are going to come to that later, but not now because we are, it is
exactly a year after Russia's full scale invasion of Ukraine and the United
Nations General Assembly will vote tonight on whether to demand that Russia
unconditionally and immediately withdraw. It's the third such vote in the past
year and the numbers voting in support of Ukraine are not expected to be as high
as the last vote when 143 out of 193 member countries backed Ukraine. And for
many it illustrates the problem with the United Nations. Its Security Council
was created in 1945 to put an end to wars and yet in the face of this one it has
seemed impotent. We'll speak to Britain's ambassador to the UN in a few minutes.
But we thought it was worth casting our minds back a year because one of the
Ukrainian towns that experienced the worst of Russia's assault is Mariupol.
Elena Selenko, a journalist at Ukrainian TV7 channel, lived there with her
husband and two children. And she told me what it was like living there after
Russia invaded. We intended to stay. We just hoped it would be like in 2014, it
would last two or three days and the Ukrainian army will deal with that. But
28th of February, that was the last day when we had electricity. And the first
days of March, the connection disappeared. That's when the hell began. We
couldn't call anyone. We didn't know what was happening with other people. They
turned off the water as well. We had to melt snow and collect the rain. And also
we were cooking outside on the open fire and all this after heavy shelling. As I
understand it, your flat was shelled. I just managed on 16th of March, I just
managed to cook food and I took it inside in the house and then I heard the
sound of plane and we just ran to the shelter. We organised the shelter in the
kids' room with lots of mattresses. We just managed to get there and then I
heard a very strong explosion and that was exactly in the same spot when I was
cooking the food. I know you have two young children. I think that's when you
decided to leave, wasn't it? It's not then when we decided to leave Mariupol. We
tried to find food everywhere where we can. Some people were looting, some
people were stealing, but there were some supplies. There were already a lot of
dead people on the streets and dogs were eating their bodies and that was a
horrible, horrible scene. But at that point we thought we can stay, we would
survive. But on 24th of March they started shelling our area so heavily for
several hours without stopping and a lot of people in our area died. So we were
really, really scared. We couldn't imagine anything like that. How did you get
out? I decided me and my kids, we need to leave the city. My husband couldn't
come because he was staying with his ill mum. So early in the morning on 25th of
March, me and my two kids, they were eight and ten started walking on the heavy
shelling. And then we consider ourselves very lucky because we saw a minibus
from Red Cross and he was asking, oh, who is going to Berdiansk? And we managed
to squeeze in there, it was already packed. And there were block posts every
200, 300 meters. I could see Russian soldiers and they, on each checking point,
they asked all men to remove their clothes. They were looking for the marks left
by guns and tattoos on our bodies. Two people didn't come back to our bus. One
was a young guy, allegedly they found a picture of him with a gun from 2014. And
the other one was a young boy who didn't have any documents with him because his
house was destroyed. They suspected that I was a sniper because my hair was
unwashed and I had short fingernails. But then I managed to persuade them that
I'm a housewife. What about your children? How are they coping now with all that
they've gone through over the past year? We live not far from the airdrome and
each time they heard an airplane, they squeezed and looked up. It was initial
reaction. They knew they're in safety, but they couldn't help it. And also they
couldn't listen or read any scary stories because they were deeply traumatized,
I would say. And once my little son told me, Mom, I was so scared when they were
searching you in Berdyansk. I was so, so scared that you wouldn't get back like
those two people they took away. Elena Selenko talking to me and she said that
she hopes to go back to Mariupol in the summer. We shall keep in contact with
her to find out the chance of that. Now, the United Nations was created to
ensure peace and stability in the world, but it really has looked powerless in
this conflict. Dame Barbara Woodward is Britain's ambassador to the United
Nations. Good afternoon, Dame Barbara. Good afternoon, Sarah. There is a vote
tonight on the General Assembly. However it goes, though, what difference is it
going to make to the war in Ukraine? I think the vote tonight, which will be to
call for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine, will send a very
important signal a year from Russia's invasion that the vast majority of the UN
membership wants to see peace in Ukraine, an end to the war, and importantly, an
end to all of the consequences that we've seen ripple out across the world, food
security, energy prices. So it will just keep Russia isolated. It will keep the
pressure on Russia to end the war. But does it, though? I mean, you've got a
situation where Ukraine's been warned they may not be able to get the vote that
they got last time, six months ago, when there was a vote on the war, which was
143 out of 193. What it shows is so many countries abstaining and a few even
siding with Russia. So when we have 140, 143 countries, we had that three times
last year in three successive votes. So we've tracked support for Ukraine
consistently across the year. Russia, of course, managed to muster four votes in
support. So that's a pretty poor record for a country that calls itself a global
superpower. And then you're right, there are countries that abstain. But when
you look at why they abstain, I think it's worth remembering that there is a
heavy programme of Russian intimidation here in New York and around the world.
They threaten countries and representatives with consequences. The Wagner
mercenaries are involved in a lot of countries. And so simply abstaining in some
ways is quite a courageous stand to take against Russia, which as I say, has
only seen four countries support it in each of these votes. But it is also one
of the five permanent members of the Security Council. It has a veto on any vote
that goes to the Security Council. It's sort of one's left wondering what
difference the United Nations makes and what the point of it is. I mean, the
whole reason it was created was to try to ensure peace and stability. And it is
powerless here, isn't it? We've certainly been very frustrated in the Security
Council this year because Russia has used its veto. But we tried to use the
debates in the Security Council to expose just how isolated Russia has been over
the last 12 months, to expose the lies, the disinformation, to expose Russia's
false claims about bioweapons. So the United Nations has been very helpful, I
think, in setting out the objective truth. But worth remembering too that the
Secretary General has been very robust in his defence of the Charter and
Ukraine's right to its own sovereignty and territorial integrity. The United
Nations brokered the release of some of the people who were stuck in Mariupol.
They brokered the Black Sea Grain Initiative, which managed to get world grain
or grain out of Ukraine, but then back to put grain prices in the world market
back down again after they spiked following Russia's invasion. So overall, I'd
say that the United Nations has played a constructive role, but it is Russia's
veto, which is blocking real progress in the Security Council. But no country
supported them in any Security Council vote. There does appear to be an
increasing polarisation going on, and it's a charge that's been levelled by
China and Russia. We have this sort of suggestion from China that tomorrow we're
expecting a peace plan on the Ukraine war. Do you welcome that and China
suggesting that? Well, I think we're all calling for a peace plan. That is at
the heart of the resolution that we'll be voting on this evening, a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace for Ukraine. We in the UK are very clear that
this needs to be based on the principles of the UN Charter so that Ukraine's
sovereignty and territorial integrity, its borders, are respected. We don't go
back to a right, a might is right world. If China has got ideas on that, and I
know that their chief diplomat Wang Yi was at the Munich Security Conference
discussing some of that, and he's just been in Moscow, obviously seeing
President Putin and Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov. So it'll be interesting to
see whether the Chinese have a plan that respects Ukraine's sovereignty and
territorial integrity, and also that Russia somehow can sign up to and then lead
to Russian withdrawal from Ukraine. The meetings you mentioned sort of reflect
what seems to be increasing collaboration between Russia and China. Do you think
that there is a sort of danger that the Western approach has resulted in a more
polarised world, exactly what China and Russia are charging, is part of the
problem? I think that we have seen as a consequence of Russia's invasion of
Ukraine that the West, very broadly defined, when you look at NATO, you look at
the G7, have become much stronger and more resolute in their determination to
see those principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity, Ukraine's right
to exist, defended. So that has been a very positive development. China I think
has sat rather ambiguously caught between its stated support for sovereignty and
territorial integrity, Ukraine's right to exist, and this no limits friendship
with Russia, which we saw announced just before the Beijing Winter Olympics last
year, and which they've tried to sustain in the face of quite considerable
difficulty. If China were to start selling weapons to Russia, as Secretary
Blinken suggested after his discussions in Munich, that would put China, I
think, on the wrong side of international law. It is illegal to supply weapons
to an aggressor state, as distinct from what the UK and others are doing, which
is supporting Ukraine in its right to self-defence, and that would undermine
China's status as a responsible, leading country in the world. So we very much
hope that won't happen. Dame Barbara, thanks very much. Now the legendary
football commentator John Motson has died at the age of 77. Known as Motti, he
had a 50-year career with the BBC, working on Match of the Day, covered 10 World
Cups for BBC Sport before he retired in 2018. Here's a reminder of his
commentary and him reflecting on his career to a BBC programme called Match of
Their Day in the late 90s. What really happened was that for the first three
months I struggled really badly and there were people saying, well, I don't
think you're going to cut this at all. And then by a fluke, my first ever FA Cup
tie for Match of the Day happened to be Herriford, Newcastle. Tremendous spirit
in this Herriford side, they're not giving this up by any means. Radford. Now
Tudor's gone down for Newcastle. Radford again. Oh, what a goal! What a goal!
Radford the scorer! Ronnie Radford! And the crowd, the crowd are invading the
pitch. That goal by Ronnie Radford, I mean, people said it was voted the goal of
the season and for me it was the goal of my career. The point about commentary
is it is the only discipline I know in television where you are going to be
doing effectively an hour and a half or two hours of live broadcasting without a
script. Absolutely and entirely off the top of my head, I mean, I have to react
to what happens on the pitch and there's no way that you can prepare or predict
that. Marvellous stuff. A throwback to the old days. Look at this. There we are,
John Mottson-Motty. Well, the sports broadcaster Clive Tilsley was ITV's senior
football commentator from 1998 until 2020. Worked alongside John Mottson at the
BBC in the 90s. Clive, good afternoon. Good afternoon. What are your thoughts
this afternoon? Well, I've lost a friend. So, you know, my thoughts are a little
different perhaps from most of your listeners. But the really outstanding
broadcasters are able to forge a relationship with thousands, millions of people
that they will never meet. And so the mourning of John Mottson today will be
felt almost as deeply by a lot of those people because of the connection that he
was able to make. And I think certain sports commentators are considered
national treasures. You know, the voice of their sport, Pedro Sullivan, Bill
McLaren, Dan Maskell, maybe Brian Johnston or John Arlerton. You won't have a
voice of football ever again now. There's too much football on television, too
many commentators. Nobody quite knows who they're listening to. But you were
never in any doubt who you were listening to when you were listening to one of
those guys or to John Mottson. I saw you tweet that when you were a teenager,
you just wanted to be him. Yeah. My parents, who are not always the best
historians, certainly of only children, would tell you that I was from an age of
eight or 10 or 12, wanted to be a football commentator. And he was the
commentator that, you know, perhaps I've modelled my style of commentary on most
closely. There was a short bridge of four or five years between him being an
iconic voice in the distance and becoming a good friend, because even in my
early local radio career, I got to meet and know him. And he was very generous
with his time and with his support. So it seems strange to say that now, but
it's true. And I was 15, 16, 17 years of age. If I didn't actually want to be
the husband of Annie Mottson, I certainly wanted his job. And he was good to
work with, just briefly. Well, he set the standards, really. And, you know, in
many respects, some of those other names that I've mentioned before maybe had
richer voices, richer vocabularies. But in many ways, I think John was the first
broadcast journalist commentator. He was as trusted by people within the game,
by managers with secret information, as he was trusted by the viewership. And
so, never mind the sheepskin coat and all the crazy stats, we're talking about a
guy who was football correspondent material. We must leave it there. Clive
Tilsley. Thank you so much, talking about John Mottson, who has died. Now, it
wasn't long after the poet and author John Fasano took his seat on a plane
yesterday that he was presented with a rather unusual challenge. It was one he
told me about. Well, I got on a flight. I'm on a book tour for The Swallows of
Lunetto, and I've been touring around the United States. I'm from the New York
area, and I'm headed to Edinburgh, where I am now, to do a few readings and do a
few events. I got on the plane. It was a late flight. I was a little tired, and
I settle into my seat, and this woman sits down next to me, and we say hi, and
then, sure enough, she puts her little tray down and pulls out of her bag my
book. I did not know what to do. I'm normally very comfortable in any given
social situation. I froze like a proverbial deer in headlights. I was not quite
sure at all what to do. I thought, well, this is a long flight. This could go
either way. I'd better give her her privacy. That's the beginning of the story.
But what you did do is you sort of crowdsourced the problem, didn't you? I did
indeed. My social media following is fantastic, and I knew that they would have
some at least lively solutions for me and suggestions. So I quickly, without, of
course, invading the privacy of my seatmate, I didn't capture any part of her, I
think except a knee. I snapped a photo, and I posted it on my Twitter feed, and
I asked my friends there, what should I do? And they got quite a lively
response. So the upshot was what? What did you do? Okay, so I thought, well, and
a lot of people suggested, you'd better wait. You don't know how this is going
to go. And when she opened the book, the lovely woman beside me, she was only on
about page 10. And I thought, oh, I should give her some time. Well, sure
enough, about 10 minutes went by, and I couldn't contain myself. And so I asked
her, are you liking that? And she said, I think so. Which I thought, okay. I
think so. She said, have you read it? And I said, well, about 100 times. And she
looked at me like I was utterly insane. And then I said, well, you know, I
wanted to make sure everything was all right, was correct. And very quickly, she
paused, she looked at me, and she realized, I must be the writer who has
proofread the book that many times. So we had a laugh, and then we had a good
chat. And, you know, I'm doing some events in town, and she's going to plan to
come to one of those. So I think it'll be great. I'm guessing that she didn't
then read the book, because it must have been absolutely excruciating to read
with the author watching you. No, we had some banter. And then I said, you know,
I'll excuse you from the obligation of continuing to read. She had some other
books with her. I said, why don't you go on with something else? Did she give
you a verdict on the first 10 pages beyond? No, we avoided the question
entirely. I guess you'll never know if she does hate it. I will never know. No,
I think we've entered the realm of politeness at this point. Has something like
that ever happened to you before? No, not at all. Sometimes as a writer, you
have these somewhat strange interactions once or twice in a restaurant, that
sort of thing. But no, I think the chances are probably astronomical that
something like this would happen, which is why I had to share it. Joseph Fasano.
And he signed the book to her. Thanks for taking me on your journey. Your
seatmate, Joseph Fasano. Well, that's it from us. Just to let you know, I did
start telling you about the dark skies of Wales' Ennis and Clee, which is Bardsy
Island, and we didn't have time for it. That's my own fault for messing up
timings. PM though. Listen to PM. It's a lovely lesson. PM is anyway, but also
that item. I'm Sarah Montagu, and that's the world at 145. Thanks Sarah. We'll
catch you on PM. Studio direction was by Graham White and the editor was Rebecca
Keating. Now on Radio 4, Matthew Syed continues tracing the history of a word
that divides the world. What's your reaction when I say the word woke? Woke,
multinational corporations. Always politically woke and all that stuff. Tofu
eating, woke karate. Drop the term into conversation and many people will roll
their eyes. It's a word that's come to symbolise an era of angry debate and
political division. I'm Matthew Syed and in the past I've used woke to describe
an overzealous approach to identity politics, but I've come to learn that the
word has a remarkable history, stretching back over a century as a watchword for
African Americans. This is woke, the journey of a word. For this series, I'm
tracing the evolution of a term that I think can help us to understand our
polarised world. I'll be telling the stories of some of those who have written
it, who have said it, and who have been defined by it. In the last episode we
met a woman who brought the hashtag Stay Woke into the mainstream in 2014,
igniting the Black Lives Matter movement. Today's tale is about a remarkable
photo that helped to change the meaning of woke forever. It begins on the 8th of
November 2016 with the election of Donald Trump into the White House. Donald
Trump sweeping many of the key battleground states. At that time, Prisca Kim was
a young mother living in Charlotte, North Carolina. After the elections I felt a
lot of sadness, disappointment and fear. They're bringing drugs, they're
bringing crime, they're rapists and some, I assume, are good people. More than
61 million Americans turned out to vote for Trump in 2016, presenting him with a
decisive victory in the electoral college. Many, including Prisca, were
concerned about what his election meant for minority groups. When you hear
somebody being voted in and that person is attacking people who have worked so
hard for so long to have equal rights and to be seen, to be heard. Trump had
been accused of misogyny during the campaign, particularly after the release of
a recording from 2005 which he described as locker room banter. You can do
anything, grab them by the pussy. As he prepared for office, women were
organising to protest against his policies and his rhetoric. What began as a
small Facebook event in Hawaii became the Women's March. The date was set for
the 21st of January 2017, the day after Trump's inauguration. Millions had
pledged to attend the marches, including Prisca. I think a lot of people were
just trying to process what happened and what led us there. For me, I think
that's what the march was for. She also saw attending the march as a way to set
an example for her two-year-old son, JJ. It was important for me to take my
whole family and my son because one of the things that I was coming into the
march with was my experiences as an Asian-American woman and the stereotypes and
the racism that comes with that, being told to come and give me a massage. When
JJ was barely walking, we were at the park and this man walks past us and just
makes these noises at us, what he believes that Asian language would sound like.
It was mocking and inappropriate. But that was JJ's first racist encounter. And
going to the march together, for me, represented that if there's an issue that
affects women, it affects everyone. At home on the eve of the Women's March,
Prisca decided to make a sign for her son to carry. I texted my sister and asked
for ideas and she's a lot more clever than me and she's the one who actually
came up with his sign. The sign says, I love naps but I stay woke. And I thought
it was age-appropriate because he was barely two at the time. The time of the
march was exactly during his nap time. And so I thought that part was kind of
funny. He made just the straps that could go over his shoulders so as he's
walking, you can see the sign. And then for the word woke, I used the alphabet
magnets that we had. At the time, the phrase, stay woke, was in the cultural
ether. It was appearing in music, online, and it was being chanted at Black
Lives Matter protests. To be honest, I wasn't completely familiar with it. I
looked into it and I did read up on it in the background and learned that it had
already existed in Black activism for a while, for a long time. When I looked up
the meaning and definition of it, I felt kind of enlightened. To me it meant
waking up from the narratives that we were fed and questioning who wrote that
narrative. Like whose voices are missing? Like being woke, it applies to
everyone. We should all open our eyes to understanding injustice. So with the
placard made, Prisca and her family headed to the march. When we went there, you
know, there were so many families walking down the streets together. People were
chanting, people were engaging. And I think there were a couple of speeches.
There were definitely moments of that anger and outrage, different points of the
march. Across the United States and the world, people were gathering in one of
the largest single protests in history, with around five million attendees. In
Washington, D.C., the crowds were addressed by feminist icons and Hollywood
stars. Let this weight not drag you down, but help to get your heels stuck in.
Back in Charlotte, North Carolina, JJ's sign was turning heads. There were
actually a lot of people who wanted to take pictures, and I honestly was not
expecting that. And then I guess like a local photographer took a picture of the
sign as well. And that's where the photo went viral. We were heading home, I saw
on my phone that I had all these messages, and people were telling me that they
saw JJ on Twitter and all these different places. So we were even getting
messages from people across the world, the UK, even in Korea. I think my aunt
told me that her friend sent that picture of JJ to her, and then she was like,
wait, I know him. It's such a cute image. JJ has a sign around his neck, he's
holding onto a Prisca with one hand, and in the other, he's carrying a balloon.
Perhaps it's no surprise that people really wanted to share it. But it soon
became more than just a viral photo. Perhaps inevitably, people saw a chance to
cash in. Honestly, like within hours, I noticed that there were t-shirts being
sold with that line or the sign and people were selling this. And I would get
texts from friends sending me photos, if they saw it in a store or there it was
like on a magnet or something. I wouldn't say that I was angry or anything about
people using that line without asking for permission, but I think I was more
shocked at how quickly people will capitalise on something that's trending and
then try to profit off of it. Is this proliferation an inevitable consequence of
woke's move into the mainstream? Asia Romano is a culture writer for Vox.com and
has investigated the movement of woke through popular culture. So it was very
much part of black vernacular that was being used in a very specific way and for
a specific event, the 2014 Ferguson protests over the death of Mike Brown. But I
think from there, as the internet will do, the internet began sort of recycling
it and spreading the word around and its usage more broadly. So you would see
white people using it in this very performative, sincere, you know, I want to be
woke about this topic, so therefore X, Y, Z, like ways in which they were
demonstrating that they were being very progressive, very demonstratively
progressive. Prisca had used the phrase stay woke at the Women's March because
it felt applicable to her own experiences of discrimination and because she felt
a sense of solidarity. White women at the march wanted to use that term too. The
Women's March took place, I believe, in 2017, about three years into the kind of
advancement of woke. So you had people on the ground making posters and
protesting, like really using the language of wokeness in their rhetoric and in
their slogans and so forth. Ideally, it was supposed to be a very diverse march
for women, right? But in reality, it was mostly white women. And this was
something that it came under fire for because the organization of the march was
seen as being not diverse enough, right, like almost not woke enough. So the
marchers were being criticized on the one hand for using the word woke whilst
not being inclusive enough themselves, but also on the other side for an
approach to societal issues that was deemed to be preachy and over the top. I
think there's a sense that woke almost immediately became used as a way of
trying to paint people who used liberal politics to be very shrill, hyperbolic
and over the top. And so like that was wokeism. There's also the added element
of the internet. The internet makes anything that is sincere immediately suspect
and immediately mockable. You know, it's almost campy and it's over the top,
wide-eyed naivete, right? There was even this skit from the comedy show Saturday
Night Live, a program often described as on the left, which pokes fun at the use
of the term. I'm woke. Woke, woke. I'm woke. So why aren't my jeans? Now they
are. Introducing Levi Wokes, sizeless, style neutral, gender nonconforming denim
for a generation that defies labels. I think the moment you saw white people
using it, it lost a lot of its cynicism, its ironic humor, its self-deprecating,
just all of the internal ironies that attach to the phrase because it is part of
black vernacular. And the criticism then extended beyond satire to the form of
woke we see most commonly today. A pejorative term used to criticize someone as
extreme or zealous in their commitment to identity politics. This usage has been
embraced wholeheartedly by Donald Trump. Now we will defeat woke radicalism and
a continuation of communism. Women's March attendee Prisca Kim. If I were going
to a march today and if I were making a sign today, I wouldn't use that word.
It's just been completely disconnected from its original context. In hindsight,
I can see how when something starts to trend, like with, you know, I love naps,
but I stay woke. That line just reproduced over and over and over again. Just it
becomes a buzzword. And then it's hard to take that word seriously. So I think
that maybe inadvertently we did play a part, but I can't say that we
purposefully pushed it towards that direction. And what of JJ, the boy whose
woke photo became a sensation? He does, you know, kind of remember, like he
remembers the image, he remembers the sign because he had it. He expresses so
much pride of being Korean American. And that's not something that I honestly
really experienced growing up. And so it gives me so much joy. Next time we head
to Florida, the state which Governor Ron DeSantis has dubbed the place where
woke goes to die. Woke, the journey of a word continues tomorrow. The presenter
is Matthew Seid and the producer is Sam Peach. You can literally go anywhere at
the snap of your fingers. For 100 years, the BBC has been making groundbreaking
radio drama. Of course, a tired woman. But you have to ask yourself what I'm
tired of. The radio plays our voices in the dark. Join me, Michael Simmons-
Roberts, as I explore this great dramatic form. Just a sheer amount of
possibilities. Continuing our celebration of the centenary of BBC radio drama.
There is scope for so much more to happen on radio. Big Beats on Radio 4 and
BBC.