TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-07H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 I think they suit the farmers and the farmers suit the buzzards and both of
them suit me. Hello, it's six o'clock on Thursday, the 23rd of February. This is
today with Nick Robinson in Berlin and Amol Rajan in London. The headlines this
morning, Sakiya Starmer is unveiling five national missions, including securing
the highest economic growth in the G7 that Labour will prioritise if it wins
power. We'll be speaking to Sakiya live at Tenpah State. An off-duty police
officer has been critically hurt in a shooting in Oma, sparking condemnation
from politicians across Northern Ireland. Also in today's programme, Amol in
Berlin to examine the dramatic turnaround in German attitudes to peace and war
since the invasion of Ukraine and the angsting that that has produced. Germany's
economics minister has this reply to those in Britain who say his country has
not done enough. Do I politely ask how many refugees from Ukraine, the United
Kingdom welcomed? And... David Bowe's personal archive has been acquired by the
Victoria and Albert Museum and will be on display in London in a couple of
years' time. The collection includes the handwritten lyrics to songs including
heroes recorded here in Berlin. The BBC News is read this morning by Chris
Aldridge. The Labour leader, Sakiya Starmer, is launching what he calls five
national missions outlining his plans for the UK if his party wins the next
general election. The commitments will be formally announced during a speech in
Manchester this morning as well as details about how the first pledge, securing
the highest economic growth in the G7, will be achieved. Our political
correspondent Helen Catch reports. Labour says its five missions will be
unashamedly long-term, an alternative to what it calls the sticking plaster
solutions of Rishi Sunak's five priorities for government. The first two
missions will be to secure the highest sustained economic growth in the G7 and
to make Britain a clean energy superpower. Sakiya will say that his missions are
not just another word for priorities or promises but would form a different way
of governing. Labour will unveil goals for its final three missions, building an
NHS fit for the future, making Britain's streets safe and breaking down barriers
to opportunity in the coming months. Politicians in Northern Ireland have
condemned the shooting of an off-duty police officer in Omer in County Tyrone
last night. He's in a critical but stable condition in hospital. Sinn FÃ©in's
Vice-President Michelle O'Neill described the attack as outrageous and shameful.
The DUP leader Sir Geoffrey Donaldson has called for those responsible to be
brought to justice. From Belfast, our Ireland correspondent Emma Vardy reports.
The shooting happened in front of young people at a football coaching session,
according to a local Ulster Unionist Assembly member Tom Elliott, who called it
a despicable and cowardly attack. It's thought the off-duty officer was shot
multiple times at around eight o'clock in the evening. Irish police have
increased patrols in neighbouring counties. After reports, the gunman may have
fled across the border after the attack. There's continued to be a security
threat against police officers in Northern Ireland since the end of the Troubles
25 years ago, but attacks are now much rarer. The government has confirmed that
the new independent regulator of men's football in England is to be established
for the first time. It'll aim to make clubs more financially sustainable and
ensure money from the Premier League filters down to lower divisions. Our sport
editor Dan Rowan reports. The independent football regulator is designed to
prevent a repeat of the failings that led to the collapse of Bury FC in 2019,
one of a host of clubs to suffer financial crisis in recent years. The body
would oversee a licensing system to ensure clubs are run sustainably, be
responsible for a strengthened owners and directors test and could block teams
from joining breakaway competitions like the European Super League. With the
Football League wanting a greater share of the Premier League's record wealth
and the FA pushing for more funding for grassroots football, the regulator could
also intervene to decide how much money flows down the pyramid. The cases of
12,000 asylum seekers are to be fast-tracked by the home office to try to fulfil
Rishi Sunak's pledge to reduce the backlog of applications by the end of the
year. Migrants from Afghanistan, Eritrea, Libya, Syria and Yemen will have their
claims decided on the basis of a 10-page questionnaire which must be completed
in English within 20 days. Here's our home editor, Mark Easton. The home office
insists this is not an asylum amnesty but a way to streamline the processing
system for five nationalities which have an asylum acceptance rate of more than
95% or the usual security and criminal checks will be conducted and biometrics
taken. But for the first time a cohort of 12,000 asylum seekers will not be
required to attend a face-to-face interview. The British Red Cross is among
organisations concerned that insisting asylum seekers complete a questionnaire
in English and return it within 20 days could increase the suffering of already
traumatised individuals. Members of the United Nations General Assembly are
likely to adopt a resolution later today condemning Russia's invasion of
Ukraine. The text also calls for peace to be achieved as soon as possible.
Moscow has described the resolution as unbalanced but it has no veto over the
General Assembly. The National Trust says the Farne Islands off the coast of
Northumberland will be closed to visitors from April to see whether a reduction
in tourism helps limit the spread of avian flu. More than 6,000 birds died from
the virus on the islands last year. Our North of England correspondent Fiona
Trach reports. The farms off the Northumberland coast are traditionally home to
around 200,000 seabirds. The National Trust says gillymots and kitty wakes were
worst affected by avian flu last year and ranges fear there will be thousands of
cases this year because the virus has persisted throughout the winter. As birds
return to nest the decision has been taken to restrict access to sailing tours
only from April the 1st to see if limiting the disturbance on the islands will
make a difference to the spread of the disease. Fiona Trach reporting. Thanks
Chris. Six minutes per six. Let's take our first visit to the BBC Weather Centre
waiting for us there. Darren Beck, morning Darren. Good morning Nick. Quite a
contrast across the UK at the moment. The southern half of the UK is cloudy.
There's still a bit of rain left over. Further north we've got some clearer
skies and in Scotland in particular it's a cold start this morning where the
frost is in places. We will see the weather though changing in Scotland. Some
southern and eastern parts of the country will keep the sunshine throughout the
morning but further northwest it will be turning more cloudy as a west to south
westerly wind strengthens and we'll see that cloud arriving across southern and
eastern parts of Scotland during the afternoon. By which time northern Scotland
and particularly the highlands will be turning wetter and windier with some
strong winds here. Across northern Ireland chilly start here. Sunshine through
the morning. A bit more cloud in the afternoon likely to stay dry and not as
windy as it will be in Scotland and across England and Wales. We'll northern
England having a decent day actually. A lot of sunshine to come today. Any
showers running in around North Sea coast won't last long at all. Further south
across England and into Wales we start the day with much more cloud. We've still
got some patchy rain as well. The cloud and the rain will push its way
southwards through the day. The rain petering out during the afternoon. Southern
parts of England staying cloudy for most of the day but we will see the cloud
breaking up in Wales and the Midlands this morning. Sunshine coming through here
and sunshine arriving across East Anglia in the afternoon. It will be a chillier
day though today. Temperature wise we're looking at around seven to nine degrees
and heading into the coming nights across Wales the Midlands southern England
there could be an early frost before we see the cloud that's in the north moving
its way further south. Darren thank you very much indeed let's have a look at
this morning's papers and what's on the news websites. A number lead with the
government's plan to reduce the asylum backlog by scrapping interviews for some
migrants from Afghanistan Eritrea, Syria Yemen and Libya. The Daily Mail says
the fast lane has been dubbed an amnesty in all but name and warns it's been
told by a senior source that the change would encourage other people from the
five countries to come to the UK. The conservative MP Marco Longi tells a Daily
Telegraph that the scheme appears to be completely wrong and people who'd
entered the UK illegally should be removed and have their claims processed
overseas but the Daily Express says the plan is a practical solution to a long-
standing problem. Just taking no for an answer is the son's message to Shmima
Bigum after the former member of the Islamic State group lost a legal bid to
restore her British citizenship. The paper says her lawyers boasted that the
battle was nowhere near over and appeals are set to cost the taxpayer millions.
An editorial in The Times says the government hasn't yet given a convincing
answer on why Shmima Bigum must not return to the UK or what threat she still
poses that couldn't be countered by close monitoring. The paper acknowledges
that keeping an eye on her would take up scarce security resources but adds that
punishing people by leaving them stateless in a desert is no answer to
terrorism. The Daily Telegraph highlights a warning from BT that the Chancellor
Jeremy Hunt will send Britain in a quote drastically anti-investment direction
if he forges ahead with an increase in corporation tax. The chief financial
officer of the telecoms firm Simon Lauth fears the increase from 19 to 25
percent will reduce business investment and slow down economic growth. The Times
says it's seen a draft of an NHS plan to tackle staff shortages in the health
service. The document warns that the NHS will be shorter more than half a
million workers without the biggest boost in training for a generation. It calls
for a doubling of medical school places by the end of the decade which would
require half a dozen new medical schools. According to the Guardian, pollutants
known as forever chemicals which build up in the body may be toxic and do not
break down in the environment. They have been found at high levels across the UK
and Europe. The paper says the chemicals valued for their non-stick and
detergent properties have made their way into the soil water and sediments from
consumer products, firefighting foams, waste and industrial processes. In the
UK, the highest level was detected in a discharge from a chemicals plant on the
river wire near Blackpool. And almost all the papers feature images of the late
musician David Bowie in some of his extraordinary costumes which have now been
gifted to the nation. The Mirror says his personal archive is donating a
collection of handwritten lyrics, letters, sheet music, costumes, photography,
music videos, album artwork and awards to the V&A, the Victoria and Albert
Museum, which will open the David Bowie Centre for the study of performing arts
in a couple of years' time. And we're going to be talking to the curator at the
V&A and someone who lived with David Bowie back in the early days of his career.
That'll be later in the programme. The time now in London at least is 11 minutes
past six. Yes, an hour later here in Berlin where this weekend protests will be
staged in German towns and cities calling on the government to stop supplying
arms to Ukraine and start talking to Russia about a diplomatic solution. I'm
joined in our temporary Berlin studio by a Berlin correspondent, Damien
McGinnis. Morning to you, Damien. Good morning, Nick. Now, these protests are
controversial, but behind them lies a petition with what more than half a
million names attached to it? A sign of German angst? I think certainly a part
of a very ferocious debate about how Germany is supporting Ukraine and Germany
is supporting Ukraine massively financially with huge military arms, but also
taking in more than a million Ukrainian refugees. However, it's not
representative of the mainstream opinion here in Germany. The political
consensus and the mainstream voter opinion is definitely full support for
Ukraine, both in a humanitarian sense, but also when it comes to sending arms.
What this is, though, is a sign at, I think you could say, the most radical end
of society that there should be an immediate ceasefire. This manifesto for
peace, which was launched last week, calls on the West to stop sending arms and
to freeze the conflict, which effectively means the occupied territories remain
under Russian control and those abuses of power would carry on. Those questions
haven't been answered. The reason why this is not representative, that even if
there are big numbers on Saturday, which there likely will be, is that the leads
of this are extremely radical. Zara WÃ¤ckenklesch, a radical left-wing
politician, is even being threatened, being thrown out of her own party. The
radical left are not supporting it. The far right are not supporting it. Within
this demonstration, you have conspiracy theorists and you have Kremlin
apologists, but I think it's a sign of a nervousness and a fiery debate, a
ferocious rouse, really, within society about where we are going with this war.
So in that sense, it is a very visible signal of what is an incredibly lively
debate here in Germany and it is ongoing. A lively debate because of how far the
countries moved since you and I sat in this very spot around about a year ago
and the Germans were being attacked for supplying only 5000 military helmets to
Ukraine. Dramatic changes which are not comfortable for everybody. Absolutely.
This is a different country to when we last talked shortly after Chancellor
Schatz gave his so-called Seidenwender speech. He talked about a change in the
times, a change in history, a turning point in history. Now I think when he gave
that speech and that phrase which everyone's become familiar with, Seidenwender,
at the time a lot of people interpreted it as meaning Germany was going to do an
historic turning point. What he actually was saying, when you listen carefully,
he was saying the times have changed, history has changed, Germany has to change
as well and Germany has changed and if you look at it in that way, what he was
saying is Germany is on a journey and that journey isn't finished. It's the
start of a debate and it's the start of Germany throwing aside its ties with
Russia, shifting its whole view of how it deals with this key ally, key trading
partner, energy partner in the past which has now become effectively a strategic
enemy. That has all been turned around on its head and key parts of German
foreign policy in terms of like sending arms to the conflict, conflict zones
have been thrown aside. So this is a different country to 12 months ago. David,
for the moment, thank you. We're going to be hearing a lot of voices over the
next three hours from here in Germany as well as from a refugee centre at Tegel
Airport here in Berlin. 14 minutes past six and it's a big day in British
football because there has been this, or there is going to be the publication of
this fan-led review into the future of English football and there are some big
proposals. Let's discuss them with Dan Rowan, our sports editor. Morning, Dan.
This comes after years of crisis at several clubs you've reported on and most of
those clubs aren't in the top tier of English football. Morning, Amol. Yes,
that's right. This is certainly one of the biggest structural overhauls football
in England has seen and yes, it is the key recommendation, this independent
regulator of a fan-led review that was designed to avoid a repeat of the
financial mismanagement and failings that led to the collapse of perhaps most
infamously, BERI FC, one of the most historic clubs in the country in 2019 when
it was expelled from the Football League. But it's just one of a host of clubs
in honesty, Amol, as you suggested, to suffer financial issues in recent years
with the likes of Derby County, Macclesfield Town and others falling into
administration in recent years. This new body would oversee a licensing system
that would try and ensure that clubs are run sustainably, take over a
strengthened owners and directors test, give fans a greater say in key decisions
and it would also be able to block teams from joining the kind of breakaway
competitions that we saw a couple of years ago with the European Super League.
This all comes at a time as well when the Football League wants a greater share
of the Premier League's record wealth and agreements yet to be reached between
the football authorities over a new financial settlement and the regulates the
government have confirmed would also have this backstop power enabling it to
intervene to resolve how much money will flow down the pyramid. And what's the
reaction mean, Dan? The Premier League Amol said that it recognised the case for
change but that it was vital any regulation didn't deter investment or reduce
its competitiveness through unintended consequences. This comes across at a
fascinating moment with Manchester United up for sale and the subject of multi-
billion pound takeover bids. The league believes it already gives enough money
away, around half a billion a year in this current three-year cycle and it's
making changes already. Most clubs didn't want an independent regulator and
believe the FA should have remained in charge. And the government believes that
while it wants to preserve the Premier League's popularity and success and
overhaul is now needed for the good of the wider game, Labour said that years,
however, had been wasted reaching this point. And I think some campaigners would
have liked to have seen the regulator given the power to immediately intervene
and dictate perhaps exactly how much money flows down from the top to the lower
leagues. It's such an important issue, Dan. Thank you. And we'll be speaking to
Rick Perry, the former boss of the Premier League, around about 10 to 7 and then
the sports minister, around about half past 7. 17 minutes past 6. Now the
government's announced it's going to look at more ways to support industry like
steel and chemicals, industries that have vast energy costs. Phyllis Deanna has
more on that and the rest of the day's business news. Morning, Phyllis. Morning.
Yes, the government says it's going to consult on scrapping certain green levees
for heavy energy users as well as reducing network charges. Those are the
industry equivalent of the standing charges on household energy bills. Now this
comes after British Steel announced yesterday that it was shutting its coking
ovens in Scunsawp and cutting up to 260 jobs. The company said its energy bills
and the cost of carbon offsetting increased by 190 million pounds last year and
that decisive action was needed. Gareth Sace is director general of UK Steel,
which represents the sector. Gareth, good morning. Good morning, first city.
What did you make of this announcement from the government? It was very welcome.
UK industrial electricity prices have been uncompetitive for many, many years
and so today the announcement from government is really welcome. It goes a long
way to bridging the gap between what we pay for electricity and what our
competitors in Europe, in France and Germany pay. But there is still some way to
go. The gap at the moment before this government announcement is something like
60% more that we pay than a steel company in Germany pays. So there is a long
way to go and we look forward to working with government to bridge that gap and
make us competitive within Europe and globally. You say you look forward to
working with government. This is a consultation. We are not going to see any of
these changes straight away. How does that affect your industry? And that is
particularly concerning. We might see our electricity prices going down in just
over a year's time. Well, just over a year's time is a long time in steel. And
you just talked, Felicity, about the announcement yesterday from British Steel.
And my fear is if we don't see a competitive electricity prices and carbon
prices and other costs and trade policy, if we don't see a competitive business
environment here in the UK for the steel sector, we won't see investments. And
my fear is we might see more announcements like we had yesterday in the next
year or so. What about, though, the importance of those green levees for meeting
our climate commitments, especially when it comes from such an energy intensive
industry like yours? Yeah, well, UK Steel, representing the steel sector in the
UK last summer, set out its roadmap for net zero to 2050. We've set it out to
the whole journey. How much it costs, what technologies will use. And
incidentally, every single solution for us as steel to get to net zero involves
us using more electricity, not less. And therefore, if electricity prices are
uncompetitive here in the UK, our journey to net zero stops right here. We can't
move any further. But if we look across the world in Europe and actually in
Canada and elsewhere, governments there are providing billions, not millions,
billions to their steel sector to help them in a joint effort to get from where
they are now is highly carbon intensive to net zero in the next 50 or 10, 15, 20
years. And we'd like to see more of that here, that scale of capex that we need,
because it's enormously expensive to get to net zero for a sector like steel.
British Steel said that it was energy bills, but also carbon offsetting costs
that had increased. How costly is decarbonizing for an industry like steel?
Well, even those costs that British Steel talked about yesterday were just
compliance costs with the UK emissions trading scheme. And for the sector in the
UK, that's Â£120 million a year that we pay to Treasury, to government. And what
does that do? Well, it doesn't help us on our journey to net zero, it takes that
money away from us. And if you think of investment in the steel sector per year,
it's about Â£200 million. Well, imagine what we could do if we had an extra Â£120
million, let alone significant government support to help us on that journey to
net zero. I'm sure a lot of different sectors would like an extra Â£120 million a
year. Why is it that the UK steel sector is so particularly important, would you
say? Well, it's important because if you think of it in a modern society, a
modern economy, everything is either made of steel or made using steel. We're a
foundation sector that feeds into almost every other manufacturing sector in the
UK. And if you look at renewables technologies and net zero technologies, every
single one of those technologies needs steel. So why wouldn't we make that steel
here in the UK rather than, which would be a disaster from my point of view,
that we'd import steel, we don't know where it's come from, we don't know the
carbon footprint of it, we don't know how far it's come. And so therefore the
solution here would be to have a strong and competitive steel sector here in the
UK. How important is steel to our exports as a country? Well, every year with
our costs being higher than our competitors, we're exporting slightly less and
less and less every year. We're seeing imports of steel going up, up, up every
year. And our production of steel going down. Unfortunately, in 2022, we
produced only 6 million tons of steel in the UK. That's the equivalent, or the
last time we did that was in 1932 when the UK was building the Battersea Power
Station. So this isn't a good situation to be in. Steel demand globally is
increasing year on year. We should be part of that, not looking at us withering
on the vine because our costs are uncompetitive here in the UK. Gareth Stays,
Director General of UK Steel. Thank you very much for joining us this morning.
While we're talking about the price of energy and steel, let's turn to
inflation. There is a more optimistic forecast from the banking giant Citigroup.
This morning, it's predicting that UK inflation could return to 2% by autumn. It
reckons the rapid fall in gas prices will ease the economic crisis and we'll see
figures dropping from the double digits that we've seen to something a lot
closer to the Bank of England's target of 2%. I'm joined now by Louise Dudley,
Portfolio Manager of Global Equities at Federated Hermes. Louise, good morning.
Good morning. This sounds always too good to be true. Yes, certainly good news
for consumers if some of those prices start coming down a bit sooner and
certainly no more interest rate hikes coming in. Perhaps a bit of a negative
outlook in the sense that if those rates are coming down, if the prices are
coming down so much stronger, perhaps that's an indication that they're
expecting a deeper recession for the UK. Therefore, it's maybe a little bit of
good news equals bad news. Well done to the Bank of England in the sense that
this is even beyond their expectations in terms of targeting inflation coming
down quicker than their models are predicting. We can't just have a good news
story. There has to be a bad news element. But no, of course, we should say that
inflation falling doesn't mean things will get cheaper. It just means that the
rate at which they're getting more expensive will slow. Let's talk quickly about
Tesla. It's scaled back its plans to make batteries for its electric vehicles in
Germany. That's after it's been won over by the United States Inflation
Reduction Act. That's an act that involves subsidies, tax credits for producing
electric vehicles, renewable electricity, other green tech sectors over in the
states. And it also provides money off for consumers who buy US made electric
cars. The EU has expressed concern that hundreds of billions of dollars worth of
subsidies in the US will encourage more companies to abandon Europe for the
states. Is it right to be concerned? I think it is. But actually quite good to
see that the US has really joined the net zero race and that they are becoming
more competitive. I think there is no such thing as a subsidy free electron that
people are getting paid on different sides, different subsidies that come in.
But the fact that the US has joined and put out such a huge amount of spending,
kind of really accelerating that transition towards the kind of green energy is
going to be really positive for EVs, for batteries, bringing the cost down for
US consumers, which is obviously a huge market. And we do expect that some of
the European industrials will also be lured over by some of these incentives as
well. Louise Dudley, thank you very much for joining us. Well, we're talking a
lot about prices. Talked about the price of steel. Now let's talk about the
price of a meal, food and drink price inflation in the food service sector fell
slightly in January, the first drop since September 2021. This is according to
data from the CGA Prestige Food Service Price Index. Its report for January
shows a small decline in the pace at which prices are increasing down to 22%
from 22.9% in December. Karen Errington is the co-owner of the award-winning The
Rat In Gastropub in Anick, Northumberland. Karen, good morning. Good morning,
Felicity. This report still suggests prices in the food service industry are
rising very fast. What are you seeing? Well, as you've just reported before,
we've seen no reduction in prices. Prices are still going up. Only last week we
had a Â£22 per keg increase on a keg of beer. So these are significant prices
that really have to be passed on to the customer. How much have you had to raise
your prices? Well, it depends what the item is, what the dish is on the menu. I
mean, there's lots of hidden costs. I mean, everybody knows the price of oil
went up significantly. You know, we went from paying Â£19 for a drum of oil to
Â£39 and hidden costs, things like Blue Roll, which every kitchen uses vast
quantities of, we were paying Â£6.95 per six-pack of those prior to COVID. And
now they're Â£16 or more if you can get them at that price. So there's lots of
hidden costs that all impact on the actual price of your menu item. How are your
consumers responding to higher prices when they're having to tighten their own
belts? Well, we've had to look at prices very closely because margins are tight
at the minute, tighter than they've ever been. So whereas in the past, we might
have absorbed a few price increases, we can't afford to do that now. So there's
no longer any wiggle room in prices. So, you know, looking at if prices will
remain static and wouldn't avoid any further increases to the customer, then
that's going to be good and people will be more confident. But generally, as the
way the business has gone, if you'd asked me that question in December, I would
have been worried because December started off quite slowly. And Christmas was
compacted into a much shorter time scale this year. Early December was slow, but
things picked up. And then between Christmas and New Year, it was very busy. And
then actually, surprisingly, January and February have been very good, better
than we could have expected or hoped for. And we're seeing customers buying
premium items like steaks and ribs with beef, etc. So we're all feeling slightly
encouraged, but it's still like very uncertain times. And if we can just keep
things static, that's going to help us loads. Karen, it's good to hear you're
having some good news so far this year. Karen Errington, co-owner of the Rat in
Gastro Pub in Aynock, Northumberland. Thank you. Phyllis, thank you very much
indeed. 29 minutes past 6. Gary's here with the sport. And no doubt your lead
story this morning, Gary, is the revelation that a 40 year old from Lancashire
is at the top of the bowling rankings for Test Cricket. You'd never make an
editor if you think that's the lead. Good morning. We talked about James
Anderson. Brilliant. Jimmy Anderson, 40. Devon Malcolm is my guest in an hour.
And we're going to be hearing from Ben Stokes in a second. Before we do that,
the really big story this morning, Wales Against England, is on. The Six Nations
game had been in doubt, but the Welsh players have decided against strike action
after a dispute about contracts. And here's captain Ken Owens. Of course,
there's been a distraction, obviously, with everything that's going on. But I've
got to commend the players professionalism in this. There's obviously been a lot
of conversations, you know, within team rooms, all that type of stuff. But when
we've got crossed our wide line of training, we've prepared well, we've done our
work as professional rugby players, and we'll be ready for Saturday. As we heard
on the programme a short time ago, full details about an independent regulator
for football will be released today. There'll be more on the story again in
around 20 minutes. Manchester City had lots of chances, but their game in
Leipzig finished 1-1 in the Champions League. Riyad Mahrez scored their goal.
England 6, Belgium 1, two goals from Chloe Kelly and two from Leah Williamson
helped England make it three wins from three in the cup competition they've been
playing in and they retain the trophy. They're now unbeaten in 29 matches. It's
a great run of form ahead of the World Cup, says Chloe Kelly. We keep building
momentum. There's a good few months before the tournament starts. So I think
it's been in the right shape come the summer. But I think we just have to go
back to club now, stay fit, stay healthy and keep learning, keep building and
yeah, just enjoy our football. Also to cricket, and England have named an
unchanged team for the second test with New Zealand, which starts tonight in
Wellington, Jimmy Anderson now 40. He's returned to the top of ICC's bowling
rankings after he finished with 7 for 54 in the first test. His captain Ben
Stokes. Just can't see him stopping. He's just every time he turns out there,
he's, you know, one of the main guys you throw at the ball to when you feel like
you need a wicket and he's just relentless with everything that he does. Very
lucky to have him. I know sometimes those rankings and stuff don't really mean
that much to people, but I think in my opinion and our opinion he's been one of
the best if not the best for longer than what these rankings are. A tough three
set win has taken Andy Murray through to the quarterfinals at the Qatar Open. He
beat Alexander Zverev 7-6, 2-6, 7-5. Here are the tips. One for Sedgefield,
3-15, number three, first man. Then we're off to Huntington at four o'clock.
Number two, William Cody. Gary, thank you very much indeed. As we approach the
anniversary of the invasion of Ukraine, James Nokti has been looking at a war
which has so far defied predictions. The world looks to the battlefields of
Ukraine and asks how and when will it end? Both sides speak of all-out victory,
but could there be a settlement between the enemies? This is James Nokti and
I've been exploring with diplomats and peacemakers the lessons of other
conflicts to see how they might help in finding a pathway through the smoke of
battle. After nearly a year of war, when might the talking start to matter more?
How Wars End on BBC Radio 4, available now on BBC Sands. 28 minutes to seven.
You're listening to today on BBC Radio 4 with Nick Robinson in Berlin and Amal
Rajan in London. Here's a summary of the news from Chris Aldridge. Sir Keir
Starmer is to outline his plans for the UK if he becomes Prime Minister. He's
calling them Labour's five national missions and says they'll form the backbone
of the party's manifesto for the next general election. The missions include
securing the highest economic growth in the G7 and building an NHS fit for the
future. In a speech in Manchester this morning, Sir Keir will say the country
needs a serious plan if it is to fix deep-seated problems. Political leaders in
Northern Ireland have condemned the shooting of an off-duty police officer in
Omer in County Tyrone. He's in a critical but stable condition in hospital. Sinn
FÃ©in's Vice President Michelle O'Neill described the attack as outrageous and
shameful. The DUP leader Sir Geoffrey Donaldson has called for those responsible
to be brought to justice. The government has announced plans for a new
independent regulator of men's football in England. It'll aim to make clubs more
financially sustainable and ensure money from the Premier League filters down
the football pyramid. The Home Office says 12,000 asylum seekers will be
considered for refugee status without face-to-face interviews. A 10-page
questionnaire will be used to assess the cases of people from Afghanistan,
Eritrea, Libya, Syria and Yemen who applied before last July. The United Nations
General Assembly is expected to approve a resolution that condemns Russia's
invasion of Ukraine and calls for peace as soon as possible. The vote will take
place today on the eve of the first anniversary of the conflict. Israel has
carried out airstrikes in the Gaza Strip after rockets were fired from the
Palestinian-controlled territory. The rocket attacks followed the deaths of 11
Palestinians during an Israeli raid in the occupied West Bank yesterday.
Scotland's public spending watchdog has warned that staff shortages, rising
costs and lengthening waiting lists are jeopardising the Scottish Government's
plan to help the NHS recover from Covid. Audit Scotland's annual report says
ministers should be more transparent with patients about the unprecedented
challenges facing the health service. The Scottish Government says its recovery
plan is backed by record investment. Chris, thank you very much indeed and to
Politics and that lead story that Chris mentioned. With Nick Early, our Chief
Political Correspondent. Morning Nick, you've had a look at this. This is a
mission statement from Kia Starma which Chris mentions. He's launching it in
Salford in Manchester this morning. What did you make of it? Morning. Well yes,
I mean for a while we had politics in three word slogans. Now it's in pledges of
five. We had the Prime Ministers earlier in the year and today we'll get
Labour's missions. I think they're going to be the spine of what Labour tries to
pitch to the electorate before the next general election. So in that sense they
are quite a big deal. I think we'll hear a lot about them and we know what they
are. There's the economy securing the highest growth in the G7. That's quite a
bold plan but we don't have a time frame for it yet. Climate zero carbon
electricity by 2030, securing the NHS for the future, making streets safe and
breaking down barriers to opportunity which I would expect to focus on reforming
child care and education. As I say, I think we're going to hear a lot about
these from the Labour Party. Kia Starma is convinced that this is the pitch
which can win him the next general election. As ever though, the devil with
these things is in the detail. I think it's going to take a while before we know
exactly what the so-called measurable outcomes from these are and the bigger
question is how does Kia Starma deliver them? Nick, very briefly, he's on it 10
past 8. What shall I ask you? Well how are you going to get that growth that
you're promising? You know there's a big debate playing out in politics already
about whether you do it by cutting tax. Where does he stand on some of those big
questions about corporation tax and personal taxes as well? And I think there is
a broader question is, are these more than just slogans? How does Kia Starma
persuade everybody that these are proper plans that he would be able to enact
his Prime Minister? He's riding high in the polls just now. There are a lot of
people in Westminster convinced he's the next PM. There's going to be a lot more
scrutiny too. Indeed. Starting at 10 past 8. Nick Early, good to talk to you
thanks. Yep, we'll have some other suggestions for you during the prequel as
well. All is 23 minutes to 7 now. On the eve of the anniversary of the invasion
of Ukraine, the UN General Assembly will debate a resolution tonight condemning
Russia and calling for the complete immediate and unconditional withdrawal of
all her troops. Those watching in the Ukrainian capital Kyiv will not be holding
their breath for Russia to comply with that. Liz Dusette, our Chief
International Correspondent, is back in the Ukrainian capital and joins us now.
Morning to you, Liz. Words, will they matter? Well, they're symbols, Nick, and
in diplomacy symbols do matter. First of all, the United Nations, in particular
the UN Secretary General, has to be seen to be doing something. Invading another
country by force is a violation of the United Nations Charter. But it's also
about the United States, its allies in Ukraine, who want to see this as a
Manichaean moment, black and white, good and evil. That's how Ukraine's foreign
minister put it. And last October, a similar resolution did have 143 countries
condemning it, but 35 abstained and five voted against it. Of course, Russia,
close friends like Belarus, Syria, North Korea, Nicaragua. But it also has to be
said there are countries and people in Africa and Asia who resent that other
issues, more dangerous for them they believe, and like famine, the climate
crisis are not just being eclipsed by this war, but worsened by it. And the
United States is very cognizant. It's not winning the, it is, it has support,
but it's not winning the argument in large parts of the world, particularly in
the South, that it wants to. We've been talking to Germany's economics and
development minister about precisely that, will hear that interview at 10 to 8.
For you, Liz, this is also quite a significant personal moment back in the
Ukrainian capital on the eve of that anniversary that you and I reported on a
year ago tomorrow. How do you find the capital now? Well, you remember that
moment, Nick, no Ukrainian can ever forget that, that moment, that moment of
disbelief in the early hours of the morning, people being shaken out of their
beds about 4am in the morning when the bombs started dropping, when the reports
came through that Russian tanks and troops were now rumbling across the border,
that an invasion in our time that many believed right to the hours before
couldn't, wouldn't, just it wasn't possible it would happen. And a year on that
shock hasn't dissipated completely, but in the capital Kiev at least, and in
some of the other major cities, Ukrainians are, I don't want to say they're
finding ways to live with this war, but they are finding ways to live. There's a
curfew, but some shops and restaurants are not just full, but bustling. There
are electricity cuts because of Russian strikes and on energy infrastructure,
but Ukrainians are finding way around it. But Nick, there are large swathes of
this country which are blackened, gutted, ruined. There are cities like
Mariupol, which are now being Russified, where all traces of its Ukrainian
identity and past and memory are being erased. There are huge, huge losses. You
still feel how resolute the Ukrainians are into a person saying that this is a
war they can and will win. I went to some training sessions with young Ukrainian
women, and you never knew they'd been through a year of hell. They are still so
determined. And of course, this is a war which is not just about territory, it
is about them. It is against a leader, President Putin, who says they don't have
a right to exist. And in response, they have become even more Ukrainian. Liz,
thank you. Liz is going to be presenting the programme from Kyiv tomorrow
morning. 20 minutes to seven. An off-duty police officer is in a critical but
stable condition after being shot at a sports complex in Oma in County Tyrone.
Chris Page, our Ireland Correspondent on the line. Chris, morning. What more do
we know, if anything? This is all I'm up to. The scene here on the outskirts of
Oma at a complex called Youth Sport. It's here that the officer was shot around
eight o'clock last night. According to the Police Federation, the body which
represents police officers here, he had been coaching young people at football
here. And it was a very busy complex at the time. Children, coaches and parents
were all on site. So this morning, the main building and a number of sports
pitches are cordoned off. There are several police officers guarding different
entrances. A car with some detectives has just gone into the scene where
forensic searches were carried out last night in the car park. The police
haven't said anything about a potential motive yet, but it's understood the
victim is an officer of senior rank. He is a detective who has a public profile
in Northern Ireland because he's led investigations into both organised crime at
drugs gangs, for example, and inter-dissident paramilitary groups who are
opposed to the peace process. So it is in those two directions, I think, where
police will be directing their initial inquiries. Chris Page, our Ireland
Correspondent. Good to talk to you. Thank you. It is 18 minutes to seven. Let's
take a look at what the morning papers are reporting in London with you, but
here in Berlin with our Berlin correspondent, Damien McGinnis, who is still with
me, of course you create on the front pages most days in most countries at the
moment, but what in particular is making the front pages the German papers?
Well, today there's an interesting issue, actually, a local issue which taps
into a lot of issues that Germany is dealing with right now, and it's in the
town of LÃ¼rra in Baden-WÃ¼rttemberg in southern Germany, where tenants of social
housing are being moved on to provide housing for refugees. And that's being
accommodated by lots of papers. The centre-left, ZÃ¼deutsche Zeitung, from
Munich, says this is not migration policy that's the problem, but housing policy
because of a lack of affordable housing. This could hinder integration and spark
conflict. ZÃ¼dkoehr, from Konstantz, says the council is doing its best. It's not
a great solution, but the government needs to be careful and not play into the
hands of far-right anti-refugee extremists. Reinfeld Zeitung, from
LÃ¼wrichshafen, says the council is not being right-wing or left-wing, just being
heartless. And I think the reason why this is interesting is we've had more than
a million Ukrainian refugees, plus hundreds of thousands of refugees from
elsewhere, migrants and asylum seekers from elsewhere. And the mood in Germany
is very much of acceptance and of having learnt from the mistakes of 2015, but a
big debate on the logistics, housing and infrastructure, because it is a
challenge. Which we'll hear more about after my visit to Tegel Airport, where
all the refugees who arrive here in Berlin are being processed. A real concern
that the numbers arriving now is higher than the refugee crisis of 2016. Real
logistical challenges. And I'm going to stick with Ukraine, actually, Nick,
because I want to just highlight two absolutely fascinating pieces on Ukraine
that I've seen here in the London media, or the UK media. The first is in the
Telegraph feature section. It's by Dylan Jones, a former editor of GQ magazine.
He's read a rather brilliant analysis of President Zelensky's sweatshirt. How
leaders dress matters a lot, particularly in time of war. And of Zelensky's
sweatshirt, Dylan Jones writes, that it proclaims, I'm with the army, even
though I'm not in the army. I'm a man who gets things done, who does things
instead of says things. I'm a man who doesn't have the time to change clothes,
who doesn't have time to put on a suit and he compares it to Churchill's sirens.
A rather interesting piece. And the other article I must, I just must mention is
an astonishing, anonymous long read in The Economist's 1843 magazine. It's by a
Ukrainian soldier. If you've got 25 minutes at some point over the next few
weeks, it's worth investing them. It's the second part of a diary the soldiers
keep. It's translated from Ukrainian. It's just utterly riveting. And unlike
anything, most of us will have read about the war. Interesting. It's quarter to
seven now. On main news this morning, Labour is setting out five national
missions aimed at helping the party win power and fixing what it says are some
of the deep seated problems facing the UK. We're going to be speaking to the
Labour leader at 10 past date. Now there's been a lot of talk about a new deal
with the EU, but as yet no sign of it. MPs turned up for Prime Minister's
questions yesterday in Parliament looking for clues about Rishi Sunak's plan to
fix Brexit. Our correspondent Sean Curran was watching. As the hands of the
clock above the Speaker's chair moved closer to noon, Rishi Sunak stood waiting
to make his entrance. For days there's been talk of an imminent announcement
about a new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland, but the red folder the Prime
Minister was carrying didn't contain a statement about any agreement. The
prospect of new trading arrangements has been the talk of Westminster this week,
but the issue had not been raised in the Commons Chamber. Until now. We now come
to questions to Prime Minister. Rishi Sunak sought to reassure some of his own
MPs and members of the DUP as he told the Commons the government was still in
active discussions with the European Union. I am a Conservative, a Brexiter and
a Unionist in any agreement that we reach needs to tick all three boxes. It
needs to ensure sovereignty for Northern Ireland. It needs to safeguard Northern
Ireland's place in our union and it needs to find practical solutions to the
problems faced by people and businesses. I will be resolute in fighting for what
is best for Northern Ireland and the United Kingdom. Yes, sir. And the Labour
leader sought to increase the pressure on the Prime Minister as he urged Rishi
Sunak to concede that there would have to be trade-offs in the negotiations and
that in the end Northern Ireland would continue to follow some EU law. The Prime
Minister is biting his tongue but at some point the irreconcilables on his
benches are going to twig and they're going to come after him. The former trade
minister says there can be no role for the European Court of Justice in Northern
Ireland. So will the Prime Minister be honest with them and tell them that's not
going to happen? Rishi Sunak said the Labour leader was jumping ahead and
talking about a deal he hadn't even seen and that wasn't finalised. It's his
usual position when it comes to the European Union. It's give the EU a blank
check and agree to anything they offer. It's not a strategy, Mr Speaker, that's
surrender. Well, that got some Conservatives cheering but the former Prime
Minister Theresa May, who was sitting on the backbenchers, showed no reaction
and looked straight ahead. Rishi Sunak accused the Labour leader of having
previously backed the idea of a second referendum. All the while he was
constantly voting to frustrate Brexit and I know what the British people know
that on this question he can't be trusted to stick up for Britain. Mr Speaker,
the sound you hear is them cheering the Prime Minister pulling the wool over
their eyes. And Sakiya Stama wanted to know what would happen next. Can the
Prime Minister confirm that whatever deal he brings back, this House will get a
vote on it? Yes. The Prime Minister, Mr Speaker, of course, of course Parliament
will express its view. Had the Prime Minister promised a Commons vote or
something else like a debate? He didn't elaborate further but the Labour leader
said he took it that MPs would get a vote. In fact, he suggested they would have
already had that vote if it hadn't been for Tory MPs he described as
malcontents, reckless and wreckers. But I'm here to tell him he doesn't need to
worry about that because we will put country before party and ensure the Labour
vote to get it through. He should accept our offer, ignore the howls of
indignation from those on his side who will never take yes for an answer. Why
doesn't he just get on with it? Yes. Mr Speaker, Mr Speaker, what I am doing is
talking and listening to the people of Northern Ireland. That is the right thing
to do. It's to make sure that we can respond and resolve to the concerns of the
unionist communities and businesses in Northern Ireland and that is what I will
keep doing. And Rishi Sunak didn't have to wait long to hear from the leader of
the DUP, Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, who made it clear that he wanted to see an end
to the existing rules. It is unacceptable that EU laws are imposed on Northern
Ireland with no democratic scrutiny or consent and will he assure me that he
will address these fundamental constitutional issues and do so not just by
tweaking the protocol but by rewriting the legally binding treaty text. The
Prime Minister didn't offer any details about a potential deal but he said he'd
heard the DUP leader loud and clear. I am Sean Curran there reporting on
yesterday in Parliament. You can as ever hear more at half per state on digital
and longwave. The time now is 10 to 7, 10 to 8 here in Berlin. ZeitenwÃ¤nder was
the word that the German Chancellor used to describe that historic turning point
created by the invasion of Ukraine. It meant moving away from a belief that
dialogue, detente, trade were the routes to a secure, a safe relationship with
Russia. Instead, Germany would spend more, much more on defence. Well, has he,
Chancellor Schulz, managed to take the German public with him? I'm joined in our
Berlin studio at the top of a hotel in central Berlin by Ellen Ainey, editor-in-
chief of WDR TV, which conducts polling for German television. She's got a
regular slot on Germany's equivalent two news light. Morning to you and thank
you very much for coming in. Good morning. What is your place to be? What are
your polls telling you about how opinion has changed over this year? Well, it's
quite astonishing actually for Germany because, you know, due to historic
reasons, we are very reserved on delivering arms to other countries. And right
before Russia invaded Ukraine, so in February 22, we asked should Germany
deliver arms to Ukraine and only 20 percent said yes, that's a good thing to do.
One month later after the invasion of Ukraine, it's like 61 percent. So it's
increasingly changing the opinion. Like, of course, everybody was completely
shocked by the invasion. And so right now there's a majority saying that the
delivery of arms is is a good thing to do. Now, both here in this country and
outside, the Chancellor was mocked for hesitating about whether to send tanks.
You do it first and maybe we will. What does public opinion say about that
decision? Well, we've asked the question since we have one year of war now,
we've asked it all through the months and we said, is it appropriate, the
support, the military support that Germany supplies to Ukraine actually? And so
that since that changed every month, you know, first of all, we talked about
helmets, then we talked about artillery, then we talked about main battle tanks.
And we still asked the same question. And the people who think it's adequate. So
what we do is correct. Now, 44 percent. It's not the majority, but it's a
relative majority. And the people who say that this goes too far is one third
now. It's 35 percent. So that's increasing. Now, who are they? And are they are
there many more people with worries in particular age groups of particular parts
of the country? Well, just concrete to the main battle tank decision, you know,
the leo part that will be delivered now, we've asked is that was that the right
decision to deliver it or not? Thirty nine percent say it was a mistake. So a
minority. Fifty two percent say it was right to do this, particularly the case
in the east. Yes. Real concerns. Yes. Because when you look at east and west
Germany, it's a completely different thing. Like the majority in the east says
it was a mistake. And the majority in the east says diplomatic efforts to stop
this war don't go far enough. And we see for those who are critical, it's a lot
of supporters of the IFT, the right wing party and the left wing party. So it's
like the extremes who say this goes too far. But the main public space says it's
good that we should not. His hesitation has still managed to bring people with
it. They've gone on that journey with him. Ellen Aine, editor in chief of WDR
television here in Berlin. Thank you. Six minutes to seven. Let's go back to
that fan led review of football published later today, which tries to address
some of the financial crises that beset lower league clubs in particular. Rick
Perry is the chair of the English Football League, very first chief executive of
the Premier League when it was launched many, many years ago. Rick, good
morning. Good morning. Just before we get into your thoughts on this white
paper, which I'm very, very keen on, can you spell out, as you see it, the
crisis in English football that it's trying to address? I think it's opportunity
rather than crisis from our point of view. Okay. Because in many ways, the
game's in rude health. But the problem from our perspective is there's too big a
gulf between top and bottom. First year of the Premier League, 93. The gap in
turnover between the Premier League and the AFL was 11 million pounds. It's now
three billion pounds. That's the disparity. It's getting wider all the time. And
our goal, our mission, our purpose is making clubs sustainable, long term
future, which means not making them wholly dependent upon owner funding. And it
means redistribution of revenues, hand in hand with better regulation. So we're
completely in favour of the changes. So I was going to say, to what extent does
this white paper and what you've seen of it, answer those worries and provide,
you know, give you the opportunity to fulfil the opportunities that you see.
Well, it certainly goes a long way. It builds upon the FanLend review, which we
welcomed and embraced. And no surprises. We haven't seen the full white paper
yet. But in terms of the summaries that we've seen, no surprises. A licensing
system, which we think is eminently workable to make sure clubs are solvent. A
better owners and directors test, which is hard to argue against. Backstop
powers for the regulator in the event that football can't solve redistribution.
And based on the evidence of the last 30 years, football cannot solve
redistribution. So we'd far rather have a football based solution, I have to
say. We'd rather be around the table and negotiating with the Premier League.
But for the regulator to have backstop powers in the event that we can't, that's
really important. Yeah, it's worth a note, of course, as you will have been very
acutely conscious yourself. It's an independent regulator. I should just
clarify, not a government one, not that you're implying that. I've got the
sports minister on around about half past seven. What are your ongoing concerns
about the white paper? What would you like me to ask you? I think get on with
it, because we all need clarity as quickly as possible. He knows our thoughts.
He knows that we don't think that backstop powers on redistribution are
sufficient, because if we don't solve redistribution, what is the regulator
going to do? Is he going to put two thirds of our clubs out of business, refuse
to give them a license when the objective is to keep them alive? So there is an
imbalance there. Minister is acutely aware of our views because we tell him
every time we see him. But yes, if you pass those messages on again, I'm sure
you'll get a right smile from him. But as I said, for us, it's a step in the
right direction. And let's bring about the changes as soon as we can. Well, I
hope I get an answer as much as a right smile. Rick Perry, chair of the English
Football League. Really good to talk to you. Thank you. Three minutes to seven
now, Darren Betts. Can you join us with the weather morning, Darren? Good
morning again, Nick. We've got quite a difference in the weather at the moment.
North, south across the UK. Cold start with some sunshine this morning for
northern areas, but it will be turning cloudy. We've got a cloudy start further
south and it will be turning sunnier. Let's look at the details across England
and Wales. For northern England, it looks like it's going to be a nice day
today. Lots of sunshine around. Any showers pecking north sea coast will soon
move away. We've got more cloud elsewhere across England and Wales. There's
still some patchy rain as well. Everything is moving its way southwards. The
rain tending to die out in the afternoon. It won't be too long before it becomes
dry in Wales and the Midlands, across to Lincolnshire. We'll see the sunshine
coming out during the morning, sunny afternoon on the whole. We should get some
sunshine eventually across East Anglia. It could be very late in the day before
the cloud breaks in southern England, but at least it will be turning much drier
during the afternoon. Further north across Northern Ireland, sunny start this
morning. Chillie starts as well. We are going to find more cloud around in the
afternoon, but it should stay dry. In Scotland, we've got the cold start with a
frost in places. There'll be some sunshine which will continue through the
morning across southern and eastern areas, but even here it will cloud over in
the afternoon. The cloud is coming in on a strengthening westerly wind and that
will bring some rain into northern Scotland, particularly during the afternoon
and that rain will turn heavier in the highlands later. The winds will
strengthen it as well. For all parts of the UK, it's going to be a cooler day
today. Typical temperatures around seven to nine celsius. Thanks Darren. On BBC
iPlayer. Six robbers have carried out an armed raid stealing almost three tons
of gold. Inspired by Britain's biggest gold heist. How do you shift three tons
of gold? Slowly. We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are
distributed via third party services and platforms and the BBC stream you are
currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an
internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the
manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to
stream on BBC sounds. I'm Roger in London and Nick Robinson in Berlin, where
I'll be talking to one of Germany's economics ministers.