TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-04H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Stay with us. Eitluc is next. This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio
station. Coming up on Outlook, the student dubbed Britain's housing hero. When
he was growing up, Cuaido Trenaboa's family home in London was unlivable. We had
issues with cockroaches, we had mice in the property, we had a bathroom that
wasn't fit for use, we had damp mould everywhere. You're constantly depressed. I
mean, I'd never, ever bring friends round. I'd not tell them of the conditions
that we were living in because of the sense of shame. Complaints to the landlord
got nowhere, so Cuaido decided to go public. I remember thinking to myself, the
next time they get a call in regards to my property won't be from me, it's going
to be from a journalist. And I made that happen. I went into the property, I
took pictures, took videos of the conditions we were living in and I decided to
post it on social media and people were absolutely horrified. Cuaido didn't stop
there but knocked on hundreds of doors to collect stories about poor living
conditions and took his fight to the top. His story after this. This is Danielle
Yawoviecka with the BBC News. Hello. Days before the anniversary of Russia's
invasion of Ukraine, President Biden has given a defiant speech painting
Ukraine's struggle as a generational conflict for freedom. Speaking in Poland,
he said that Washington and its allies would never waver in their support for
Kiev. Addressing a cheering crowd in Warsaw, Mr Biden said that President
Putin's lust for power and land, as he put it, would fail. When Russia invaded,
it wasn't just Ukraine being tested. The whole world faced a test for the ages.
Europe was being tested. America was being tested. NATO was being tested. All
democracies are being tested and the questions we faced were as simple as they
were profound. Would we respond or would we look the other way? We know the
answer. We did respond. We would be strong. We would be united and the world
would not look the other way and Ukraine, Ukraine will never be a victory for
Russia. Never. Mr Biden said the West had not plotted to attack Russia as Mr
Putin had asserted earlier in a stridently anti-Western speech to Russian
parliamentarians. The head of NATO has accused President Putin of making the
world more dangerous after he announced in his address that Russia would suspend
its participation in the only remaining nuclear arms control agreement with
Washington, the New START Treaty. Jent Stoltenberg urged Moscow to reconsider
the decision. Steve Rosenberg is in Moscow. This treaty was in trouble. Both
sides had been accusing the other of violating it. There were concerns that it
could unravel and we saw what happened today with Vladimir Putin suspending
Russia's participation in it. So he hasn't pulled it out completely but he has
suspended participation and that has caused concern. I was speaking to some
military experts who said this is serious because this is the last remaining big
nuclear arms deal between Russia and America. So if that completely unravels,
you have the danger of a new arms race. Putin was already hinting that Russia
may resume nuclear tests if America does so. It's a serious moment. China's top
diplomat Wang Yi is in Moscow for talks with Beijing's strategic ally. He said
bilateral relations remained rock solid. On Tuesday, NATO echoed US concerns
that China could supply Russia with weapons, as Nicholas Rocha reports. From the
start of Russia's so-called special military operation one year ago, China has
refused to condemn Moscow's invasion of Ukraine, although it has claimed it is
impartial in the conflict. This week, Wang Yi said China supported peace and
negotiations and would put forward its own position on a political settlement of
the crisis. It's not clear what Mr. Wang will say in Moscow, but the EU and
Washington have warned Beijing against providing military assistance to Russia's
war effort in Ukraine. BBC News. A court in New York says victims of the 9-11
attacks in 2001 by Al-Qaeda militants are not entitled to Afghan central bank
funds frozen in the United States. Lawyers for the victims say they will appeal.
Peter Bowes has more details. At the time of the attacks, the ruling Taliban
allowed Al-Qaeda to operate from Afghanistan. They were removed from power by a
US-led military coalition late in 2001, but retook control of the country two
years ago. Judge George Daniels, sitting in Manhattan, said if he allowed the
funds which are frozen in the US to be used, it would mean recognising that the
Taliban are now the country's legitimate government. That, he said, was
something that the Biden administration did not do and a conclusion that US
courts lacked the power to reach. A New York court has found Mexico's former
security chief guilty of taking bribes in return for allowing safe passage for
drugs. Prosecutors said Henaro Garcia Luna, once the face of Mexico's war on
drugs, was secretly receiving millions of dollars from the country's biggest
crime group, the Sinaloa Drug Cartel. He faces 10 years to life in prison. The
US authorities have ordered a train operator to pay the entire cost of cleaning
up contamination after one of its freight trains carrying hundreds of tons of
chemicals derailed in the state of Ohio earlier this month. The head of the
Environmental Protection Agency said Norfolk Southern would bear the cost for
the trauma it inflicted on the town of East Palestine. The attorney general in
Peru says the US State Department has agreed to extradite the former Peruvian
President Alejandro Toledo on corruption charges. Prosecutors say he used
accomplices bank accounts in the US to receive millions of dollars in bribes
from the Brazilian construction giant Oderbrecht in exchange for contracts to
build a major road in Peru. Mr Toledo denies the allegations. BBC News. Hello,
I'm Jo Fidgen. Welcome to Outlook, the program that shines a light on people
doing extraordinary things all over the globe. 24-year-old Cuejo Treneboa lives
in one of the world's richest cities with a glossy reputation that attracts
international bankers and billionaires and yet this is Cuejo's description of
the place he called home. We had issues with cockroaches, we had mice in the
property, we had a bathroom that wasn't fit for use, we had damp mould
everywhere. At one point a ceiling collapsed and a ceiling was missing for the
whole of winter, it wasn't put back up. You mentioned cockroaches right at the
start, I mean how bad was that infestation? They were in the kitchen, bedrooms,
it was everywhere, it was everywhere. Guys, pretty unhygienic isn't it? It is.
You say you had them in the bedroom? Yes. Would they get in your bed? Often, I
mean they went everywhere, there wasn't anywhere that they couldn't get, I mean
in the living room or the sofas. And the kitchen, was it usable? We couldn't use
it to eat and even if we did, you'd then hear mice in the cupboards or find a
cockroach. Huh. It's hard to believe that's London isn't it? It is, I mean
London's painted as this city which is amazing and in some aspects it absolutely
is but what people don't realise is the way in which people really have to live.
Cuejo's dismal flat in South London was the scene of a personal tragedy. It was
also the place that gave him a new purpose in life. He's now fated all over the
country for what he's doing to help thousands of others facing the same
challenges. Decorating the walls of this apartment are paintings that Cuejo has
made of some of the people who've inspired him along the way, like the champion
boxer Anthony Joshua. There's a scene that I painted one of Anthony Joshua's
fight scenes. I painted that specifically because that was a time where he was
doubted because he had lost the fight against the same individual that he was up
against and he won the second fight. And it was almost a message of you may not
get things right the first time but continue doing the work that you're doing
and creating the change that you want to because eventually you will get there.
Cuejo's personal fight was waged on behalf of his much-loved father, Quaecu,
who'd come to the UK from Ghana and was a single dad to Cuejo and his two
sisters. Did he bring much Ghanaian culture with him into fatherhood? Yeah he
did from food to the churches we went to, to his family and friends. You
mentioned food first. Was food a very big part of your family life? Yeah it was.
Like I still remember it's quite funny there's this dish that we equalled for
food. I think he started feeding us it as soon as we could start eating so it's
like a ball of dough basically. It starts as a powder and then I believe you mix
it with hot water and you really have to pound it and it thickens up and you do
have to be strong. I mean I used to watch my dad doing it and it's so thick that
you have to be very strong to make it and you'd make it with a soup. So we used
to have like chicken, goat meat, smoke fish. Scotch bonnet chillies, would you
have that? Yes and that's the one thing that his soup was very very spicy. I
remember being young with my sisters and we'd make an absolute mess trying to
eat it with a soup everywhere but it would be sat on the floor and usually
there'd be like newspaper underneath just in case we did spill anything. Did the
house always smell of fantastic cooking smells? It did, it did. Like he would
make some chillies from scratch and it would be so like strong that we'd be
coughing because of the seeds that he'd used to make it but the house always
smelled of ganyan food whether it was jollof rice, whether it was pufu, whether
it was kenkei. These are all yeah, ganyan dishes that he would make. Oh you're
making me hungry. Oh no. So was mealtime a kind of sacred time? We all sat
around the table and chatted or how did it go? Yeah I mean when we were younger
even up until secondary school dad used to feed us and he used to like hand feed
us and that's just a traditional way that they do things. Even when we went to
restaurants he would do the same but as we got older my dad he'd eat at the most
random times actually because he was working from morning till about early
afternoon and then he'd probably eat around that time and then go out for his
night shift and then when he came home eat again. Quaker was holding down two
jobs as a carer and working two shifts a day. He built close relationships with
his clients. I mean he would refer to some of them as his mum and dad and they
were older than him and he genuinely did care for them like they were his
parents and that's how he saw it should be so he loved his work and he did
everything he could. I mean he wasn't earning a lot at all. He did struggle with
our housing situation with bills etc he did struggle but he done absolutely he
could to make sure there was food on the table, there was a roof over our head
and that we were going to school that we were looked after and that we were
given the best opportunities that we could have been given by him. Yeah well
this is the thing isn't it? You're not well paid as a carer in the UK. This is
not a job that pays you a lot. No. So even if he's working two jobs he couldn't
make the rents in London. No it was very very difficult for him. So if your if
your dad was having to look for council support to get housing for the four of
you what kind of accommodation was on offer when you were growing up? I mean we
were putting a converted car garage. We had an infestation of ants. We had mould
and damp so bad in the bedrooms that it was beginning to grow onto the bed. It
got so cold in there that the pipes froze the radiator pipes and then burst and
this is whilst I was trying to study for my A-levels at the time. Your end of
school exams your A-levels? Yes and my younger sister was studying for her GCSEs
which is your exams to get into college. We had no furniture and we put our
books on the floor but to have our bedroom flooded it destroyed everything. I
mean they are very hard exams but to study in those sorts of conditions. I often
wonder like how we even got through it to be honest and how we didn't fail. It
was literally a garage. A garage for cars that you were living in. Yeah it still
had its garage door on. Remember green garage door? You can imagine that after
the garage experience Quajo and family were delighted to be told a proper
apartment was available run by a different housing group. Finally my dad was
offered permanent social housing and that was on the Eastfields estate the home
that I'm currently in now. We were happy three bedrooms that would fit us all
in. We had a kitchen, we had a bathroom, toilet, it wasn't a garage. This flat
on the Eastfields estate this is the one you were describing earlier with the
cockroaches and the mice and the collapsed ceiling and the bathroom and the
kitchen that wouldn't work and all the rest of it. Exactly. What impact did it
have on you specifically living in accommodation like that? I mean I didn't want
to be there. I remember trying to spend more time at sixth form and work
studying than I did in the property. I'd rather be out of it. The impact on your
mental health even when you're not at home when you know you're living in those
sorts of conditions is you're constantly depressed. I mean I'd never ever bring
friends around. I'd not tell them of the conditions that we were living in
because of the sense of shame. Where do you think those feelings came from? This
is stereotype with public housing and housing that if you're living in poor
conditions it's your fault. You should deal with it, stop being so dirty. It's a
stereotype that's been embedded for absolute generations in decades. You did
complain to the landlord, the housing association about the condition of the
flat. What kind of responses were you getting? We sent emails, we called, there
was time I'd phone up chasing and they would say they had no record of us
complaining to them or they would promise someone would come out, no one would
show up. It wasn't long after the family moved in that Quajo's dad received
horrible news. It was late 2019 that my dad was diagnosed with esophageal cancer
and it was early on I think it was about stage one and he took a while to tell
us actually and then when we did find out I'd just be like it's fine it's stage
one like it's better we found it now than stage four he would he would get
better he would be treated. It's very naive about it I think. How quickly did he
show deterioration? Very quickly I mean he went from walking around like any of
us being of a normal weight, he wasn't eating, he was a skeleton of himself, he
was even smaller than me and it was very very rapid in short space of about a
year he went from walking around being able to eat and swallow to the cancer
progressing very very aggressively and rapidly to being fed through his stomach
and receiving chemotherapy, radiotherapy. And all the while being cared for in
this flat that you described? Yeah by district nurses I mean the district nurses
even coming in the home were horrified at the conditions he was having to stay
in I mean he was bed bound in the front room in a hospital bed with mice with
cockroaches, damp, mould, the nurses struggled to even bathe him. They were very
sad you could see it in them every time they'd come. Did you have a choice about
whether he should be cared for at home or elsewhere or hospital say? No we
didn't at the time but I know he wanted to be at home he wanted to feel a sense
of being at home in normality and he had fought so hard for years to get that
property and he had only been there for what just over a year so that's the
place he wanted to be. Must have been hard for you? It is, I'm getting a bit
upset sorry. Yeah no I understand I understand and I mean hard for anybody to
watch someone they love going through that but in that flat in those conditions
it must have been heartbreaking. It was and the emotion was pure anger at the
time. Where do we draw the line? Where do we say this is wrong? This cannot be
allowed to happen. You lost your dad at the beginning of 2020. I wonder what
happened to your anger at that point? You say you'd been so angry that he'd been
having to live in those conditions. What happened when you lost him? It was very
difficult. I remember when he passed away and it sounds to someone that hasn't
been through it I think it sounds very strange to say it but having spoken to
people that have had people that had passed away from cancer or illnesses they
sort of got what it was that I was saying but when he passed away there was a
sense of relief. I remember at the time I didn't even cry. I didn't even cry I
just felt relief because of what it was that he had been through but the anger
came straight back because for someone that has cared for the elderly for many
decades looked after people of this country and then for the last couple of
years to die in those sorts of conditions it left me with pure anger. I was
completely enraged. I didn't know what to do or how to channel it at the time
and I was depressed. I was very very depressed. There was points where I was
suicidal I mean and to top it off after my dad had passed away during the
pandemic they then sent us a notice to quit and gave us 30 days to vacate the
property because my dad passed away and there was a clause in the tenancy
agreement saying the kids cannot take it and that's when I started channeling my
anger into a response to fight back against what they were saying. Fighting so
hard to stay in this flat but this flat was falling apart around your ears.
Exactly. I mean this is when the ceiling came down isn't it? Yes it was it was
so there was a leak on the day of my dad's funeral and it caused a ceiling below
to partially cave in and we had been complaining complaining. My dad's funeral
was in February 2020. No one came out until the October of that year to look at
the ceiling. Then when they did I didn't realise they were planning on pulling
the whole ceiling down. There was something in particular worrying Quajo. A
workman told him there might be asbestos in the collapsed ceiling which can
cause life-threatening illness if inhaled. It was widely used in construction in
the UK until it was banned in the late 90s. The housing association in charge of
the Eastfield estate has told us that air testing was carried out at the
property when the ceiling repair was undertaken and confirmed they say that
there had been no release of asbestos but Quajo wasn't to know that at the time
and now had a mission. What was the point when you thought to yourself I've just
got to act? I've got to overcome this resistance to sort of talking about this
explaining the conditions I live in. I've just got to tell everybody how bad
this is. I remember exactly that moment it was like a light bulb moment. I
remember the time it was about 10 10 30 during the day and I was at work and
what had happened was we was promised that work people would be out to carry out
a repair in the property and they were supposed to be out at eight o'clock in
the morning. Nine o'clock went by no one showed up no call ten o'clock went by
no one showed up now it got to 10 30 and I was annoyed so I phoned up to find
out why they weren't here but the person on the other side of the phone was so
dismissive and so rude and then as I was responding to them they hung the phone
up and I just stood there and remember thinking they really don't care they
couldn't care less. I need to find another way of complaining I need to find a
way of shaming them I need to do something about this now I've had enough. I
remember thinking to myself the next time they get a call in regards to my
property won't be from me it's going to be from a journalist and I made that
happen. Tell us how you did it. I went into the property I took pictures took
videos of the conditions we were living in the damp the mould the cockroaches
the poor security to the house the missing ceiling and I decided to post it on
social media in a thread and just explain. My followers at the time knew that my
dad had recently passed away and I'd shared the thread and people were
absolutely horrified I mean within the space of a couple of hours it was shared
hundreds of times hundreds of people had commented hundreds of people had tagged
the house and provider had tagged journalists national news not only that other
people are coming forward in the comments section and in my DMs to say they're
living in similar conditions and it's completely out of order. How did you feel
about all that going on with people saying hey we don't blame you and secondly
yeah it's the same for us. It finally felt like we were being listened to we
were finally being heard and it wasn't until I've seen those comments that I
realised no this is wrong this is completely wrong and what happened was I felt
a shift and I finally felt the scales were finally being balanced you had this
monster organisation versus me as an individual but now you had this monster
organisation versus me and thousands of others on social media shaming them.
Quajo soon got a response from the housing association but it wasn't the one he
wanted. Their statement said we acknowledge the inconvenience the repairs issues
at this property have caused and apologise if Mr Twenebower feels we haven't
provided the service expected from us. Had they responded in the correct way I
would have left it at that but I was aware that my estate was falling to bits
and that other neighbours would be living in the same conditions and I then
decided to go around every single property on my estate and there was over 500
and we knocked on all of the doors we put leaflets in people's doors with my
contact details on and by the time I had got around the full estate I had
already had messages from tenants on the estate sending me pictures upon
pictures upon videos of the absolutely disgraceful unsanitary conditions they
were also living in. In some cases people were living in those conditions for
longer than I had been alive and in one case 27 years. Who was that? This was a
neighbour of mine who actually my dad knew after my dad passed away she was
making food for me and my sisters and she was she was bringing it round in
containers because she's gone in she'll make the food that my dad would make and
she works three jobs as a cleaner in schools and she had done that for many many
years and she had been living on the estate for decades and she had had a severe
infestation of mice her kitchen was falling to absolute bits and for 27 years
she was having to live in those conditions. I mean the mice infestation was so
bad this lady's in her 60s she had to go to our local hardware store buy cement
take it upstairs to her house and mix in her kitchen to fill try and fill the
holes to stop the mice from coming in because the provider wouldn't deal with
it. So when you got all these messages were you able to publicise the conditions
that other people were living in too? That's exactly what I did. I made another
thread and I said it's not just me living in those poor conditions look at the
way in which my neighbours I live in too. This just took it to a whole other
level I mean it was post upon post upon post of people angry, disgusted, upset
and that's when it got the attention of national media. There was a two-week
undercover investigation of my estate which I helped them with and it ended up
being a top story in national news around the country and that's when things
just exploded tenants reaching out to me from across the country across London.
So I've just come to house they've had issues with cockroaches for around 10
years possibly over 10 years and first complained about 10 years ago. This is a
tenant I've spoken to in Liverpool who's had his home completely flooded between
25 and 30 times. So I've just come down to here and probably going in after the
tenant contacting me it's the worst case of damp and mould I've been in in the
country so far. It made me feel a sense of finally people are going to be
listened to and people are talking about this issue no one's ashamed to be
talking about it anymore and politicians are going to have to listen to it. Well
and indeed politicians were asking to speak to you so you went to meet the
Secretary of State for Housing you went to meet the Mayor of London you told
them what's going on you fed into to the work they were doing you've been called
Britain's Housing Hero as a result. Yes it's crazy at one point the Secretary of
State Michael Gove reached out to me and I remember thinking at first is this
some sort of joke is it real and then I found out that it was. I mean we've got
regulation coming out later this year so changes to the conditions that people
are living in more rights for tenants. Are these changes that you have been
involved with? Yes so I met with the government I met with Michael Gove on
several occasions now. I also wanted to thank Quijo Trenabur a young man who I
think all of us in this house have seen campaigning with eloquence and passion.
When will you know that your work is done? When people no longer need my help
and that might not be until I'm old and no longer able to work but I hope it's
sooner than that. When the phone stops ringing? When the phone stops ringing.
Has your flat been repaired? It has been repaired I still had some issues with
cockroaches and mould so it's an ongoing process. Do they jump though when you
call these days and say you need repairs? Yeah absolutely not just on my behalf
and my family's behalf but on the behalf of any tenant I really reach out on
behalf of. I've had cases where tenants have been complaining for 10 years and
then I post on social media within a matter of hours they're commenting but in
regards to my personal case they they did they have they have to respond
straight away. I mean they know not to leave me in the way that they left me and
my family many years ago suffering in poor conditions and continuing to suffer
in poor poor conditions. Were you able to fix things as well for the for the
Ghanaian lady and the neighbour who who'd lived with that mouse infestation? Yes
she's so grateful it's crazy because a few months after highlighting it she had
her new kitchen finally and they came around replaced her bathroom too. The
walls that were filled with her cement they repaired. It must feel good the
difference you're making to people's lives. It does I mean I never came into
this work for absolutely anything I just started here off the back of my dad and
his story nothing can outweigh being able to change someone's life for the
better or to be able to help a young family with children not go through what it
was that me and my sisters had to go through whilst we were younger whilst we
were studying and living in those conditions. What do you think your dad would
say to you? He'd be proud he'd be proud he'd probably laugh. Laugh? He'd
probably laugh at the fact that I'm even sat here speaking to you today because
he was a fan of the BBC and he always used to watch it listen to it so he'd be
satisfied with the work that I'm doing especially coming from his background of
looking after the Ellsby and caring for others. I know it's probably the some of
the most important work that I will ever do and I'm glad I've been able to do
it. He doesn't get much time to himself these days but painting is Cuajo's
therapy. Among the personal heroes he's put on canvas is the rapper Dave who was
in the year above Cuajo at school. He went from just being like me an ordinary
person from our school in South London to creating music globally. The painting
is entitled Black Excellence. I'm hanging it in the school that I went to
especially to inspire the younger generation of kids from disadvantaged
backgrounds to aspire to great things and believe that they can achieve whatever
it is that they want to. It is possible. I grew up in Stratton and teachers were
giving me tests. Cuajo Tweneboa on his campaign to improve living conditions for
many living in social housing in the UK. When we approached the housing
association involved in his case they told us the following. The issues raised
by Mr Tweneboa have been fully resolved and extensive work has been undertaken
in his home which was completed in September 2021. We have invested
significantly to improve existing homes on the Eastfields estate including
carrying out a large-scale roof replacement and we will continue to maintain
them until the last person has moved into their new home. We have knocked on the
door of every household to check for outstanding repairs, opened a dedicated
estate office, apologized to residents where our service fell short and
published a comprehensive lessons learned report. We also contacted the local
council Merton who told us that the temporary accommodation Cuajo talks about
was not managed by them nor was the Eastfields estate. Outlook will be back
after the news with a grandmother and grandson on the road trip of a lifetime.
Stay with us. This is the BBC World Service meeting the Vietnam war veterans who
left America and retired to the country they fought in. 50 years ago on the 29th
of March all American forces will be withdrawn from South Vietnam. Today a small
group of US veterans now in their 70s have returned to live there permanently. I
was expecting people to hate me when I came back. People welcomed me like I had
just left the day before. I am Na Pham and I'll be finding out why they choose
to retire in Vietnam. You're ashamed of what you've seen and what you did. I say
this is the only thing that makes sense me living in Vietnam. I came back to
find the war. I kind of explained it as when you're a little kid you've got a
monster under the bed. I had to look under the bed and the monster wasn't there.
No place like Naam. Saturday at 12 GMT. Coming next on Outlook the American
woman who in her 80s set out on a road trip with her grandson to visit all 63 US
national parks. Every person that passed us on that trail on the Allen Cave
Trail in the Great Smoky Mountains. Everybody gave her a high five, a hug and
said keep going grandma keep going. Oh it was very exciting. I always like to
try something different and it was. More from Joy and Brad after the news. BBC
News with Danielle Yauviecza. Days before the anniversary of Russia's invasion
of Ukraine, President Biden has given a defiant speech painting Ukraine's
struggle as a generational conflict for freedom. Addressing a cheering crowd in
Warsaw, Mr Biden said President Putin's lust for power and land would fail.
China's top diplomat Wang Yi is in Moscow for talks. Mr Wang told the Russian
Security Council secretary Nikolai Patrochev that relations between the two
countries remained as hard as a rock. He said the two sides discussed their
willingness to oppose all forms of bullying. A judge in New York says victims of
the 9-11 attacks in 2001 by Al-Qaeda militants are not entitled to Afghan
central bank funds frozen in the United States. The judge said it would mean
recognising the Taliban government as legitimate. Mexico's former security
chief, Henaro Garcia Luna, has been found guilty of taking bribes to allow safe
passage for drugs by a US court. Mr Luna took millions of dollars from the
Sinaloa drug cartel, Mexico's biggest crime group. The attorney general in Peru
says the US State Department has agreed to extradite the former Peruvian
president Alejandro Toledo on corruption charges. Prosecutors say he used the
bank accounts of accomplices in the US to receive millions of dollars in bribes
from the Brazilian construction giant Oderbrecht. The US authorities have
ordered a train operator to clean up contamination after a train carrying
hundreds of tons of chemicals derailed in the state of Ohio earlier this month.
Iran has imposed sanctions on 36 EU and British individuals and organisations.
The EU imposed similar measures on Tehran a day earlier. And the European Food
and Safety Agency has recommended that laying hens and broiler chickens are no
longer kept in cages. BBC News. Everybody knows that the key to a great road
trip is an equally groovy soundtrack. Obviously in the Smokies there's nobody
you can listen to except Dolly Parton without being sacrilegious. So you know we
really let the land kind of dictate what music was playing but we always had
something. Joy is there one particular song that stands out to you? Oh. Oh
Johnny Cash right? Yeah that's right. Yeah I've been everywhere man. Yeah that's
great. That's fantastic I love that. Today we're taking a trip with an
inseparable duo Brad Ryan and his grandmother Joy. Having both faced moments of
hardship in their lives they set out to find peace in nature and embarked on an
incredible journey to visit all of the 63 national parks spread across the
United States. Growing up in the small town of Duncan Falls, Ohio, Ryan vividly
remembers spending time with his grandmother immersed in nature. So my first
memory and I had to look it up and make sure that I wasn't just imagining this
but they said that on average the earliest memory that we have for most people
starts about two and a half and that's how old I was when I went on this road
trip to a fishing camp with my grandma Joy, my grandpa Bob and my parents and my
very first memory of even being conscious and alive on this planet is being on a
lake shore with my grandma Joy and I see the seagulls flying around me and we
have some bread in our hands and we start throwing it on the beach and these
birds come down right in front of me. Growing up Brad witnessed his parents
divorce which caused a rift in the family and he moved to the big city Columbus,
Ohio to go to university. Then he decided to go on an adventure of his own. You
lived in South Africa, Kenya and Botswana meaning you spent about 10 years away
from home. Was there any point that you thought about your grandmother Joy and
those memories that you had spending time outside with with nature? Well yeah
she actually took me to the airport in 2001 for my first study abroad trip and
my first international trip which was in Kenya. It wasn't long after I returned
from that trip that the estrangement began so most of that decade where I moved
back and went to graduate school, hike the Appalachian Trail, that was a period
of time where we weren't speaking at all. So for those 10 years you and grandma
Joy did not speak at all? It was pretty close. It was about 2002 to 2011. How
did you come to terms with that? How did that feel that you weren't really
speaking to your grandmother? Well I think part of running away to Africa was
was disassociating from the reality of my circumstance and the sadness that I
was feeling. Meanwhile on the other side of the world Joy received terrible news
about her husband. We found out about his diagnosis when we were on vacation in
Florida and he got the backache and the doctor asked me to step outside and he
said your husband has cancer and he didn't have long to live and I said well
please don't tell him till we can get him home. In April is when we brought him
home and the doctor come in and said he said how long do I have to live? He said
two months and it was two months exactly he died on Father's Day. Thank God he
didn't have to suffer. And how did your life change after his passing? Well I
just pulled myself up by my bootstraps and went up to the grocery store and put
my application in and went to work for 12 years. So just a week after her
husband's funeral Joy had to stack shelves at her local grocery store until she
was 80. By this time Brad was struggling to keep up with the high pace of
veterinary school and he'd even missed his grandfather's funeral. So when he and
Joy were finally reunited at Brad's sister's wedding after almost a decade of
being apart they were elated to see each other. Of course I was amazed how much
he'd grown. I just remember when he was a little fella and now he's a young man
but he still looked the same. Just with hippie hair. What's hippie hair? Just
the long like Jim Morrison the doors. I was trying to be a 70s rocker I think.
Yeah I mean it it was a very it was a very sobering reality to see her so thin
and frail and I always had in the back of my mind that if I didn't go to her
house and learn to bake banana bread and raisin filled cookies and just make
things right that that I would have a lifetime of of pain. Joy how did you feel
about reconnecting with your grandson? Well of course I was really glad to see
him back again you know. I was alone. The boys all lived away and you know you
felt like part of your life was missing because you look forward to
grandchildren. That's the best part of being old I guess. The more time they
spent with each other the more they realized how much they'd missed exploring
the outdoors together. When we were walking around our state park I was filling
her in on the gaps of my life and telling her about my adventures in Africa and
and hiking from Georgia to Maine for six months and she was like you know I
really I wish that I'd seen more of the great outdoors in my life. I really envy
all the things that you got to do and I said what do you mean you've never seen
mountains and and she said no no I mean we you know Grandpa Bob wanted to go
perch fishing in Lake Okeechobee and that's that's what we did every winter. I
couldn't reconcile that in my brain that this woman that had this thirst for
life was very active and engaged and mentally acute was trapped in Duncan Falls,
Ohio for the rest of her life while I continued to go out and and live my life.
Then a classmate of Brad's at veterinary school took his own life. This had a
huge impact on Brad and it was a wake-up call for him. It was a trigger for me
and I remember sitting in the radiology suite in the dark having never met this
guy looking at his photos on Facebook and I just had tears streaming down my
cheeks until they were burnt and I I went to the bathroom I think and I called
Grandma Joy and I said how do you feel about seeing that first mountain this
weekend and she said what time are you picking me up and that answer changed our
lives. Was there any sort of anxiety before the trip or was it just pure
excitement? Yes it was just excitement uh to know I got to go on this nice
expedition and uh see what was out there and I really looked forward to it and
then Brad asked me to go camping and I'd never been in a tent before so I said
well I'm willing to try that whatever of course it was kind of an awakening when
we got there was pouring down rain and I was chasing with them but I love when
he's trying to put the tent up but uh it was a fun trip anyway and I got to
climb my first mountain. It was so unexpected that she would climb a mountain
with me and that she would go camping and smile the entire time and sit around
the campfire and have these beautiful conversations and everybody we met was
inspired by her. I knew on that first trip that we had a special undertaking
that um was resonating with with strangers because every person that passed us
on that trail on the Allen Cave Trail in the Great Smoky Mountains everybody
gave her a high five, a hug and said keep going Grandma, keep going. Did you
find it easy or was it was it difficult? Oh it was very exciting. I always like
to try something different and it was. It had been raining the day before and it
was kind of slippery and uh it was easier going up than going down I can tell
you that but there were so many all the people passed us we saw little children,
big children and it was very exciting. I was shocked that she she was doing the
things that I was watching her do because it was log bridges with a cable going
across streams and up steep uh rocky hillsides and we just we just took our time
and we took lots of breaks ate a lot of granola bars and we had a lot of we had
a lot of people cheering us on. I think we had adrenaline the closer we got and
when she got to the top two and a half miles to the to the Allen Cave Bluffs
everybody stood up gave her standing ovation people wanted to get their photos
with her. This was before she was you know the grandma joy of of of the internet
of viral fam you know she was she was um doing something unique and special and
and and that was just the fact that you know most people in their 80s are not
climbing mountains and I don't think it's necessarily because they can't I think
it's because they put themselves in a box or they they put those self-imposed
limitations on what's possible and they forget that life is still happening
right now and grandma joy never forgot that life is still happening. Joy how did
it feel to get to the top? I was disappointed I expect to see a cave and all it
was was a dip in the wall. I said you need to tell me I walk through up here to
see that. It was ridiculous. We might have picked a better mountain. We could
have picked a more exciting mountain. Maybe it was a good place to start. Yeah
it was a good place to start. She got better with the better views would come
right? Yeah. It was it was a complete shift in my my mental health after having
that experience and then when I thought back on how much that meant to her and
also how much it meant to me and I and I looked at the pictures of us in the
Smokies so I said what do you think grandma about trying to see as many national
parks as we can? Why don't we try to do all of them? So we we traveled for 28
days we saw 21 US national parks on our second road trip and then we we road
tripped along the east coast all the way down to Florida. We road tripped up to
New England and did Acadia so all of that so we we actually got to the halfway
point on our own without any public awareness. So it was all privately funded up
until that point? I launched a GoFundMe account for the 28 day road trip. I said
this is my grandma Joy. She never had a chance to go see the great outdoors. She
is deserving of this opportunity. She's been through a lot in her life. She lost
two of her three sons well before their time. She had to work in a deli to make
ends meet until she was 80 and she doesn't have the means to travel. I really
want to I want to have this experience with her and enough people rallied behind
us that we were able to make that happen. What were the most beautiful moments
that you experienced on that trip? The most special moment of all of our road
trips was when we went to Fishercap Lake because we were promised that that was
a great place to see moose and we had never seen seen those magnificent animals
in the wild before and I'm photographing the moose, grandma Joy sitting there on
the side of the lake and this little girl from Eastern Europe who did not speak
English, this little girl who was separated by at least eight decades of age and
a language barrier sat down next to my grandmother so that she could share her
binoculars and I watched these two people just smiling at each other and
pointing and and taking in that that majestic scene. That little girl was the
sweetest little thing. I just got to get her home with me and we were able to
communicate and the joy of seeing that animal and that was as a special memory
to me. I think about that a lot. And I just realized that that's the default.
This idea that we can't hang out with somebody who's older, that's not really
the way we are when we come into this world. I think society and life makes that
uncool. We drift away from that and ageism manifests in lots of different ways
but if we lived in a world where it was normal for people to connect
intergenerationally and go on vacation together and party together and have fun
together, our story never would have gone viral but seeing them reminded me, oh
yeah, that's what it was like for me when I was a kid on that lake shore feeding
the seagulls. So I think that remains my favorite moment. Joy had countless
special moments on these trips and it was all captured by Brad who took videos
as she lost herself in the deepest valleys and tallest mountains and he posted
it for her tens of thousands of fans on social media. In California she would
learn an important lesson about the towering redwood trees. That was the most
amazing thing in my whole life. You could not see the top and those poor trees
had been struck by lightning. There was big gouges in them but they stood there
proudly and kept right on growing. So that means a lot. Don't give up and they
didn't. That's great advice and I also saw a video of you rolling down these
sand dunes in Colorado. Sure, I wasn't going to be back there so I thought well
might as well give it a whirl because I'm not going to be back here. So he said
how are you going to get back up there and I said I'll just crawl and I did. So
it was fun. I got a kick out of it. I think I would be afraid of rolling down
sand dunes. So when I saw that I was like wow you really are fearless. Was there
any moment where you felt some sort of fear? No, when you're rolling down a sand
dune you don't think how old you are. It makes you feel young. It was just fun.
That's amazing. It really sounds so idyllic. You know a grandmother and a
grandson exploring the United States through these amazing national parks and
doing all these wonderful adventures. Was there any sort of moment where you
were like okay I feel like maybe now I could use a little bit of space. Oh I
don't know. We really got along pretty good together. We really did. But I think
overall everything was really really great and it was really fun. That was the
whole point of it is to be fun, relax and have a good time and we did. Brad and
Joy still have one stop left on their tour. The National Park of American Samoa,
7,000 miles away in the South Pacific where Joy will celebrate her 93rd
birthday. I've been to Reno, Chicago, Fargo, Minnesota, Buffalo, Toronto. How do
you feel about being able to celebrate your 93rd year in such a far away place?
Yeah, I think it's going to be kind of wild. 93 and 63 so we're going to get
along pretty good. I'm looking forward to it really am. The irrepressible Joy
Ryan and her grandson Brad speaking to Outlook's guy at Karamata. Thanks for
your company today. Outlook's back same time tomorrow. BBC World Service and now
witness history with me, Rina Stanton Sharma. That's Sege Man by Kaya. His death
in police custody in 1999 sparked three days of rioting in Mauritius. Kaya,
whose real name was Joseph Topiz, was part of the Mauritian Afro-Kreel
community, descendants of slaves who felt disadvantaged compared to the majority
Indian Hindu population. For me it was as if the world stopped on that day.
Everything went dark and for a moment I fainted. It was something very hard to
accept. I don't wish anyone to experience this kind of situation. Veronique
Topiz is Kaya's widow. She was 31 when he died and the couple had two young
children. Kaya was performing at a rally to legalise marijuana and he was later
arrested for smoking the drug there. He was taken to a prison which locals
called Alcatraz and died there four days later. When word got out riots erupted
on the streets of the capital, Port Louis. People believed Kaya had been beaten
to death. Kaya had a relaxed manner and gentle character. He was always happy,
smiling. Everywhere he went he would spread joy. Kaya pioneered a new genre
called Segeh for using reggae and sega, traditional music for Mauritius, the
small island in the Indian Ocean off the eastern coast of Africa. He chose a
stage name as an homage to Bob Marley's album Kaya and was heavily influenced by
Marley's music and political messages. Everywhere Kaya performed there were many
people. For Magic Land 90 there were 44,000 people in the stadium in Ozil. The
police said Kaya died in a prison cell and a coroner declared that a skull
fracture caused his death. Police records stated that he was suffering from drug
withdrawal and threw himself against the walls of his own cell. But many felt
that there was more to this story. Veronique demanded a second independent
autopsy and this coroner ruled that Kaya had been beaten to death. But this
wasn't the only reason that Mauritians took to the streets in their thousands.
African Creoles felt discriminated against by Indians who dominated Mauritian
politics, the economy and the police force. The news editor of Le Express paper
Harish Chunden Singh spoke to the BBC. I think this was quite a catalyst for
things which were growing here in Mauritius and for some time it has been an
explosion of something which was in fact here boiling for some time and it was
in fact a cold run which has just exploded somewhere. The riots started on the
23rd of February. During the height of the disorder Veronique was travelling
through Roche-Bois, a suburb of the capital. I saw broken wood, burnt wood and
rubber and debris. Shops, schools and businesses remained closed in the capital
and other towns across Mauritius as the worst rioting the island has seen for 30
years raged on. The road was blocked every five minutes. I had to ask people on
the road to clear the way for me. There were men on the street that seemed to
have not slept overnight, looked disheveled and were outraged by Kaya's death.
When the president, Kasamu Tim stepped out of the presidential palace he
witnessed the chaotic scenes. So nice daggers, all sorts of artisanal weapons
that people were hiding behind their back and as waiting for the community to
come. It was scary. Tires were burning on the streets. There were people here
and there running, public buildings and shops burning and some of the routers
with big television sets on their heads running around. You had people with
their clubs and their hands, sticks, knives. The violence started to spread from
the capital to other parts of the country and the situation was out of control.
The army was called in early this morning as violence flared, public transport
was disrupted as many operators chose to stay off the streets. What began as
protests against the establishment revealed deeper underlying ethnic tensions.
The few shops that were burnt were said to be owned by Hindus while those who
were setting fire to those buildings were Creoles. It was not true. Some of them
belonged to other communities, Muslims for instance. So this started big trouble
in Mauritius instead of the people having a grudge against the authorities. The
anger just stirred between Hindus and Creoles and this was extremely dangerous.
President Uhtim decided he'd have to go into the heart of the danger zone and
speak directly to the rioters, ignoring the advice from his own security team.
When I told them look in the palace when the houses outside are burning, then
people are at each other's throat. Even the Prime Minister, Naveen Ramgoulam,
told him not to go according to the President, claiming the rioters would calm
down by themselves. President Uhtim, who was Muslim, believed he'd be able to
get through to them because he wasn't part of the Hindu or Creole communities. I
think they trusted me by telling them, look, I have come all the way to speak to
you and I know how you're feeling. Please don't do what we're trying to do
because this way to create havoc in this country. You and your children are
going to be the greatest losers if the country goes down the drain like this. I
cannot ascend your anger, leave it in our hands. We are going to deal with the
problems. We are going to settle a commission of inquiry and we are going to set
things right. The death toll was growing. Berger Agaté, a guitarist and friend
of Caius, was one of those who died after being hit by a rubber bullet fired by
police. Four people are now known to have died in Mauritius since disturbances
began in the wake of the death of the reggae star Caius, and several policemen
had been injured too, some of them suffering burns from petrol bombs. The day
before Caius' funeral, Mauritians had the chance to mourn his death. We had to
lay Caius' body on the football ground in Rochefort because all night long there
were so many people who came from different corners of the island to pay their
lost respects. I saw people spending the night on the street and people in the
neighborhood were cooking for them. It was like a pilgrimage. At the church it
was extraordinary because there was another singer, Berger Agaté, who burst
away. It was a joint funeral and the church was full. After the funeral, the
violence started to simmer down. President Utym kept his promise of a judicial
inquiry into Caius' death. The state took the responsibility, which means that
the state recognises the wrong was done by representatives of the state to Caius
and to his families. Veronique's quest for justice would continue for eight
years. She eventually received 4.5 million rupees, around $9,000 in a settlement
from the government. Caius' death forced politicians to acknowledge the
discontent of the Afro-Creole community, and eventually a government department
was set up to address their concerns, although many believe that little has
changed. I kept everything good that he left as a legacy. His music, his smile,
his way of life. In any case, it is necessary to keep what is good. Veronique
Topiz and Kasam Utym were speaking to me. Veronique Topiz and Kasam Utym were
speaking to me. Rina Santensharma for Witness History. Working together,
sometimes at personal risk.