TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-15H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 something to tell Elizabeth and Helen has the bit between her teeth. That's In
The Arches here on BBC Radio 4. BBC News at two o'clock. Rishi Sunak has told
MPs that his proposed law on illegal migration is a priority for the British
people during a heated session of Prime Minister's questions. Mr Sunak said the
plan showed he was determined to ensure the UK remained a compassionate and
generous country. But the leader of the Scottish National Party at Westminster,
Stephen Flynn, questioned whether the policy would protect the victims of sex
trafficking. I'll take that as a yes from the Prime Minister that women who are
the victims of sex trafficking will not be protected under our modern slavery
laws. What a complete and utter disgrace, Mr Speaker. But whilst it may shock,
it shouldn't necessarily surprise because this is the Tory government that in
recent months has spoken of invasions. A number of Conservative MPs have
expressed anger with the BBC presenter Gary Lineker after he criticised the
government's asylum policy, describing it as immeasurably cruel. The BBC said it
was having a frank conversation with him. Mr Lineker said he would continue to
try to speak up for poor souls that had no voice. The reward for information
that leads to the conviction of those who carried out last month's shooting of
one of Northern Ireland's most senior detectives has been increased to Â£150,000.
Police investigating the attack on DCI John Caldwell have revealed details of a
second vehicle that they believe was used. Investigators in Germany say they've
searched a boat which they suspect was used in an attack on the Nord Stream
pipelines, which bring gas from Russia to Europe. The New York Times has quoted
anonymous US intelligence officials who suggest a pro-Ukrainian group carried
out the attacks. Kiev has denied the claims. A psychologist has told a parole
board that Charles Bronson, one of the UK's most violent criminals, has
developed post-traumatic stress disorder while in prison. The psychologist,
who's not been publicly named, assessed Bronson at the request of his lawyers as
part of his attempt to be released from prison. Shape-shift seems to be the
answer to all of Bryony's problems. Her career, her confidence, her sister's
cancer diagnosis. But what does Shape-shift want from her? Join our thriller,
Limelight, in 15 minutes. But first, Lily and Josh can't agree on anything in
the arches. MUSIC MUSIC Did you check out Courtney's profile, then? I did. So?
Does she get your seal of approval? She wasn't exactly how you described her,
Lily. What do you mean? You said she was impossible not to like. Yes, she is.
Look how many followers she's got. I'm not sure I could live with someone who
spends all her time making unboxing videos. They're really popular, you know.
They're stupid. Why would anyone want to watch a stranger unwrap a load of
deliveries? People do, though. I met her selling kitchens. Now she's pretty much
a full-time influencer. Sorry, Lily, she's just not housemate material. Are you
sure? She'd wind me up, I know it. Well, I haven't found anyone else. I've got
my mate Dom. I messaged you about him. Right. He's one of the catering guys we
sometimes use for the barn. Yeah, I had a look at him online. And? I really
don't think so, Josh. Why not? Every post was of himself flexing his muscles in
the mirror. Well, he's into fitness. Classic narcissist. I think your friend
Courtney might fit into that category. Neither of them, then. That means we're
back to square one. I really need to find someone quickly, though. Absolutely.
The sooner the better. Well, I'm moving in at the weekend, whatever. Fine. Only
I want to take some measurements of the room, if I can. Yeah, sure. I'll be home
around six, if that's any good. I'll say I'm going to the ball with you and Ben.
Hang on. You mean you haven't told your mum you're moving out? Oh, Freddy. What?
I know. I should. I think Mum's quite enjoying having me to herself without Russ
being in tow. Only now I'm leaving. And Freddy? I'm sure he'll take it
personally. I just need to break it to them gently. Lily, could you give me a
hand with something? I've got to go, Josh. Is that your mum? I'll see you later.
Just tell her, will you? Bye. Sorry, I didn't realise you were on the phone. Oh,
it was no-one. No-one? Nothing. It doesn't matter. You seem a bit... What? I
don't know. Unsettled? Really? Lily, is there something you want to tell me?
Um... Look, I've been feeling a bit restless, Mum. Like I need to do something
different. Like... You see, what I'm trying to say is... I'm moving out. Dad? In
here, Helen. Are you in the middle of something? I've just been on the phone to
Jim. Oh? He's going on about these plans for this electric car charging station.
And? Have you been on the website? No need. I've heard it all from Susan. So,
what do you think? Well, it's bigger than I'd pictured. Jim insists it's going
to be a huge blot on the landscape. I must admit, the size and scale concern me.
It's bound to bring more traffic into the area. And then there's the retail
units. Oh, no. I mean, any number of businesses could be going in there. Not
necessarily anything to worry us, though. Oh, I don't know. A charging station
obviously has its environmental advantages. Yeah. What does the website call it?
A forward-thinking scheme? Yeah, but when big business is involved, I can't help
feeling suspicious. We sold some of our land to developers. We know the benefits
of that sort of deal. Yeah, I know. David and Ruth had every right to do what
they did. They needed the money, and I'm sure it helped enormously. There's
already a lot of local opposition, and Jim's determined to lead the fight back.
People are wary, aren't they? Well, just have to keep a close eye on how things
develop. At the end of the day, it could result in more footfall for us. Maybe.
Unless a coffee shop or a convenience store moves in, in which case... We'd have
stiff competition. Oh, who knows? Anyway, Dad, there's something else I wanted
to discuss. Oh, yes? My plans for the dairy. Oh, less controversial, I hope.
Actually, I'm really excited. Adam's ideas for the forest garden have really
inspired you, haven't they? He's right. We should be opening things up where we
can. Give people more insight into where their food comes from. Well, perhaps
you can tell him what an influence he's been. It might give him a boost. How do
you think he's doing? He said he's been trying to sort through Jennifer's
belongings. Oh, really? Making slow progress, though, by the sound of it. Well,
he's certainly prompted me into action. Let me show you what I'm thinking. The
truth is, Mum, I wasn't even looking for anywhere else to live. Honestly, I
promise you. Lily... But when the opportunity came up, it just felt right. Lily,
it's OK. Really? Well, I have a slight confession to make. You knew. Only since
this morning. I told Josh not to say anything. Oh, he didn't. It was Aunty
Shula. Josh texted her to update the contract, and she called to see if she'd
been in touch. I told her to update the contract, and she called to see what I
thought. But you're fine about it. Well, I mean, I'd rather have heard from you
first. I didn't want to upset you, Mum. Lily, I'm not... You'd tell me if you
were upset, wouldn't you? Yeah, I'm not upset, and you mustn't worry about me.
I'm glad you're thinking about the future. I didn't think that you'd live here
forever, you know. But I do wish you'd let me know how you were feeling. I might
have helped. Thanks, Mum. I guess it's been creeping up on me for a while now.
Wondering if I'll ever move on. From Russ, you mean? It's a few things, I
suppose. Nolotando was telling me she's looking for a new place in Durban
already. She's just forging ahead. I mean, it's thousands of miles away, and
they've only been broken up a couple of months. Whereas me and Russ... There's
no right speed to move on. Sometimes it takes a bit longer, that's all. Yeah,
it's just being with him kind of compromised things for me. Oh, Lily. I hate the
thought of you feeling like he's spoiled things for you. And this will always be
your home. Always. Of course. And I know that. But I'd be lying if I said I
hadn't imagined a future for us here at Lower Loxley. And now... Now I need a
different future. Of course. I just want to try something new. I need to. And
you're so right to. I really hope it's what you're looking for, darling. Thanks,
Mum. So do I. I take it you haven't told Freddy your plans? I will. He's in the
office if you want to catch him. Maybe. What is it? I don't want to tell him
just yet. I will, but I just need a bit longer to sort some things out. Your
brother should know. Please don't say anything, Mum. I'm not comfortable with
that, Lily. It won't be for long. Tell Freddy while I'm away, then. What? You
haven't forgotten I'm going on this course tomorrow. Right. So it'll just be the
two of you until Friday lunchtime. We'll be fine. Just make sure Freddy knows by
then. Okay. And don't be so reluctant to share things with me in future, even if
they might be difficult. I'm sorry, Mum. Come here. I'm really going to miss
you, Lily. I'll only be down the road. It doesn't matter. She'll miss you all
the same. It's certainly an interesting idea, Helen. So the window would be
here, along this wall, backing onto the yard. And it would reach right across
the dairy and the cheese room. So people visiting the forest garden can come
over here and see the team churning the curds and whey. I think customers would
love it. They can see how we make their cheese, yoghurt, ice cream. So we'd be
sharing the food journey, as your mum would say. I found some other dairies
online that have installed similar windows. Restaurant kitchens have been doing
it for ages. They look smart, Dad. But most importantly, they help to engage and
educate. We can show what we do in an organic farm dairy. It would definitely
complement everything we're trying to do here. It makes the dairy much more
accessible without really impacting production. I think it's a brilliant idea,
Helen. Well, thanks. Have you told your mum and Tom? Just now, yeah. They seem
to love it. Tom suggested some sort of shelter for the public in case it's
raining. Yes. You'll need a canopy above the window. So people can watch what's
going on, whatever the weather. We could have a rustic, corrugated roof. Oat
beams. Give it that farmyard feel. Great thinking, Dad. Shabby farmyard
agricultural chic. It sounds like we're all on board. Yeah, and the cost
wouldn't be astronomical. I think it will be a sensible investment, Helen.
Exactly. When were you thinking for installation? Summer, perhaps? Actually...
Or even in time for the Open Farm Sunday? I'd rather get going as soon as
possible. I'm thinking as soon as. The Easter holidays would be great. Well,
that's a nice idea. Why wait? I think we'd struggle to secure a builder at such
short notice. Well, you say that. You haven't found someone already, have you? I
mentioned to Lillian that we needed someone to do a bit of work for us, and she
came up trumps. Really? I was only hoping to get a quote, but this guy she knows
through Amside had a job fall through, so he could start as soon as we like.
Well... Reckons he might be able to finish the window in a couple of days. That
quickly? Yep. He said he'd come over for a recce tomorrow morning. You really do
have the bit between your teeth. Well, why hang around, Dad? Anyway, he seems as
keen as I am to get on with the job, and comes highly recommended by Lillian. I
think you'd better warn Susan and Clary, then. After all, you'll have to close
the dairy while the work's carried out. I'll see what the timetable is first.
Will you just grab the end of the tape measure, Josh? Yep. Got it. Great. I am
sorry, Lily. Why? I didn't realise Aunty Shula was going to tell your mum about
you moving in. Not that quickly. We can't keep things quiet in our family, Josh.
You ought to know that by now. True. Anyway, I should have said something
earlier. Oh, you can let go, by the way. Ow! Careful. I was just worried about
upsetting Mum. Was she OK? I think so. It's a big change for both of us. Mm. So,
will your chest of drawers fit? Should do. Now all we have to do is find the
ideal third person to complement the household. Actually, I was going to talk to
you about that. We don't like each other's suggestions. Look, I really don't
think you've given Courtney a fair hearing. Veto. Hey! You veto Dom. Yeah, fair
enough. Would it really be so bad if we asked Freddie? I reckon it could work,
the three of us. No, it wouldn't. It might not be as bad as you think. You're
right. It'll be much worse. Lily, please... OK, fine. Offer it to Dominic. What?
I've changed my mind. Tell him he can have the room. It's too late now, anyway.
What do you mean? Dom's found somewhere else. Well, there's got to be others.
Ambridge isn't exactly handy for most people. No, but... Our options are pretty
limited. Why not stop wasting time and just ask him? I'll put more effort into
looking. It's a hopeless cause. Please! OK. But if you can't find anyone by the
end of the week, I'm asking Freddie. That won't be necessary. Really? One
thing's for sure, Josh. I've not made this decision to have Freddie follow me
here. Noletando goes on an intriguing tour, and Kate confines in her dad in the
arches tonight at 7 o'clock. Our speculative thriller about big tech, data
manipulation and the undermining of democracy is next, followed by an original
short story set in Wales. Spring Stories is at a quarter to three. Then Dan
Whitworth presents Moneybox Live. Whether it's your energy bill, the price at
the pumps, or an evening out, inflation is impossible to hide from. One of the
places it's felt most keenly is at the supermarket check-out, on the basics, the
everyday essentials, and those once-in-a-while treats. So today on Moneybox,
we're looking at how the price of your food shop is changing, how it's impacting
your finances, and what you can do to try to bring it down. If it's something
you've noticed, please do send your questions or comments to
moneyboxatbbc.co.uk, include your phone number if you can, and listen today at
three o'clock. Now on Radio 4, we continue our thriller Galapagos by Simon
Scardifield and Andrew Dee. Bryony's new employers, a tech company called
Shapeshift, seem to be the answer to all of her problems. But what do they
really want from her and from their new AI, Galapagos? Listening to my own
voice, telling it now. There were lots of times I could have put more of the
pieces of the puzzle together. But even with Caracoga dying, Shapeshift felt
like an amazing opportunity. It was a hundred times better than everything else
around me. My sister Gaynor getting sicker by the day, poor Ewan falling to
bits. With all that happening, it was wonderful to have this great salary, a
boss who believed in me, clients all over the world, big, big shit going down
everywhere. Galapagos by Simon Scardifield and Andrew Dee. Part 3. Je vous en
prie, Ã  la prochaine. Bravo, they loved you. Madame Le Pen is taking her time to
commit because her people don't understand tech and won't admit it. She came
across as pretty smart. She asked if the algorithm can read French. I didn't
know the answer to that one. Nonsense. You explained Concordance data to them.
Not bad going. I barely understand it myself. Don't do that. Don't put yourself
down. It's just a little... It's just nothing, Bryony, and nobody needs you to
be little. OK, OK, sorry. And don't apologise, ever. OK. I might not be able to
take the girl out of Port Talbot. What was that? What? When you laughed. It
sounded... Oh, it's the microphone. It smooths out glitches in the signal, but
stretches the sound waves, changes pitch and, you know, stuff. I wanted to say
it's good that I'm here for Gaynor and Ewan. Thanks. I hate you. Keys home.
There's a delivery bot coming with a green screen arriving there tomorrow
sometime, so we can drop in whatever backdrop we like on your calls. Where do
you fancy calling from tomorrow? Ooh, how about Kuala Lumpur? Wherever that is.
What did I just say? You know the capital of almost every country in the world.
Don't pretend you don't. How do you know I know? We not only record your calls,
but also put them through textual analysis software that assesses and predicts
your levels of knowledge. OK, my fault for asking. Now, tomorrow, you ready for
the would-be governor of Oklahoma? Will repealing gay marriage mess with his
ratings? That's the issue, right? It comes down to whether there are more votes
in being homophobic or anti-homophobic. And we'll explain that he can be
homophobic for the homophobic voters and anti-homophobic for the not-homophobic
voters. If he works with us. Feeling good about it? Yeah. I need that confident
version of you at all times. Understood. Confident. Even when no-one's looking.
Someone's always looking, though. Right? Right. Wow, all your leaflets gone. Did
you dump them in the recycling? Funny. Come outside a minute. It's freezing. I
don't want you one to hear. Did you talk at all? Er, no. Did you try it? It's
not easy. I only went out leafletting so you two could talk. Not to free Wales
from the tyranny of the English oppressor? Leave it, Brie. He needs to talk. To
me, though. Please, try again. I'm pretty sure he's smoking something, you know.
I mean, if he's acting like this already... Dana, don't worry. Worrying is a
crime. Yeah, cos if I stop worrying and skip around all happy, you can spin my
terminal cancer like some feel-good story with 50,000 Facebook likes. You know
what? Fine. Play the cancer card if you want. You always did play the victim,
anyway. Sorry. Sorry. No, better out than in. I'm more of a talker than a
thinker. Rubbish. You're the clever one. You got all the A stars. You paged your
way through uni with a sales job. That's worldly. He wouldn't respect that. You
reckon? He thinks your job is cool. Does he know what I do? No-one does, Brie.
Including me. Actually, I shouldn't say that. I'll go up to Ewan now and use my
famous charm to strike up a conversation with him. Thank you. And get all your
work finished. I want us to spend some time this evening zoning out over a beer
and some tunes. Jesus, not if it's any of your Welsh-language bants. You are
turning your back on your own country. You've always worked well for me. Oh! I
think this is for me. Yes! And this is? Our green screen. We can create whatever
background we like on my course. Uh-huh. Because my box room makes you look
poor. I can look like I'm anywhere in the world. It's cool. It's fake. It's just
like being clothed instead of naked. It's so not. Are you... am I what? Glad I'm
here. Yeah. Getting at you stops me getting at you, huh? Pfft! Mm. Eh. Mm. Mm.
Shh! Shh! Could you, um... Thanks. You wanna hang out? Oh. What sound you got in
there? Last rapper I got into was Stormzy. It's painful, you know. I know. I
know it is, sweetheart. For all of us. No. This. It's painful. You're trying to
get all friendly because of Mum. I'm your auntie. This is what I'm for. Do your
thing with Mum, but leave me out of it, fam. Oh, come on! Let's... Your brick's
buzzing. It's the burner. It can wait. Why don't we... Oh! Actually, I do need
to get this quickly. Let's... Yeah. Omar. Briony. Finally. Got a new number,
then? Private one. Because the reason I wanted to speak to you urgently... You
heard what happened to that guy in Zimbabwe? Boniface Karakoga? No. The leader
of the protests. He was beaten to death by a mob with farm tools. Oh. That's
bad. After we set Galapagos on him. The post-hoc fallacy. The most common
diagnostic error. What? The leader died after Galapagos did his thing, but not
because of it. It's separate. Galapagos doesn't do that, so it didn't do that.
We need a way to make 100% sure Galapagos is not linked to anything like that. I
am 100% sure. And prove it to outsiders. Otherwise... There's no chain of
causality for collective human action. What's that, inhuman? If I... If I'm
walked into a pub before a football match wearing the wrong team's colours, I
could be kicked to death. What's the cause of death? Colour of my scarf? No. The
cause of the violence is within the violent group and very difficult to analyse
or predict. Right, I get that. I mean, it was a random act that killed him. You
can't blame Galapagos. Of course not. Crowds of ordinary human beings have the
same behaviour patterns as pathological individuals. That's why all social
interaction should be limited. That sounds like an Omar Aziz solution. That
sounds like irony. It was. And it'll be better when you've built in your... What
do you call them, tripwires? And feedback loops, yeah. But I won't be doing
that. Because...? I don't work for Mayfair Interventions anymore. Since when?
Same day they fired Max. You too? It's great. I've got an insane payoff and this
Sydney woman is fixing it for me to go to MIT and do research. Listen, this is
my personal phone. Use it from now on. What for? Er, to speak to me. Oh. I
suppose you'll have questions about Galapagos still. I care about you. I care
about you. Still. Care is what good friends do to each other, right? You're
getting good at this irony thing. Hey, Sydney. You're not at Gaynor's house? I
needed a break. Family taking up a lot of headspace right now? No, no, no, no. I
wanted some froth on my coffee, so I'm in Patelbert's Best Cafe. I'll be in
front of the green screen for this afternoon's calls. You're going to vote for
independence, apparently. Poor Talbot. If Gaynor gets away, it will. I've got
5,000 leaflets in my room. Sydney? Yes? Omar. You let him go. Why? His response
to the Karakoga backlash was woeful. He just told me that Galapagos had nothing
to do with it. That's true. So he's right. But for the wrong reasons. He refused
to consider the possibility, didn't want to investigate it. Gave in to
confirmation bias. Very common in highly intelligent people like him. Right, but
Galapagos, he invented it. He's special. So was Thomas Edison, but nobody needed
him to stick around to switch the lights on and off. He was going to fit
Galapagos with these feedback loops and tripwires. Yeah, that's because he's
obsessed with removing human beings from the process. But every AI system has to
have, at its apex, a human being. In this case, you. I'm not doing myself down,
I swear. Why me? What do I do? OK, take a look at what I'm sharing now. What do
you see? It's a dashboard. You're looking at the ten campaigns Shapeshift is
currently running across the world. And the movement you see is the digital
activity representing the campaign changing in real time. I can click on one
campaign, let's take South Africa, and then, like this, break it down by region,
by social media platform, by search term, by age group, race, anything. That's
very cool. This is nothing. When we throw Galapagos at it, everything on this
dashboard will speed up. That's where your intuitive understanding of human
nature and stories and meaning comes in. How's that? You steer Galapagos moment
to moment. When the client's aims are achieved, we want the fuss to die down
fast. We want all our activity to get scrambled and buried. We may even need to
throw Galapagos into reverse. So that... So it doesn't draw attention to itself.
In another Caracoga situation, after Galapagos discredits Caracoga and he loses
his following... Like last time. Then we need to actively prevent harm. We throw
Galapagos into reverse and we disseminate positive stories about him. We even
debunk the stories we created before. We protect the guy? Him and ourselves.
With something this powerful, we need to make sure it doesn't leave a giant
crater in cyberspace everywhere it goes. Otherwise people will point to it and
try to blame us for all the craziness erupting out on social media. I get it. I
get it all. You see why you are so important to me? You have the strategic brain
and the moral heart. You think Omar is special? Not as special as you. I accept
that. Okay. I accept that. Good. Now you can meet up with your old classmate
Sam. Oh, you... Obviously. I know she called you. She's desperate now. Her
editor is going to be demanding something, anything soon just to justify the
time and money she spent chasing the story. She's going to try and pin
Caracoga's death on us. But she can't, right? There is no link. And she works in
old school news. She's evidence constrained. You can't stop her from even asking
the question. True. I need to find her a different story. Somehow. Meet her
tonight. Call her now. Tonight might be difficult. Nonsense. She'll drop
everything. And you'll think of something. I meant... I can't just... Ugh.
Please leave a message after the signal. Sam. Listen, you were right about
certain things. But I need to be careful. My boss would be not pleased to know
I'm speaking to you. I can get away tonight. Call me on this number. PHONE RINGS
Hello? It's Ewan. What's up? Listen, this is now my work phone only. Not for
nephews. Call me back on this... No, no. They said I only get one call. Oh,
Ewan. No. All right. I'm coming. Tell me where you are. We're treating it as
possession, which means a caution. Thank you. So we don't look at his phone, his
movements, any of that. You understand? 100%. We're going home right now and
we'll have it all out with his men. Don't let us see you again, Ewan, OK? OK.
Thank you, really. MUSIC PLAYS You complete idiot, Ewan. Don't tell Mum. That's
the whole reason I run. So, you two hanging out? Ewan, you having fun, career?
Classic auntie-nephew action. Burger, some bowling. Oh, that sounds lush. Just
what he deserves. Heading back, we'll tell you all about it. How much are you
smoking? I don't know. Like three talks after lunch. After lunch? So Mum doesn't
smell it. How come the police got you? The others sent me to buy. Don't be a
mug, OK? If the police find one text on your phone saying, ''Fam, sort me out,
that's intention to supply.'' Supply? I'm not selling it to anyone. Given your
friends, the share they paid for counts as supplying. How come you know so much?
I had friends, did what you're doing, and they sure as hell never left Patol,
but... Neither did Mum. No. She chose... I don't want her to go. I know. Me
neither. Did you hear how happy your mum was just now? Let's both make it our
job to keep her there as much as we can for the next.....always. Nothing else
matters. What are you doing? Finishing up. Long day. Oh, sorry, Gain, it's the
time difference. Waiting for the would-be governor of Oklahoma to finish lunch.
Is that the...? Oh, yeah, green screen. Where were you today? Kuala Lumpur. Were
they deceived in Oklahoma? It's not about deception, it's about privacy. Can I
borrow your car? Yes. In fact, can you buy it? Why? Well, I won't need it for
long, will I? No, but... Have it for free. I just want to sign the paper so it's
yours. One less thing for people to sort out later. OK. Um... Can I use it now?
Ewan's just laid the table. I'll eat it when I get back, for God's sake. Sorry,
I've just got to meet someone at Sarn Park. The services. Why? Bring us
doughnuts for pudding. Drive safe. Covering every aspect of the referendum,
which, judging by the people I've been speaking to in Fishguard today, will go
right down to the wire. Yeah, people go on about the economic consequences, like
we should sacrifice our own right to govern ourselves just because we might lose
a few quid and a down from England. And truth is, nobody knows today what's
going... PHONE RINGS Yes? Sam. You on your own? Of course. You? Yeah, I'm by the
Paw Patrol car ride just inside the entrance. I see you. Green jumper. What's
funny? Just haven't seen you in ages. Do you ever wish you'd stuck with it?
Journalism? No, I'm no good at being neutral. I like a scrap. Me too. Bring it
on, then. Look, I don't see you as my opponent in this, OK? I'm working on a big
piece about the power of modern PR. It basically rescued the British monarchy.
You think so? I wouldn't want to be in William's shoes. All Charles' critics,
though, they've had their careers destroyed with rumours that were proof false,
but only after the damage was done. How would I know anything more about that
than you? You know the playbook? That's what my editor wants. The playbook that
she used to pick off awkward people. Investors, agitators, whistleblowers. Once
upon a time, they'd be poisoned, thrown off balconies, conveniently commit
suicide, but now PR firms do the job, destroying someone in the digital realm.
The Caracoja case was... It was a freak outbreak of violence. A WhatsApp lynch
mob whipped up by... Well, I'm trying to find out what by. By false rumours of
the kind PR firms like you have used in other... That's not what I do. OK, tell
me about Boniface Caracoja. I met him once. Smart guy, decent. It was horrendous
what happened to him. He'd still be alive without Mayfair interventions. Look,
there's no point me taking the risk of talking to you unless I tell you the
truth, but... I can stop this landing on you, personally. You can't. Your work
isn't an exact science any more than mine. Anyway, here's the thing. We had no
interest in Caracoja coming to any harm. A PR company can't afford bad PR,
but... Ugh. Fish Eagle, the company... The mining company that hired you, yeah.
They didn't care about looking a bit nasty as long as the mine reopened. So,
well, they weren't really listening to us, and they... Well, they may have
started the rumours, then got out of control and got Caracoja killed. That's a
tip, but you didn't get it from me. What evidence have you got? That's your job.
Oh, hello, two chocolate custards and a Rockefeller, please. That's Â£10.99,
please. So you're saying there might be a needle in the haystack, but you don't
know? It's my hunch. I'm known for my hunches. Oh. Donut? No. Convenient that
your hunch deflects attention from Mayfair interventions. Thank you. Thank you.
Like I said, who stood to gain from Caracoja's death? Not us. We'd already got
the mine reopened. Job done. It'll be interesting to compare your version of
events with Max's. You're talking to Max? Shmurru, does that worry you? No, no,
he'll tell you the same thing, but there's something you should bear in mind.
Yeah? When Mayfair interventions got bought out, I got a promotion and Max got
brutally screwed, so you might want to factor that in when you're listening to
him. We need to be independent so we can get back into the EU. That's the thing,
because England can't, as long as it's in the grip of... Oh, thank God for that.
Get enough of that from Gaynor. How did it go? I pointed the finger at Fish
Eagle, which should be a dead end, but it looks believable to her. Correct.
She's speaking to Max. Is she now? I think that's the first time I've ever told
you something you didn't already know. Haven't you got him under surveillance?
We've got a laptop full of his compromat. He won't do anything silly. I think we
could use him to scramble the signal. Go back. What? Go back. Who was that? I
was saying Max... No, come off at this exit and turn around. What for? Head back
east and then take junction 32 to Cardiff Centre. No, no, no, I need to be back.
You'll be at my hotel in 20 minutes. I'm dropping a pin. I've got to get back to
my sister. That's what I want to talk to you about. Good stuff. You tell that to
Gaynor. Sure, I could give her a call. No, no, for God's sake, no. Take the slip
road, now. OK, I'm doing it. Oops, sorry, slip road. You're in Wales again. Why?
What were you just saying about Max? What? Scrambling the signal. So, yes, we
can set him up to blow the whistle on the Caracoga thing. Then discredit him,
then seem to clear his name, then discredit him again. Right, like they did with
Julian Assange, and then Prince Harry. Yeah, exactly. So one minute Max seems
like the good guy, then the bad guy, till you don't know what to believe. Nice
thinking. Cardiff, 21 miles. I know, I can see. I'll order you some dinner.
Hello? The good news, they had chocolate custard. Just tell me, Brian. The
boring work thing just got boringer. I'll be back later. Who are these people?
One minute it's some American politician, then you're pretending you're in
different places and you can't tell me anything. Clients like a high level of
confidentiality. Not as much as you, by the look of it. Listen, I'm not even
going to be here next year, so I might as well tell you what I think, OK? Fine,
but not now. Corn-fed chicken. I gambled that you're not a vegetarian. Must be
an algorithm to tell you that, based on my other data. Glass of wine. Thriving.
So, very stressed. I thrive on pressure. Pressure turns negative at a certain
point. It's inevitable with your sister. Work, personal life, separate. When the
two conflict, both suffer and it can't go on. Fine, listen, I'll go back to
London, no problem. From here, directly, nothing. I mean, nothing is going to
distract me from... That's not the solution I've chosen. Don't fire me. Stop
talking. Concern for Gaynor is a powerful distraction, so let's eliminate that.
You're working on a cure for cancer? Not quite, but we've identified the most
advanced treatment available at a clinic in Florida. She's looked into that.
It's way too expensive. We'll pay. What? For everything. For Ewan to have maybe
six, twelve more months with his mother. Seriously? Treatments, flights, hotels,
transfers. For Ewan, too. Oh my... She needs to know that you'll take care of
everything, whatever happens. Can I really say that? You are unique and so
valuable to Shapeshift that they will pay the price. For your peace of mind.
There are no guarantees. You could still fire me tomorrow. You want a written
agreement? Precisely. The only thing you can rely on is the look in my eye right
now. So look hard, decide if you can trust me, and lay your bet. Why are you in
the dark? It got dark. Actually, I've got something to tell you. Me first. Like
I said on the phone, I'm not going to be here long so I can say what I like.
Wait. You are so bloody talented and full of energy and life. I mean, that is
crystal clear to me right now. You've got to start believing in that. In
yourself. I do. You're always looking for someone else to tell you, to give you
permission to be confident. Like you're doing now. Because I want you to hear it
and take it for good. Consider it done. What that means is you need to get free
of these people who, whatever their name... Free of these what? Shapeshift.
Sisney. She's done more for me in a month than anyone in this so-called family
did in 20 years. She's a businesswoman. It's an exchange. If she bigs you up,
it's to squeeze more out of you. If I'm good with that, it means I can pay my
way. What's that supposed to mean? This town was always full of people moaning
that no one gives them anything. I'm not asking for anything. I just need it to
be okay that I earn some money. Look, you help people. That's what you want to
do for a job. Fine. I respect that. Really? I want respect too. I'm not just
this selfish sell-out and neither are the people I work with. You want proof?
They just offered to pay for cancer treatment. In Florida, they'll fly you
there. You and two. They'll take the tumour out. They... It'll grow back. It'll
give you more time. So? They don't give a toss about me? It's to win you over.
Well, maybe I'm worth it to them. Half a million quid? What are they getting
from you that's worth that? Who cares right now? This is your life we're talking
about. Yeah, my life. I want you to know that I will take care of things,
whatever happens. You and two. No. And he'll understand as he gets older what's
important. Right, so what's important? His mum chose to be a hero. Sticking it
to the man. Better be dead on the moral high ground than compromised to give
your son 12 more months of memories. OK, let's drop it. You and my son. Be poor.
Be a downtrodden victim all your life so you too can die looking down your nose
at anyone who gets their hands dirty by actually doing something. Sorry. Be gone
by the morning. I'll tell you when you've said goodbye. I cried. There were
tears falling into my suitcase as I packed my clothes. I couldn't see a living
long enough for us to make up again. And Ewan would keep me as a name in his
head. An odd memory, like a supply teacher he once had or the mum of a friend
who moved on. I'd have been happy to nuke, but Wales, myself most of all. But
those feelings don't last long with me. I always hit life back harder. It's a
reflex, not a choice. In Galapagos, Bryony was played by Hannah Daniel and
Sydney by Ashley Haddad. Omar, Danny Ashok, Gaynor by Sarah Gregory, Ewan by
Jamie Redford and Sam by Claire Cage. The series was written by Simon
Scardifield and Andrew Day. Sound design by Nigel Lewis. It was directed by John
Norton for BBC Audio Drama Wales. On BBC Radio 4... You know, I've seen you.
You're always wheeling yourself around here. And I've seen you. Porgy, reborn in
the back streets of South London. Don't make me beat down every door, you're my
girl. Featuring new music produced by the critically acclaimed artist Swindle.
Roll your dice, see where it lands. Performed by the BBC Concert Orchestra.
Don't tell me you're not like any other man, Porgy. What else do you want?
Nothing! Bess loves Porgy. Kiss me again. Yes, madam. On Radio 4 and BBC Sounds,
beginning on Saturday afternoon at three. Now on Radio 4, another in the series
of spring stories with an original short fiction by Thomas Morris. Wales. It's
been three months since they saw each other and Gareth wonders if his father
will recognise him. He pictures his mother upstairs, sitting at a dressing
table, practising her face. He wonders if his father will come into the house.
He thinks, if dad comes in, Wales will lose. Hearing his mother on the stairs,
he moves from the window and settles on the couch. The gap in the curtains, the
only evidence he was standing there, waiting for his father's car. Got your
phone? She asks. Yep. Text me when you're on your way back, alright? Yeah, yeah,
he says. A car horn beeps outside. His father has arrived and he isn't coming
in. There's a pause and his mother smiles. Well, have a good time, she says, and
make sure you get something to eat. I've told your father, but you know what
he's like. Gareth nods, absorbs it all. If Wales win tonight, everything will
turn out okay. His mother will find a wad of cash stuffed in the walls and they
won't need to move out. But if Wales lose, the repo man with his bulging muscles
will return and take Gareth's bike, or the ceiling will cave in and fall down on
him while he's watching cartoons on the couch. Wouldn't be mad if you see me in
the crowd on the telly, he says. I'll keep an eye out, his mother says,
grinning, and I'll text you if I see you. Outside, the March evening air is
fresh on his cheeks. Young man, his father says in greeting. All right, Gareth
replies. They drive up Caffidi Mountain, Gareth secretly steadying his father's
head. One day he'll be able to read people's minds. He just needs to learn to
focus harder. What are you looking at? his father asks. You're going bald,
Gareth says. Thanks, his father replies. They drive on and his father instructs
him to open the glove compartment where Gareth finds for two tickets, sacred and
shiny, his first real match at a real stadium. So what do we know about Northern
Ireland, his father asks. Any predictions? We've got some good defenders, Gareth
says, but Wales will win. I'm going to say 2-0, Ramsey header and a Gareth Bale
bikey from halfway. His father laughs and in a quiet voice explains that because
he's only a friendly, Ramsey and Bale have been rested and won't be playing. Oh,
right, Gareth says. It'll still be a good game, his father says. Just don't get
your hopes up, all right, and put those tickets back now before you lose them.
His father refuses to pay for parking. So for 20 minutes they drive round one
residential avenue after another, finally finding a spot in a street lined with
trees. Here nice, Gareth says, passing houses three storeys tall with tiled
porches and coloured glass in the doors. They probably cost you a million
pounds, his father says. A million quid, Gareth says. That's insane, that is.
They walk on, Gareth taking two steps for every one of his dads. Slow down, will
you, Gareth says. I'm literally only ten. Well, hold my hand then. Nah, you're
all right, Gareth says. On the high street, the air throbs with horns and
whistles. Clouds with flags draped over their shoulders spill into the road, the
cars slowing and honking. Outside a pub, a group of men in red T-shirts, two
trumpets and trombones, and one man plays the sax and another bangs a drum, arms
aloft, fancying, I love you, baby, and a woman, dressed like a daffodil, jumps
up and down, her pint spilling onto the pavement. Let's get some food, his
father says. They eat outside the chippy, their backs against the window. The
chips are hot and moist with vinegar. Inside, a girl with a red dragon stenciled
on her cheek stands beside her dad with a burger and a can of coke. If she looks
at Gareth, Wales will win. Enjoying the chips? his father asks. Yeah, Gareth
says, they're lovely. As they're about to leave, the girl smiles through the
glass. Onwards they go now, among the stream of fans, shuffling down avenues and
roads towards the stadium. The sky is purple-black. This is a long walk, Gareth
says. Best way to soak up the atmosphere, his father says. You should have
parked closer to the stadium, Gareth says. This is a bloody marathon. Football
is all about opinions, his father replies, and in my opinion, you can shut up.
Gareth laughs, and the crowd stroll through the dark streets until suddenly the
stadium is before them, glowing like a flying saucer. His father buys a
programme, and Gareth holds it proudly. In the queue, a bald security guard
shouts, Coats off and arms in the air! He looks like the repo man, the man who
took away his mother's car. All right, son? he asks, patting Gareth down. Any
knives in your pockets? As if, Gareth replies. Good boy, the man says, smiling.
Enjoy the game. Through the beeping turnstiles now, into what feels like an
underground car park, bodies hustle past, and there's a smell of sizzling onions
and hot dogs. A woman in a high-vis jacket checks for tickets and directs them
at the flight of concrete steps, and then they are somehow, magically outside
again, and there it is, the pitch. It's way different to how it looks on the
telly. The grass is a giant green stage, lit so bright beneath the floodlights
it seems unreal. The seats are behind the goals. He hears the players warm up,
he feels the thud of each kick in his chest, and he hears the coaches' echoing
shouts. He pictures stepping onto the grass, striking a penalty, the net
rippling. When the anthems begin, they rise to their feet, and his father's
voice is deep and rumbling. He has sang it in school, but this is completely
different. The anthem is massive, it fills his chest and roars out of him as if
everything, Wales, the world, his whole life, depends on it. At the end, his
father claps and yells, Come on, Wales! and Gareth yells it too, then bellows
the chant that's swirling around the stadium, Wales! Wales! He is screaming, he
is letting something go. The game is difficult to follow. There are no video
replays, no commentators, just the players on the pitch and the sound of the
crowd. For every Wales tackle, a huge roar fills the air, and any decision
against them means thousands of people howling at the referee. The crowd urge
the players and the players drive the crowd, and it's electric and it feels out
of control. The matches are blue, and before he knows it, it's half-time. No,
no, his father says. They leave their seats and head back out to the concourse.
Gareth blows on his hands to warm them up. His father asks if he wants a hot
chocolate, but Gareth says he needs a wee. At the urinals, sandwiched between
two men, nothing comes out. Beside him, a man sways and leans on the wall to
steady himself. Gareth does a zip and comes back to his dad. Did you go? Yeah,
Gareth lies. Wash your hands then. At the sink, he sends his special energy to
the players. When he was four years old, he got separated from his mum in WH
Smiths. Looking for the DVDs, he found a narrow blue corridor. He passed through
alone. The floor was slanted, and everything was so, so quiet, and he realized
he had entered a secret realm between this world and another. Years passed
before he emerged beside his mum at the stationary. Later, at home, he tested
his powers. With his hands above his head, he stood still in the corner of the
living room. His father walked past and did not see him, and Gareth only
returned to the world when his mother called him for his dinner. As the teams
run out for the second half, Gareth closes his eyes and transmits messages. Come
on, he tells them, we can do this. And it seems to work. Wales play well, but
then Northern Ireland start to attack, and the fans begin muttering, and in the
60th minute, when Northern Ireland score, all the air is sucked out of the
stadium. I bloody knew it, his father says. The crowd falls silent, except for
the few hundred cheering green shirts in the corner. His heart is a torn-up
football. Every time Wales get possession, it's just a matter of time until
Northern Ireland take it back. With every Northern Ireland attack, he picks it
from scoring. This won't do. It just won't do. He tells himself to shape up, to
focus, to really focus. With his mind, he keeps pulling the ball back towards
the Northern Ireland end. He focuses and focuses, and he wishes and he wishes,
and he summons all the magic in his body. But it's no use. 70 minutes becomes 75
becomes 80. There's only 10 minutes left. If Wales lose, he just knows that
something terrible will happen. He breathes deep, and this is it. He focuses on
the ball. He wills it. Insists with all his power, and with one minute to go,
Simon Church is in the box, and Gareth from the whole stadium is screaming,
Shoot! Shoot! And Church touches the ball away from a defender, then tumbles,
and with a sharp blow of a whistle, the referee awards a penalty. Oh my God,
Gareth says. His father turns his back. I can't look, he says. Please, Gareth
says to himself. Please, please, please. Hands on hip, Simon Church tries to
compose himself, and Gareth is back in the blue corridor, the timeless place
between worlds, where it's quiet and still, and everything is at his command.
When Church runs up and whips the ball into the net, the stadium erupts, and
Gareth roars, Yes! And his father hugs him tight, his stubble bristling Gareth's
cheek. Then the referee blows for full time, and the game ends, 1-1. They stay
behind to clap the players and the manager off the pitch. Gareth waves, but
Chris Coleman doesn't see him. Exiting the stadium, the night air feels raw on
his face, and his legs are aching. And now for a marathon back to the car,
Gareth says. Don't you start now, his father says. God, we were terrible
tonight. If we play like that in the Euros, we've got no hope. Neither Gareth
nor his father know this, but in four months' time, on a July afternoon, they'll
come back to the stadium and cheer the Wales team on their return from the
European Championships. For Gareth, it will have been a summer of dizzy days and
holy nights, watching Wales play football on the telly. He'll watch one game
with his dad, one game with his mum, and he'll even watch a game with his
friends in the hall at school. And when the repo man comes and takes the TV, and
the bank repossesses the house, and Gareth and his mum move in with Auntie
Avril, they'll watch the quarter-final in Avril's living room. Gareth will wear
his lucky socks, reeling around the carpet every time Wales score. And when
Wales are finally knocked out in the semi-finals, he'll collapse on the bed he
shared with his mother and cry. Afterwards, when she comes in and strokes his
head, he'll say to her, I'm not sad, I just feel proud. But right now, they
don't know any of this. The summer is way off. It is March, the start of spring,
the air still chilled with winter. But the evenings are stretching, and the days
are warming. And Gareth, you can feel the change already, can't you? That
feeling is coming back, the belief that your life is forever on the cusp of
magic. Walking with the crowd now, watching your father's breath curl white into
the dark night as the flowing fans chant and sing for Wales, you know somehow
that everything will be okay. It's a private feeling, fizzling like a sparkler
inside your chest. Thinking about it makes you laugh. What's so funny, your
father says. Is she ever joke? It's nothing, you say. Go on, your dad says, tell
me. Well, I've just got this feeling we're going to do amazing at the Euros.
Your father blows out his cheeks. Look, he says, I don't want to be a downer,
but I've supported Wales a long time now. Honestly, it's better not to expect
anything. They'll only let you down in the end. Actually, that's probably not a
bad life lesson either. You're better off not expecting much, or you'll only be
disappointed. At that, you stop and look him in the eye. Yeah, well, you say,
football's all about opinions, and in my opinion, you should just shut up. Your
father smiles, then laughs, and hand in hand, together you make your way back
through the city, back where you came, back in search of a car. Breaking
Mississippi with me, Jen White. Starts next Monday to Friday morning at 945.