TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-08H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 to one of Germany's economics minister about what they do next. Good morning,
it's seven o'clock on Thursday, the 23rd of February. The headlines this
morning, Labour is setting out what it calls five national missions, including
an economic growth strategy to form the basis of its plans for government. A
police officer is in a critical condition in hospital after being shot while off
duty in Omer. An independent regulator is to be established as part of major
changes to the way English football is governed. The BBC News is read this
morning by Chris Aldridge. The Labour leader, Sakhir Stama, is launching what he
calls five national missions outlining his plans for the UK if his party wins
the next general election. The commitments will be formally announced during a
speech in Manchester this morning, as well as details about how the first
pledge, securing the highest economic growth in the G7, will be achieved. Our
political correspondent Helen Katz reports. Labour says its five missions will
be unashamedly long-term, an alternative to what it calls the sticking-claster
solutions of Rishi Sunak's five priorities for government. The first two
missions will be to secure the highest sustained economic growth in the G7 and
to make Britain a clean energy superpower. The party has already announced a
target of making electricity zero carbon by 2030. Sakhir will say that his
missions are not just another word for priorities or promises, but would form a
different way of governing, bringing together government departments,
businesses, trade unions and civil society. Labour will unveil goals for its
final three missions, building an NHS fit for the future, making Britain's
streets safe and breaking down barriers to opportunity in the coming months.
Sakhir will describe it as a long-term plan to unlock Britain's pride and
purpose. Politicians in Northern Ireland have condemned the shooting of an off-
duty police officer at a sports complex in Omer in County Tyrone last night.
He's in a critical but stable condition in hospital. Sinn FÃ©in's Vice President
Michel O'Neill described the attack as outrageous and shameful. The DUP leader,
Sir Geoffrey Donaldson, has called for the cowards responsible to be brought to
justice. Ireland correspondent Chris Page has sent this report from the scene. A
police car is guarding the entrance to the complex called Youth Sport. The main
building and a number of pitches are cordoned off. Several other police vehicles
are in the car park where forensic officers have been carrying out searches.
Local people say the centre was busy when the shooting happened. Children,
parents and coaches were at the site. It's believed two gunmen were involved in
the attack. The victim was a detective of senior rank. He's led investigations
into organised crime and dissident Republicans who are opposed to the peace
process. This work means he has a public profile in Northern Ireland. Police
haven't said anything officially yet about a motive. The last time an officer
was murdered in this part of the UK was in Omer in 2011 when Constable Ronan
Kerr was killed by a booby trap bomb. The government has confirmed that a new
independent regulator of men's football in England is to be established for the
first time. It will aim to make clubs more financially sustainable and ensure
money from the Premier League filters down to lower divisions. Our sports editor
Dan Rowan reports. This is a hugely significant moment for the English game. The
key recommendation of a fan-led review, the independent football regulator is
designed to prevent a repeat of the failings that led to the collapse of Bury FC
in 2019, one of a host of clubs to suffer financial crisis in recent years. The
body would oversee a licensing system to ensure clubs are run sustainably, be
responsible for a strengthened owners and directors test, give fans a greater
say in key decisions and could block teams from joining breakaway competitions
like the European Super League. With the Football League wanting a greater share
of the Premier League's record wealth and the FA pushing for more funding for
grassroots football, the regulator could also intervene to decide how much money
flows down the pyramid. In a statement, the Premier League said it recognised
the case for change, but that it was vital regulation did not deter investment
or reduce its competitiveness through unintended consequences. The cases of
12,000 asylum seekers are to be fast-tracked by the home office to try to fulfil
Rishisounak's pledge to reduce the backlog of applications by the end of the
year. Migrants from Afghanistan, Eritrea, Libya, Syria and Yemen will have their
claims decided on the basis of a 10-page questionnaire which must be completed
in English within 20 days. Here's our home editor, Mark Easton. The home office
insists this is not an asylum amnesty but a way to streamline the processing
system for five nationalities which have an asylum acceptance rate of more than
95%, or the usual security and criminal checks will be conducted and biometrics
taken. But for the first time, a cohort of 12,000 asylum seekers will not be
required to attend a face-to-face interview. Instead, if they applied for asylum
before last July, they must fill out a form. The home office is likely to face
criticism that the fast-tracking has more to do with the Prime Minister's
promise to eradicate the asylum backlog than having rigorous checks for
identifying individuals with no right to be in the UK. However, the British Red
Cross is among organisations concerned that insisting asylum seekers complete a
questionnaire in English and return it within 20 days could increase the
suffering of already traumatised individuals. The United Nations General
Assembly will vote today on a resolution that condemns Russia's invasion of
Ukraine and calls for peace as soon as possible. The measure is not legally
binding but it holds political weight. Our UN correspondent Nada Tofik reports
from New York. On the eve of the one-year anniversary of the war, Ukraine and
its supporters see this vote as an important moment to defend the principles
enshrined in the UN Charter that Russia has violated. The draft resolution is
largely based on President Zelensky's ten-point peace formula. It calls for a
just and lasting peace involving the immediate, incomplete and unconditional
withdrawal of all Russian forces from Ukraine's territory. Western diplomats
expect wide support for the resolution but Russia's allies, including Belarus,
China and Iran, have warned it will further a cold war mentality and stoke
tensions. Moscow's ambassadors to the UN said passing the resolution would allow
US and European leaders to continue what he called militaristic, Russophobic
lies. The outcome of the vote is expected to underscore Russia's isolation
rather than convince it to change course. Israel has carried out airstrikes in
the Gaza Strip after rockets were fired from the Palestinian controlled
territory. The rocket attacks followed a raid by the Israeli military which
killed 11 Palestinians in the city of Nablus in the occupied West Bank
yesterday. The US State Department said it was deeply concerned by the large
number of casualties. The annual report by Scotland's public spending watchdog
has warned that staff shortages, rising costs and lengthening waiting lists are
jeopardising the Scottish Government's plan to help the NHS recover from Covid.
The Scottish Government says its recovery plan is backed by record investment.
Here's our Scotland editor, James Cook. Audit Scotland says that even before the
pandemic, the Scottish NHS was not being run sustainably. Now, the pressures are
more intense, exacerbated by high energy costs, rising wages and expensive
planned reforms to social care. The report criticises the Scottish Government's
Covid recovery plan as a high-level, top-down document which lacks detail,
making it hard to measure progress. A key commitment is opening 10 new surgery
and procedure centres, but three have already missed their start dates and some
may not be ready for five years. A target of increasing the GP workforce by 800
is not on track either, while patients on long and growing waiting lists are
often in the dark about when they'll be treated. Although the report does detail
some progress, it may pose problems for the Scottish Health Secretary Hamza
Yousuf, who's running to become First Minister. An island off the Heim Peninsula
in North Wales has become the first place in Europe to be made an international
dark sky sanctuary. Anis Enhui, or Bardsley Island, as it's also known, had to
meet strict criteria for the status, as Neocheriffs explains. Wales already has
a number of dark sky places and reserves, but the sanctuary status awarded to
Enlhui is much rarer. There are only 16 others worldwide, and this will be the
first in Europe. The sanctuary has much stricter criteria in terms of darkness
and is typically in a very remote location. The island off the coast of Heim is
shaded by its mountain, and the nearest source of major-like pollution comes
from Dublin. It's hoped the status will attract investment to safeguard the
island's uniqueness. The Bardsley Trust, which owns the island, hopes that the
new status will raise its profile and help to promote Wales as a dark sky
nation. Neocheriffs reporting. Thank you, Chris. It is now nine minutes past
seven. What can, what will stop the war? Is it supplying more lethal weaponry to
Kiev so that Ukraine cannot just hold off Russian forces but defeat them and
drive them out of the country? Or is it stopping the armed suppliers and
focusing instead on negotiations? That is the debate which is happening here in
Germany, a country which prided itself on turning its back on a belief in the
power of arms, but which has in the past year become one of the largest
suppliers of weapons to Kiev. More than half a million Germans have signed a
petition calling for a change of approach. There'll be protests in towns and
cities across the country this weekend. Margo Kiesman is a former bishop of
Hanover. I've been speaking to her. She told me what the manifesto for peace is
calling for. They're calling for an end of delivering weapons into an area of
crisis and war and to bring all the energy we have into a stop of the killing in
Ukraine instead of thinking about more and more weapons and more and more years
of this war going on in which in the end Europe will be part of this war, some
say already is. And do you believe you've now got the support of many other
Germans too? Well, we can see that we now have a very almost aggressive debate
in Germany about whether we should deliver more and more weapons into the region
of war. And what the manifesto really succeeded in is bringing a public debate
which in the last few weeks was only about military causes, about weapons, what
can we deliver to Ukraine, how many weapons, how many tanks, who goes first, who
goes second. And I think it's a change in debate and that's what we wanted. Does
it worry you that some of those involved in pushing the petition, in organizing
a protest this weekend, are political populists on the far left and the far
right of German politics? Yes, certainly that worries me. That's why I will not
be in the demonstration in Berlin, but at other places, Cologne and Bonn. And we
have as German Peace Society demonstrations on Saturday in many, many places in
Germany. And I see that in Berlin, in this very special and very right-wing,
left-wing tension, it might be problematic. And our German Peace Society clearly
says there's no place for neo-Nazis or right-wing people in our demonstrations.
We don't want them. Germany's chancellor spoke of SeitenwÃ¤nder, a historic
turning point, meaning that this country had changed its approach to defense and
to Russia. Was that a mistake in your view? Yes, because what is the
SeitenwÃ¤nder then? We have war in Syria since 12 years with Russia being
engaged. We have war in Yemen since nine years. There has been war. And my plea
is let's invest in peace and not anymore and more and more. And now we want to
give 100 billion dollars into our army. I think that's not the way towards the
future, less weapons and less war. That's a SeitenwÃ¤nder we need. Margaret
Caseman there, the former bishop of Hanover, talking to me about the petition,
the manifesto for peace. Listening to that is a member of the Bundestag's
Foreign Affairs Committee, representative of the opposition Christian Democrats,
the CDU on the right of politics here. Norbert Rook and good friend of the
program. Morning to you, Norbert. Good morning, Nick. Do you think this
petition, do you think these protests do represent a change in the debate here
in Germany and potentially a threat to those of the country like you who want to
keep supplying more weapons to Ukraine? No, definitely not. It's not
representing a change in our debate. It's representing a debate and not more.
And this is quite a natural thing for a democratic society. And there is strong
bipartisan support for what the government is doing. Some are urging the
government to do more. In the recent polls, 30 percent said the government
should disupply more weapons to Ukraine. Forty percent said it's just the right
amount of weapons we are delivering. And 30 percent are against this course.
Yes. But this is a strong support for what the government is doing. And what is
represented in this poll is that there is a fundamental shift in the attitudes
and views of the German society. We were a very pacificed society. The
Bundeswehr security matters did not enjoy high appreciation. And this has
fundamentally shifted. This is the news from Germany. And you think it will stay
that way, Mr Rook? Because there are people who think, give it a few months if
petrol prices are still high, if there is no sign of any side winning, that
German public opinion may turn on its politicians and say, look, settle this
now. We are talking about war fatigue, support fatigue now for many months in
this country. But it hasn't occurred because the facts are very evident. There
is a brutal war ongoing waged by Russia against another country, the neighboring
country, Ukraine. And if we do not resist this war, this war will stay in Europe
and we have to support the Ukrainians who are which are attacked. And so this
this is these these are the facts and people understand these facts. So let me
ask you if I made the question I began with. How does the war end? I think what
we can say quite probably and very unfortunately, this war is not going to end
anytime soon, because there is a determination by Vladimir Putin and Russia to
to stick to their war goals. And there is only one way for him to wage war. I
think there is no there is no way back for him now. So he isn't a dead end. And
his only and last hope he has is to try to exhaust militarily the Ukrainians and
politically the West. So this war is not going to stop anytime soon. This is my
this is my analysis. But it will only end with the total defeat of Putin and
Russia in your view. No, not total defeat and not total defeat of Russia. Of
course not. But it will. There will only be a new opportunity for diplomacy and
negotiation if to everybody is absolutely clear. This war has failed. There is
no chance to achieve anything with war. Norbert Ricken joining us this morning
from Hamburg. Thank you very much indeed. I've been speaking here in Berlin to a
representative of the government, the governing Social Democrat Party will hear
that interview 10 to eight. 16 minutes past seven and off duty police officer is
in this critical but stable condition after being shot at a sports complex in
Oma County Tyrone last night. There are unconfirmed reports that he was hit
multiple times. The BBC is reporting and two gunmen were involved. He was
apparently shot while he coached young people playing football. Baroness Nula
O'Lone is a former police ombudsman for Northern Ireland joins us now. Good
morning. Good morning. As I tried to convey there, there is a limit to what we
know so far. But based on what we do know, this will be hugely traumatic in
particular Baroness for the young people who are at the scene. And we do know
that a lot of children were at that scene. It's unthinkable to think what these
these children have seen. I mean, we before I even start that I would like to
say that I would like to offer my deepest sympathy to this officer and to his
family. I really hope he makes a full and rapid recovery because it's a terrible
experience for them. But but for the young people who witnessed it for their
coaches for the parents, all those kind of people that really, really traumatic
experience, we had hoped we saw these things in the past. We had hoped they
would never happen again. And we know that the children, the young people
they'll they'll carry the scar of this with them. It's not something they'll
ever forget. Well, you mentioned the past August 15th, this year is the 25th
anniversary of the car bombing in Oma carried out by the real IRA. And it's
taken so much effort hasn't it so much graft to build the town back. This does
rather show doesn't it that like all social goods pieces easily destroyed but
not easily created. That's absolutely true. You know, Oma is a lovely, lovely
place to visit and the people after that bombing, which 29 people and two, two
little unborn babies died, the people worked so hard to to be re but physically
rebuild their town and to rebuild the spirit of the town and and care for all
those who were injured and and that this should happen there again, just you
know, and it's 25 years coming up to 25 years since the Good Friday Agreement
just established the peace which is so vital for us. And it's awful to think of
this visit. There's a serenity to Oma. It's a beautiful place. And it's awful to
think of that serenity being so shattered again, such an awful crime, such an
awful crime. This officer was actually making an important contribution to
society. He was going out after his policing. And he was enabling and
encouraging young children. And they get the people who tried to kill him, they
knew he would be there just giving generously. It's awful. And I do hope he
recovers fully. Indeed, indeed. Well, our own condolences to the family as well.
And also, wish you a speedy recovery. And we will bring more detail on that
shooting if we get it over the course of this program. Baroness Nula Olaon,
former police ombudsman for Northern Island. Thank you so much for joining us.
It is 19 minutes past seven. These are curious days on the front page of The
Daily Star as a man dressed as a tomato holding a placard. What do we want? Veg.
When do we want it now? What is going on? Fliss can tell us. I can tell you my
kids aren't too fussed up. But yes, yesterday Tesco followed Asda Morrison's and
Aldi in imposing purchase limits on vegetables. This is after harvests in
southern Europe and northern Africa were badly hit. What's going on? Let's ask
somebody who knows. Justin King is the non-executive director at M&S and a
former chief executive of Sainsbury's just in Good Morning. Good Morning. What
do you see as the key factors behind these shortages? Well, I mean, as it's been
reported, there's been terrible weather in the key sourcing locations for these
veg at this time of year. But to understand the problem, you have to go back
further. This is a sector that's been significantly disrupted by Brexit. And if
you look in particular at the salad veg, which historically for a long time
actually has been grown 52 weeks of the year in the UK under glass, I encourage
your listeners to go on a map app and Google FANIT Earth. They'll see the
biggest greenhouse complex in Europe in FANIT, which used to supply vast
quantities of tomatoes, cucumbers and the like. But that's not a sector the
government's chosen to support this winter from an energy point of view. So
we're uniquely exposed to imports at this time of year. There is a genuine
shortage, but we did rather bring this problem upon ourselves. But as you say, I
mean, this is down to global pressures on things like fuel, the cost of
fertilizer, the cost of energy for heating those greenhouses. So that's the
primary issue here rather than Brexit. Oh, yes, no. But I think this is a sector
that is very integrated across Europe. And we could have chosen, of course, to
subsidize the energy this winter as we have done for other industries. The NFU
through Minette Blatter has been pointing out that this problem was evident some
months ago. And of course, as you couldn't predict the weather, but the weather
has indeed come and disrupted. And of course, what you then see, and you've
started this segment by talking about rationing in supermarkets, is what
supermarkets call fair purchase policies. Actually, most supermarkets have still
got very good supply coming in. I think you've seen pictures of European
supermarkets with good supply. But overall, the country is short. And what tends
to happen is that restaurants, even high street greengrocers, when they can't
get their stock from their wholesale markets, because they're definitely bare at
the moment, will start buying off supermarket shelves. And that's why
supermarkets introduce fair purchase policies so that real customers and
consumers, if you like, are able to buy the one or two that they really need.
Because what often happens is in the early hours of opening, when supermarkets
open in the morning, traders come in and grab armfuls and whisk them off to
their businesses. So that's what these fair purchase policies stop. Justin King,
thank you very much. Twenty-two minutes past seven. All this week, we've been
examining how the war in Ukraine has shaped thinking in Europe, in Estonia, in
Poland, and this morning here in Germany and Berlin. What, though, about what is
taking place in Russia? Will President Putin's decision to invade Ukraine have
long-term consequences for him, the man who has dominated that country for more
than two decades? From Moscow, our Russia editor, Steve Rosenberg, now reports.
President, Rassiska Fyodoratsy, Vladimir Vladimir Putin. Inside Russia's largest
football stadium, Vladimir Putin takes to the stage. The crowd is ecstatic. But
why? After all, Putin's decision to invade Ukraine has proved disastrous for
Russia and for Russians. Thousands of Russian soldiers have been killed, many
more wounded, and hundreds of thousands of Russian citizens have been drafted
into the country, even so. Majority of Russians support Putin in every of his
idea, argument, and goal. Moscow newspaper editor Konstantin Remchukov isn't
surprised that despite everything that's happened, many Russians have kept faith
in President Putin. Because they think as he thinks, they want what he wants.
They view Ukraine as he views. And he reflects their behavior. His popularity is
not based on the air. His popularity is deep-rooted in the Russian public
opinion and perceptions. And this is his strength. But what is his weakness? Too
much power, says Andrei Ilaryanov, Vladimir Putin's former economic adviser.
Power corrupts, absolute power corrupts absolutely. How far do you think he's
prepared to go now in this war? What is his ultimate goal? If there would be no
resistance, he would go as far as he could. There is no way to stop him except
military resistance. Has Russia gained anything from a year of fighting?
Vladimir Putin claims his country has become more independent, more sovereign.
Political scientist Gekaterina Shulman is skeptical. The country becomes more
sovereign. You may read it like there are less threats to my power. Quite at
present. I am less and less constrained by any international norms. So I and my
esteemed cronies can do pretty much whatever they like. Isn't it a great
achievement? Ukraine, of course, has suffered most from this war. To Russia, it
has brought instability and political uncertainty. There has been public
infighting amongst elites. Newspaper editor Konstantin Remchukov says his
biggest fear now is civil war. The real chance to avoid civil war will be if the
right person comes to power immediately after Putin, the right person. The
person who has authority over elites, who has resoluteness to isolate those who
are eager to exploit the situation. And this is the huge battle behind this
thing. What is the elite in Russia thinking, discussing now, who that right man
would be? Quietly. Quietly with lights off, they do discuss. And does Vladimir
Putin know, do you think, that these discussions are happening? Yes, I think
that he knows. I think that he knows nearly everything. Back in the stadium,
Vladimir Putin joins the crowd in singing the national anthem. This week, the
Speaker of the Russian Parliament said, as long as there's Putin, there'll be
Russia. Very loyal, but inaccurate. Russia will survive. It has for centuries.
Vladimir Putin's fate, however, is linked irrevocably now to the outcome of this
war. Steve Rosenberg reporting there from Moscow. It's now 27 minutes past seven
and Gary is back with the sports news. Hi, Gary. Good morning to you. Game on.
Wales against England in the Six Nations had been in doubt after the Welsh
players had threatened to strike in a dispute about contracts, but it's been
sorted. And Nigel Walker, chief executive of the Welsh RFU, is my guest in an
hour. Manchester City are nicely placed in the Champions League after a 1-1 draw
in Leipzig. Riyadh Morris scored their goal. England six, Belgium one, two goals
from Chloe Kelly and two from Leo Williamson helped England to make it three
wins from three in the cup competition they've been playing and they retain the
trophy. Full details about an independent regulator for football. Football will
be released later. We'll have more on that story in five minutes. Onto cricket,
England have named an unchained side for the second test against New Zealand in
Wellington, which starts tonight. And Jimmy Anderson has returned to the top of
the ICC bowling rankings. Anderson was in brilliant form along with Stuart Broad
in the first test. Well, Devon Malcolm once took nine wickets in an innings for
England against South Africa. And let's speak to Devon Malcolm. Devon, good
morning to you. Good morning, Gary. Stuart Broad 36 years old, Jimmy Anderson
40. They've now taken a thousand nine wickets in tests. How surprised are you
that they continue to achieve such landmarks? That is quite remarkable for fast
bowlers. I mean, the way cricket is played these days, although it's a
tremendous amount of fast strength going through the body as a fast bowler,
probably 10 times, you know, your body weight going through your knees and legs
every delivery of your bowl. But regarding longevity from these players, the way
contracts are distributed now, I mean, you know, central contracts, these guys
can concentrate on playing test cricket. So although the strain doesn't get
away, there's still a room there where they spend a lot of time just keeping
fit, being looked after very well and just concentrate and playing international
cricket for England. And tell me about the physical strain on the body. I mean,
you know very well what it's like to bowl over after over. It is test cricket is
so tough these days, but the brand of cricket, you know, England is playing at
the moment, very attacking cricket. And as for Anderson and Broad, they almost
got a new launch pad because you remember last year in West Indies tour, they
were left off for that and all of a sudden a breath of fresh new life, I would
say. So that probably motivates them even more. If you were a young player in
the England side now, what inspiration would you be taking from Broad and
Anderson? As for youngsters, great motivation. They'll pick up from the way
England are playing test cricket at the moment. They raise the bar. When I used
to play cricket, Gary Wayback, Australia used to set the standard, move cricket
forward. But at the moment, the rest of the world have to be, you know, taking a
step to try and match what Ben Stokes and the manager is doing at the moment. So
these guys just getting test cricket exciting as close as possible to one day
cricket these days. So it would be absolutely a joy for young people to watch
the way these guys execute their skills. Final thought, the second test starts
tonight and another win that really sets England up for the summer, especially
with Australia on the horizon. Yes, I mean, Australia for the first time for a
very long time, they're going to be extremely rare about England because the
confidence is there and winning so many test matches is not just luck. There's a
serious amount of talent in the England team. England have a fantastic chance of
regaining the ashes this summer anyway. Devon Malcolm, thank you very much
indeed. Thanks, Gary. Here are the selections, one for Sedgfield, 3.15, number
three, first man and then Huntington at four o'clock. Looking out for number
two, William Cody. Gary, thank you very much indeed. And Hayley Hassell is here
to tell us about Women's Hour at 10 o'clock. Morning, Hayley. Good morning.
Yeah, we've got some really exciting interviews and guests this morning. First
up, Avril Mansfield, who's made history as the UK's first female vascular
surgeon and the first female professor of surgery. She qualified in the early
1970s at a time when only 2% of her colleagues were female and was often met
with disbelief bordering on amusement when telling people what she did. Well,
she'll be talking to me about her medical achievements, which she downplays in a
very humble way, calling it just glorified plumbing. So make sure you tune in
for that. But then I'm asking, did you always hate your older siblings until
COVID hit? Well, we have some new research from the Cambridge Centre of Family
Research, which has found out that children with older siblings fared best
during the lockdown. So we'd love to open up that question to our lovely
audience and get to know whether it held them in good stead. What do you think
of your siblings? Have they been a support to you through times like lockdown?
Honestly, please listen from 10 o'clock. Cheers, Hailey. Thank you very much
indeed. Quick look at the weather now turning dry and brighter for many today,
but cloud and rain gradually spreading into the north. You're listening to today
on Radio 4 with Nick Robinson in Berlin and Amol Rajan in London. It's now 28
minutes to eight and Chris Aldridge is here with a summary of the news. Sir Keir
Starmer will launch what he's calling his party's five national missions this
morning in Manchester. It's his plan for the UK if Labour wins the next general
election. The missions include measures such as securing the highest economic
growth in the G7 and building an NHS fit for the future. Details of how they'll
be achieved will be set out over the coming months. The shooting of an off-duty
police officer in Oma in County Tyrone last night has been condemned by
politicians across Northern Ireland. The senior detective, who's not been named,
is in a critical but stable condition in hospital. Rishi Sunak said he was
appalled by the disgraceful shooting. Police have pledged to relentlessly pursue
those responsible. The government has announced major changes to the way English
football is governed. The plans include setting up an independent regulator,
which could block teams from joining breakaway competitions such as a European
Super League. It will also aim to make clubs more financially sustainable and
ensure money from the Premier League filters down the football pyramid.
Thousands of asylum seekers will be asked to fill out home office questionnaires
to decide their claims, rather than take part in face-to-face interviews. The
move is an attempt to cut the backlog of cases. The policy will initially apply
to applicants from five countries, including Afghanistan, Eritrea and Syria. The
United Nations General Assembly will vote today on a resolution that condemns
Russia's invasion of Ukraine and calls for an end to the war as soon as
possible. The measure is not legally binding, but it holds political weight.
Israel has carried out airstrikes in the Gaza Strip after rockets were fired
from the Palestinian-controlled territory. The escalation follows a deadly
Israeli raid in the occupied West Bank yesterday. New draft rules clamping down
on relationships between university staff and students have been published by
the regulator in England. The Office for Students is consulting on the plans as
part of efforts to tackle sexual harassment and misconduct on campuses. Chris,
thank you very much indeed. Well, let's get into that story that Chris mentions
about this fan-led review of football. Will it restore the vitality of our
grassroots game and stop lower leagues going bust or lower league clubs going
bust without compromising the financial and global clout of the Premier League?
Well, Stuart Andrew is sports minister and joins us now. Good morning, Mr.
Andrew. Good morning. Let's get into the detail and the potential efficacy of
this white paper. What's the problem or the set of problems that it's trying to
solve? So we commissioned a fan-led review, which spent about 100 hours, I
think, getting evidence from many fans around the country, looking at the whole
football picture, if you like. And it was clear that there's lots to be
absolutely celebrating about English football and the success of that is not
just felt in this country but around the world. There are clearly some really
serious problems and it came up with a list of recommendations. The key to that
was the establishment of an independent regulator. And so that is why today we
are publishing our white paper, which is taking on board those recommendations
and we'll see the establishment of that regulator to bring about stability to
the wider pyramid and so ensure that actually English football is something that
we can celebrate today but also well into the future and celebrate the success
that we've seen. OK. Are too many Premier League clubs currently owned by
extremely rich foreigners? So actually what we're trying to do here is ensure
that each of the clubs that are, you know, each club is regulated properly so
that we understand exactly who owns those clubs first and foremost, where their
source of wealth comes from to make sure that we stamp out illicit finance from
those clubs and that those owners have the best interests of the club at heart
because frankly when these clubs fail, it is the fans and the communities that
suffer most and we want to stop that happening as much as we can. And Rick
Parry, the chair of the English Football League, who you'll have spoken to at
great length about this, was on this program about half an hour ago. What he
wants, and I want to go through some of the things that he was keen to champion,
what he wants is a proportion of media revenues, these huge lucrative, lucrative
income that the Premier League has. He wants a fixed proportion, around about
25% of those media revenues to go to lower league clubs. Can you give him that?
So actually we would encourage both the EFL and the Premier League to continue
their negotiations. We've been pushing them to doâ¦ Hang on, hang on, hang on.
Why can't you make it happen? I mean you're setting up an independent regulator,
why don't you just force it through? Let me come to that. We still believe that
the best solution would be a football-led solution to the redistribution of the
money but if they do not come to a conclusion, if they do not come to a deal,
the regulator will have powers at their disposal to first of all try and bring
about arbitration but if that doesn't work either, they will get the best offers
if you like from both sides and come up with the solution that is in the best
interest of the whole of the football pyramid. And his main beef with you, as
he's often told you personally I'm sure, is that there's a lot of ifs in what
you're saying and football has not been good at sharing those revenues and this
regulator shouldn't have to wait. There is this thing, the so-called backstop,
which basically means they can force the Premier League's clubs to share
significantly more. I mean they already share some revenue. They can force them
to share significantly more of their revenues. But he says it's not going to
happen and actually the regulator, if it's going to be proactive and effective,
should just force it through from the beginning. Well I'm afraid I think he's
wrong because that's exactly why we have put powers or we will be giving powers
to the regulator to ensure that if they still cannot reach a deal themselves
that the regulator will be able to do that. The fallback position will be there
for the regulator to ensure that redistribution of money happens throughout the
pyramid because one of the principal objectives of the independent regulator is
to bring about stability to the football pyramid and to do that obviously a
settlement has to be agreed. So that's in the provisions that we are providing.
When is this actually going to happen? When is it actually going to become
legislation? Because clubs have gone bust, communities have been affected and
it's happened bluntly speaking because of global forces but it has happened on
your watch. So when are we going to see this turn into actual concrete
legislation? Well I wouldn't say it's just happened on our watch. This has been
a problem that's existed. It goes back 30 years. For 30 years we've seen over 60
clubs going to administration. We've wanted football to sort this out
themselves. They haven't and so that is why we are stepping in. That is why
we're introducing this new independent regulator. We've got this white papers
today. They will be a targeted consultation and then as soon as practically
possible we will introduce that legislation because I am keen to get on with
this. Stuart Alexander. Forgive me Stuart Andrew. Stuart Andrew, Sports
Minister. Thank you so much for joining us. Thank you. It is now 28. Well every
day is a good day to buy a newspaper. Thursday is a particularly good day to buy
current affairs magazines in this country. Let's have a look at some of the
things that they are leading with this morning, often published of course on a
Thursday. The New European has the headline, The Shadow Prime Minister and makes
reference to what it calls Boris Johnson's unwelcome return. It's got a picture
of Rishi Sunak in a long shadow cast by Mr Johnson, articles by James Ball and
Martin Fletcher. The London Review of Books has got some fascinating writing by
William Davies on the reaction economy of social media and James Butler on the
crisis in social care. I also mentioned The Spectator. The cover this morning
features the historian Andrew Roberts on Britain's depleted army. It's got the
headline paraphrasing Hemingway. Farewell to Arms and there's also a bit of
foreign reporting which they are promoting by a foreign reporter scribe called
Nick Robinson and it's about Estonia's Iron Lady. Yes, I wasn't busy enough at
all. That's why I had to write for The Spectator as well. I was reflecting on
that interview I did a couple of days ago with the Prime Minister of Estonia in
Tallinn. And this week we've been in Tallinn, we've been in Warsaw, we're now in
Berlin. Looking at how the war has changed, not just Ukraine of course, not just
Russia as we heard in that brilliant essay by Steve Rosenberg a few minutes ago,
but countries throughout Europe, particularly those countries near to or on the
border with Russia who are having to reconsider their entire relationship. It
does feel to me as I said briefly on the programme yesterday that we are at the
beginning of a new Cold War. This reminds me and perhaps that's because I'm a
child of that era. I am what Timothy Garton Asher will hear later in the
programme calls a 1989, someone whose perspective on life has shaped both those
extraordinary events when the Soviet Union collapsed and the Berlin Wall came
down. Nick, thank you for now. Let's get 18 minutes to eight. Let's go to
thought for the day. The speaker this morning is Daniel Greenberg, the
parliamentary lawyer. Morning, Daniel. Good morning. A colleague of mine who
combines her parliamentary work with sitting as a part-time judge heard a rather
unusual case earlier this week. A few years ago, a man lost his dog when it ran
away from home. The local authority found it and being unable to trace the owner
arranged for it to be placed with a new family who have looked after it ever
since. Following a complicated series of events, the old owner finally found out
where the dog was now living and brought legal proceedings to recover ownership.
In the eyes of the law, domesticated animals were once treated as mere property,
subject to the wishes and whims of their owners in all respects, but times have
moved on. The Animal Welfare Sentience Act passed last year requires public
policy to reflect the welfare of animals as sentient beings, and the criminal
law prevents animal owners from causing them suffering or neglect. But how can
we actually know what animals want or feel? A rabbinic perspective on a biblical
law is relevant here. In Leviticus, chapter 22, verse 28, the Bible contains a
prohibition against a cowardice calf being slaughtered on the same day, and the
rabbis attribute this prohibition to the avoidance of cruelty. But the author of
the medieval book of education, Seferachinuch, observes that the commandment
cannot really be about actual cruelty. Beyond actual physical pain, we have no
idea what emotions some animals actually feel. The author concludes that the
action is prohibited not because of what the cow may feel, but because the Bible
wants us to avoid behaviour that feels insensitive on our part. Some kinds of
conduct suggest a callousness that may not only hurt the animal, but more
importantly certainly debases the human. Listening to my colleagues' case about
the dog, I was pleased that the law in 2023 can clearly go further than the mere
protection of property, and can demonstrate sensitivity to humans and animals
alike. It was good to see that we have developed to a position where the law is
able to support and protect behaviour that reflects the best human instincts
that arise from the divine image in which we were created. Fascinating. Daniel,
thank you. That was thought for the day with Daniel Greenberg, the parliamentary
lawyer. It brings us to 16 minutes to 8. Amidst all the words of condemnation,
all the promises to stay the course, all the talk of solidarity with Ukraine,
will her allies really be prepared to continue spending more and more money
supplying more and more weapons, tolerating high energy prices? Or will calls
grow for negotiations to end the war as it enters its second year? Here in
Germany, a petition backing a so-called manifesto for peace. Talks now and a
halt to arms sales has secured more than half a million names since it was
published last week. It reflects the angst that most Germans of words felt by
many Germans as their government, led by other social democrats in the greens,
has taken an ever tougher stance supplying more and more weapons to Kiev. In a
moment, we'll hear from a leading figure in that government. But first, what are
young people thinking about the decisions their leaders are taking? A year ago
on this day, I reported from a comedy club in Kiev. Last night, I went to a club
here in Berlin. Hello, everybody. Transition into comedy. There's a lot of stuff
going on here. I know it's comedy night, and this is not a funny subject. But
are you worried about Germany sending weapons to Ukraine? Do you think maybe
it's time to say more talking? I'm worried, that's true. I'm generally always
worried when it's about weapons because it's serious, you have to be careful
what you say. So talking for sure. You as a young German, does it feel like this
is a new world? It's quite an uncomfortable world for Germany. Yes, I feel
uncomfortable with the situation and also the topics in my family, with my
friends, they are more and more about war and weapons and that's very
uncomfortable. Absolutely. My generation and my parents' generation never had
been confronted. So we are living in peace for so long and we are not confronted
with these thoughts. Your generation may one day again have to fight you, Bin?
Yes, exactly. Or that we come to a defence situation not only for us. Also
because we are in NATO, we have a responsibility for other countries also. I'm
worried about that for sure. What about for you? Is it also an uncomfortable
question? I think Germany is kind of between a rock and a hard place in the
situation because you want to show your support for Ukraine. But on the same
time, we have all of the history from Germany with the previous wars and
everything and you don't want to have that kind of connection again. So I think
it's very difficult that whatever you do, you're kind of doing something wrong.
And then we ask, oh, who are you? I understand what's happening. My name is Ori
Halevi. I am comparing a show of epic comedy Berlin. We have comedians from all
over the world that live here or are visiting. Can you make jokes about
something as sensitive as the war in Ukraine? I think the first day that the war
broke out, I made jokes about it. Look, I'm from Israel and I'm Jewish and I
live in Berlin. So the dark humour is like, I know that that's what helps.
Talking of angst, the Germans love to angst. And they angst in particular about
whether they're doing the right thing in this war. I guess that's very true.
Yeah. Most Germans that I meet are like, let's stop the war. Let's stop the war.
Stop it. Yeah, let's stop. That's what I've heard. How? How? I mean, they're
supporting, they send money and all that kind of stuff. But that's my feeling
from comedy shows, at least. People are very much on the Ukrainian side, very
much want to stand, very much are like, let's stop with this. The views there of
some comedy club here in Berlin. It is Chancellor Schulz, a social democrat who
has to chart this difficult course for his country. And he faces critics on both
sides. Some accuse him of hesitating when he should be leading. Others say this
country of all countries has to be the country that finds a path to peace and
away from war. I've been talking about those dilemmas with one of his allies, a
member of his centre-left SPD party, a deputy economy minister. He's Niels
Annan. And I asked him whether it feels like the start of a new Cold War. Well,
it certainly feels a little bit like, you know, the stories that I basically
know from the history books. But I don't think it's really a Cold War. We don't
have ideological blocs being opposed to each other. And also the global panorama
looks different. So yes, it's a reference for many, I would say the older
politicians making decisions today. But it's not quite an accurate description
of what is happening. But it is clear that this is no longer just a conflict
between Russia and Ukraine. It is a conflict that is shaping the politics of the
whole of Europe. Yeah, absolutely. I think geopolitics is back and that's not a
good news. And for us in Europe, you know, we especially in Germany believed in
the philosophy of integration that it's going to yield a benefit for all of us.
So what we see is a brutal, imperialistic war that Russia is waging against
Ukraine. And the logic, the zero sum logic is back. And so the challenge for us
is we need to confront the aggressor. But we also need to protect what made us
strong in our own societies. Well, I've just come from Tallinn from speaking to
the Prime Minister of Estonia. And for her it is simple. Russia simply needs to
be defeated, seen to be defeated. Putin must admit his errors. Is there a
slightly different view here in Berlin? Well, I think she is a very strong
leader. And what our Baltic friends in general have been doing over the last
years is extremely impressive and remarkable. We're speaking here in Berlin. We
don't have Russia at our border, which is a few kilometers from where you
probably spoke with the Prime Minister. So we have to acknowledge that. But
Germany, even before Russia attacked Ukraine, has been supporting the Baltics,
for example, and not only with resources and political support, but German air
forces flying air patrols in the Baltics. We have been deploying tanks to
Lithuania. So we recognized the need for collective security, especially in the
most vulnerable parts, which are the Baltics. So I don't think we have a
disagreement on that. No disagreement, but maybe in the future there will be a
role for Germany in saying we do have to live with Russia. We simply can't wish
away the existence of this powerful country. Yeah, look, nobody can wish away
the existence of that powerful country. That's just a reality. And that's why I
believe two messages are very important. We will do everything to support
Ukraine. And that's true for my ministry when it comes to economic cooperation
and also the efforts that we are already making for the reconstruction of
Ukraine. We are not waiting until the war is over. It's a strong message to
Putin, but also a strong message to the people in Ukraine. But the Chancellor is
also keeping open a line of contact with the Russian president. He had been
criticized for that, but I believe it's the right decision to keep that option
open. But again, I don't see that there's a fundamental disagreement. Keep it
open for what? To look for a moment where talking might be possible? This is not
the time to speculate about negotiations. And we made it very clear that it's
not Berlin, it's not Warsaw, it's not even Washington. It's going to be Kiev
that is going to make the decision about the future of their own country. But
thousands will be on the streets here in Berlin at the weekend. We'll see how
many. We will look for urgent peace talks. Yeah, we will see how many are going
to be here. We are a democracy, so that's part of our political life. I'm not
concerned about that. And is your party strong enough to withstand the claims?
There's a great history in the German Social Democrats of talking to Russia. Is
Chancellor Schulz strong enough to say to his own supporters, no, we're not
going back? You already have your answer. He turned German foreign and security
policy around. And Germany today is Ukraine's third biggest weapons suppliers.
We are supplying highly sophisticated heavy weaponry. We are the leading donor
when it comes to the reconstruction effort. We have been rallying supporters and
humanitarian and development assistance. We are the ones and the chancellor
personally that used the G7 presidency to create an international support
platform. So you have your answer. Germany and the chancellor are strong enough.
Is it frustrating, therefore, to sometimes hear coming from Britain criticism of
Germany for being too slow, for hesitating, for not giving as much to support
Ukraine as it might? Do I politely ask how many refugees from Ukraine, the
United Kingdom welcomed? Many fewer than here. Now, as it happens, I've just
been to Tegel Airport. To see those refugees here in Germany, you obviously
hoped, they hoped that they would be able to go home after weeks and months. It
is a real pressure on your country now. Well, we are used to that pressure. And
you cannot choose the times you're living in. And I think it's interesting to
see. The last years we saw many talking heads, think tankers, politicians
calling on Berlin for more leadership. Well, now you get your leadership. It's
probably not always what you like, what you expect. But that's the price for
leadership. Is there a worry that this refugee crisis is already as big as the
one that we saw a few years ago, 2016, with all those Syrians coming here and
could get bigger? I don't know if I would describe it as a crisis. But we have
welcomed more Ukrainians than Syrians. And we opened the labor market for them.
They are entitled to seek the same social benefits than Germans are receiving.
So it's a huge effort. And we haven't even calculated the fiscal dimension of
that, because we believe it's our duty to do that. But of course, our cities,
our communities, they are in a difficult situation right now. So that's why the
states who are important in Germany and the federal government are teaming up.
And we are going to find ways to support our communities. But the population is
still very much believing in the need for solidarity. And it's very encouraging.
Minister Niels Allen, thank you so much for talking to me. My pleasure. Thank
you. My report on what's happening at that disused Tegel airfield will come at
around about 20 to the last eight extraordinary scenes there as people are
processed in the old chicken deaths. They're not checking in for a holiday. They
are checking in for a new life in Germany. And just to reflect that tomorrow,
the first anniversary of the Wolizde set will be presenting the program from the
Ukrainian capital Kyiv alongside our international editor, Jeremy Bowen. And
once again, we'll hear from the Archbishop of Canterbury for thought for the
day. Three minutes to a good time to go to Darrin Bet with the weather morning,
Darrin. Good morning. Again, quite a contrast across the UK at the moment after
a chilly start. There's some sunshine for northern areas. It wasn't quite so
cold first thing this morning further south where we've seen more cloud and
there's still some rain around as well. Let's head northwards though into
Scotland where there was a frost this morning. We'll keep the sunshine in
southern and eastern parts of Scotland through the morning. But even here, it
will cloud over during the afternoon. There is more cloud coming in from the
northwest across Scotland today as the westerly wind strengthens and that will
bring some rain in the afternoon in northern Scotland. It will turn heavier in
the highlands as well. Strong winds across northern Scotland. The winds will be
lighter for northern Ireland where it should be generally dry. Some sunshine
this morning, more cloud around during the afternoon and across England and
Wales. A lot of sunshine to come across northern England. There are some showers
coming in from off the North Sea. Those will fade away in the next few hours.
We'll see more cloud further south across Wales, the Midlands and southern
England. That's still producing some patchy rain. That will move its way
southwards. The rain tending to dry out through the day but will keep a lot of
cloud until well into the afternoon across southern parts of England. During the
morning though we'll see the cloud breaking up in Wales and the Midlands and in
the afternoon across East Anglia as well. The winds are lighter across England
and Wales. All areas are going to be on the chilly side though, 7 to 9 degrees.
Early in the night across Wales, the Midlands and southern England, likely to
have a frost. That's before all the cloud that's in the north moves its way
southwards but it will bring very little rain. Tomorrow we'll have a northerly
breeze that will bring one or two showers into northern and eastern Scotland
down the North Sea and temperatures will peak at 9 or 10 Celsius. Darren, thank
you very much indeed. If you've never listened to David Sedaris, if you've never
read him, you should and you can because he's back tonight on Radio 4. The
master of satire David Sedaris is back with his unique blend of wit and wisdom.
I know that people are now taking pictures of themselves at funerals because
when I looked up selfies at funerals was the third option. The humorous laughs
at life and himself. I've been studying Japanese and I'll say something to Hugh,
I'll say oh did you know that this is how you say and he says we're only going
for four days. A new series of Meet David Sedaris starts this evening at 6.30 on
Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. And coming up in the next hour of this programme, the
Labour leader, Sir Keir Starmer, is going to be joining us at 10 past 8 and...
We'll be hearing from a curator at...