TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-12H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 that's become synonymous with our era of angry debate. Woke the journey of a
word at 1.45. BBC News at 11 o'clock. King Charles has marked the first
anniversary of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. In a message posted on social
media in the last hour, His Majesty said the people of Ukraine had suffered
unimaginably from the unprovoked full-scale attack. He went on to praise their
truly remarkable courage. In Ukraine, ceremonies are being held across the
country. In the capital Kiev, President Zelensky addressed troops and presented
awards to military personnel and families of those killed. He said that Ukraine
would do everything to achieve victory this year and would not stop until those
he called Russian murderers had faced punishment. Our Ukraine correspondent
James Waterhouse was watching the ceremony. It is clearly a day Ukraine wants to
mark, but it is a very bittersweet anniversary. While it is a story of survival,
Ukraine is still fighting in essence for its very existence and Moscow is
certainly showing no signs of letting up. It seems to have already started its
spring offensive. So it's a loaded day for so many reasons. In Russia, the
country's former president Dmitry Medvedev, who retains a senior security role,
has said victory would be achieved and Ukrainian forces should be pushed back to
the Polish border. In other news, a fourth man has been arrested in connection
with the shooting of an off-duty police officer in Oma. Detective Chief
Inspector John Caldwell is in a critical but stable condition after Wednesday's
attack. Nominations close in the next hour in the contest to succeed. Nicholas
Sturgeon as SNP leader and first minister, three MSPs Kate Forbes, Humza Yousuf
and Ash Regan have said they will stand. The winner will be announced next
month. Parts of usually sunny Southern California are under their first blizzard
warning since 1989. Forecasters are predicting record snowfall of up to eight
feet in mountains to the east of Los Angeles by Saturday. BBC News. This is
Radio 4 now. Is psychiatry working? Welcome to a strange country, a land known
to all of us in some degree, but which is still little understood. A land where
some of us travel very hard roads. Welcome to the country of the troubled mind.
Four years ago, I had a breakdown. After a short stay in hospital, I began the
process of healing and recovery with help from my family, friends and a
therapist. It was a difficult time, but fascinating. My experiences of
psychiatry were mixed. I knew the clinicians wanted to help, but I felt our
encounters were not long enough or deep enough. The subjects of this programme,
healing and recovery, were barely addressed. I'm a great fan of the good
psychiatry can do and the benefits of the right dose of the right medication,
but my experience like that of many patients and former patients led me to ask
serious questions about how psychiatry understands and treats people in distress
and how they can recover. My name is Horatio Clare. I'm an author and
journalist. Together with the renowned psychiatrist, Femioy Abode, we are
asking, is psychiatry working? This is episode six, healing and recovery. You
have to stabilize the actual symptoms in my view, and then you've got a chance
to repair all the other things that have gone wrong. When I first attempted to
take my own life, I actually went to a police station before being taken to
hospital. I was arrested and made to be a criminal. I think we have these two
opposite poles. We have excessive coercion at one end and we have exclusion at
the other. We live in a world that's absolutely obsessed with scams and blood
tests. Diagnosis isn't scientific. It's people making a judgment about other
people's behaviour. What's key to this work is love and kindness, an arm round
the shoulder, a hug in the morning. These programmes are following the stages of
a breakdown from crisis to diagnosis, medication and recovery. There is great
hope and light here, but some of these stories are not easy listening. Do look
after yourself as we go in search of recovery. Femioy, how does psychiatry view
the concept of recovery and has that view changed over time? I think it's
helpful if I said something about how doctors in general think of recovery and
that's exactly how psychiatrists also think of recovery. So doctors think of the
symptoms that the patient presented with and see whether at the end of
treatment, whether those symptoms have totally resolved or not. Then given what
they know about the natural history of that condition, by which I mean the long-
term outcome of that condition, they have some sense of whether the person is
likely to have recurrences or not. Therefore, there's a muted sense of what it
means to say somebody's recovered because at the back of your mind you've got
this notion if they haven't really had all their symptoms resolved, you do not
want to say that they've recovered. And I think the change has occurred is that
patient groups have appropriated the term recovery to mean that even though the
symptoms are not resolved, yet they feel that they can reengage with life. So
this transfers the power from the doctors to the patients so that the patients
become active agents in their own life, active agents in describing what their
outcomes are, and then they can embrace the residue if there are residual
symptoms or not. And they can find ways to live in such a way that they're
fulfilled within their lives, irrespective of whether the doctors think that all
the symptoms have resolved. Do you think a wider cultural shift towards a more
hopeful perception of what can happen after a crisis would help people recover
faster and more strongly? I think so. I mean, but of course you know that
cultural shifts are not things that happen overnight. But in theory,
conceptually, I agree with you that if we were to live in a culture where it's
expected that people, even though they've had a psychiatric disorder, an episode
of illness, or even several episodes of illness, that does not mean that they're
incapable, does not mean that they are not able to function, doesn't mean that
they're unable to live with family, doesn't mean that they are unable to partake
in society in the usual way. So expectation makes a lot of difference to how
people see themselves and also how they expect their lives to go. And you've
talked to me about international and different cultural examples. For example,
you said in Nigeria, a single episode of psychosis is much more common with a
recovery behind it. Yes, I mean, we know from the International Pilot's study of
schizophrenia, which has done all that all those years ago in 1972, you know,
it's reported in 1972, that the outcome of schizophrenia in the third world,
that a single episode of what we call schizophrenia, is much more likely to have
a better outcome. And the site has been on for the last 50 years to try to
understand what it is that underlies the better outcome in the developing world,
because you'd expect for there to be worse outcome, given that the modern
psychiatric treatments are probably worse. And one of the possibilities, it's
not the only possible answer to this question, but one of the possibilities is
that it is the expectation within wider society that underlies the better
outcome for schizophrenia in these cultures. At the University of Birmingham, we
found a striking example of recovery in action, better than well. Luke Treanor
is one of its service leaders. He has seen peer support make a huge difference
to many lives, including his own. Luke has found that having a purpose larger
than oneself is key to recovery. I am the programme manager of better than well
collegiate recovery programme here. That's a addictions recovery, peer support
service for students in recovery from addiction and for other mental health
conditions that are kind of impulse based quite often. When you look at the kind
of root causes of addiction, there is a kind of malady, which I identify with,
which underlies addiction. And I suppose that the kind of simplest way of
putting that across is that I try to fix what's going on internally with
external things. How do you go about helping people recover? Are these
essentially 12 step programmes based on the Alcoholics Anonymous programme? No,
they're not. And there's always a danger if you've got a kind of homogenous
recovery that kind of dominates any programme. So we are very much of the mind
that there are many ways to recover, that there isn't just one way. I come from
a 12 step recovery background. So I can support students who are more inclined
towards that spiritual direction of things, I suppose. But we have smart
recovery here, which is a evidence based CBT type recovery. We have meditation
based recovery, which isn't necessarily spiritual at all. It's more your
mindfulness kind of things. There are a lot of options in terms of how students
recover, I suppose what unites all of those recovery types is peer support and
connection, the connection, the therapeutic value of students recovering
together. That is the thread through all of these recovery kind of ideologies.
Can I ask, in your case, are you clear about what took you down that road? I am.
There was an early life trauma for me, which I think was probably the catalyst
for it. So alongside my recreational use of hashish, LSD, the more experimental
stuff for me, I was coping with feelings and thoughts that I couldn't handle
without telling the people that I experimented or was taking recreationally
with. So I would be very much, we're talking about the early 90s, the rave
scene, but most of the other people there that I know were just doing that. And
then they were getting on, going to school, getting on with their lives, having
steady relationships or whatever. I was taking benzodiazepines on a daily basis.
I was drinking from early in the morning and I was taking amphetamines just so I
could stay on my feet with that cocktail of things in me. So yeah, for me, I
very much identify with the fact that drugs felt like a solution to the problem
that was me for quite a long time in my life. That's beautifully put. And then
it turns out that the solution to the problem that the drugs made is you
becoming, in a sense, a healer. I wonder if you could talk about the role that
your work plays in your ongoing recovery and strength. Yes, it is a huge part of
it. The recovery kind of world that I come from, we have a phrase which is kind
of get out of self and help others. That's quite a lot to unpick, but there is a
feeling that I can identify with and a lot of people can identify with that
things start to become darker when we're too isolated in our own head, in our
own thoughts, not running our thoughts by others or not reaching out and having
connection with other people. So as much as it is a joyous thing, I would advise
it for anyone to be of service to your community. I think that's good for all
people. For addicts of my variety, it's an absolute necessity. I need to do
that. I need to do that on a daily basis. In the morning, I orient myself in
that direction. How can I be of most use to the people around me? And that just
works pragmatically. It just works. And I see the same for the other people I
support. So I'm now in a position where I have supported people who support
people, who support people, who support people. And this is the wonderful thing.
This is a gift for me in my life today to see this. Pfizer is another one of the
students who have benefited from this service. The one I go to on a Friday is
called Recovery Celebration. So I quite like that because it wasn't like
therapy. It was, you know, we're celebrating people in recovery. I think my
first ever session, it was quite overwhelming just because I wasn't sure if I
should have been there. But then when other people were talking about their
experiences, even though it wasn't something that I had suffered with in terms
of like an addiction, but I related to their thoughts. And that was overwhelming
for me because I was like, wow, there are other people who are kind of dealing
with the same thoughts as me. And it felt like a little bit less lonely. That
must be very powerful. Could you talk about what kinds of thoughts that you were
dealing with? Yeah. So since about the age of 12, I've suffered with an eating
disorder. The thoughts are very similar to an addiction mindset in terms of
secrecy, guilt, shame, and using something like a behavior, for example, I used
to exercise compulsively and frequently. And it came to a point at one point in
my life where I was completely hiding everything I was doing, which, as you can
imagine, led to me being hospitalized in the Children's Hospital. And I've had a
spell of many, many months in inpatient facilities. So you can imagine it was
getting quite boring, quite tiring, and quite repetitive. And I realized that I
really don't want to live in and out of hospitals. And I've had my fair share of
therapy techniques. So one of them was making like a little placemat to kind of
sit under your food when you eat. So you can kind of look at things while you
eat in the hospital, right? And you'd kind of write motivations or maybe
pictures of your family. And one of the big things on my placemat was one was
cricket, because I play a lot of cricket, and two was university. I really
wanted the university experience. And it was something I was really, really
aiming for. At that point, I was in GCSE stage. So you know, it was a long way
to go. But I think it was good because having an actual achievable goal of
university, and now to sit in the University of Birmingham is quite surreal. And
that I know that since I've gotten here, well, I can set another achievable
goal. And I find that quite helpful to set these goals, but in a healthy way.
You describe you wanted to get better, you didn't want to be in hospital, and
you wanted education, and you had a dream that you made come true. So all of
those things come from inside you. Was there external help that helped you get
to where you are? I mean, my biggest, biggest support is my mum because she
really stood by me. In terms of my medical teams and other support, there was a
very intense support, but they do try to gradually decline it because it's not
sustainable to live your whole life in services. So yeah, my mum was always is
still always here. But I think although I right now, I'm not in a stage where
I'm physically or mentally unwell, I think that this group is the exact support
that I need because it's my choice to be here. All of the therapy that I've had
in the past, it's not my choice. I was sectioned under the mental health at
numerous times, taken to hospital against my will forcefully. So it's a big
thing for me to be in control. So the fact that I am here, but it's for a
positive thing, and I have the option if I want to leave, I can. Also the fact
that all my therapy before was very based just on me. It was like five to one
kind of ratio that my mum, my doctor, my psychologist, everyone all saying, you
need to do this. Whereas this is like, there's like maybe five, six people who
turn up to a whole group. And like, there's Luke, but I mean, he's not really
giving us like, you have to do this, like, it's like a safe space to just talk
openly, knowing that if anything gets out of hand, then you're in good hands. I
mean, what's the relationship between dependency and mental health disorders and
distress? Very complex relationship, very complex indeed. We know, for example,
that in the early phases of a major illness like schizophrenia, for whatever
reason, and we don't understand it entirely, something to do with attentional
difficulties and something to do with weird and unusual experiences, a lot of
people self-medicate with substances primarily with cannabis. So that's one
possible relationship. Another way of thinking of it is to say that if you're
thinking of alcohol abuse, a lot of people who misuse alcohol, who become
dependent on alcohol, have the men have social anxiety, so that they start to
drink in order to control their social anxiety. And then they discover that they
become dependent on alcohol. So that's another root of the relationship. It
seems worth putting a question mark against that idea that cannabis is used as
self-medicatory when there's nothing to suggest cannabis specialists believe
that in fact, cannabis can cause this schizophrenic breakdown. Oh, of course.
Yes, yes. So we're not saying that cannabis is innocuous, sadly cannabis itself
can induce an acute onset of illness. And part of the huge psychological benefit
of this group was clearly peer support. Why does peer support work? For all
sorts of reasons. And the first simple straightforward answer is that we're
social animals. And given that we're social animals, I mean, the benefit of
being involved with other human beings is inestimable. So that's a very simple
straightforward way of thinking of it. The second thing is to say something
about the benefits of being in groups. So this idea that we're in a group, you
get a fellow feeling because you're in the situation where you're with other
people who are similar. The second thing is the idea that the other people have
difficulties and you can help them given your own experiences. And then they can
help you too, given their experiences. And then you might see people who are
further down the journey and they're starting to come out of their difficulties
and that gives you hope. So that idea of the installation of hope, it gives you
hope that the arc is bending towards recovery, which is also very, very
important. Let's look more closely at the elements of recovery and healing. Mike
Slade is Professor of Recovery and Social Inclusion at the University of
Nottingham. One of the influential understandings that we've developed is the
CHIME framework. So CHIME is five processes that people with their own
experiences of mental health problems identify as important for their own
recovery. And CHIME stands for Connectedness, Hope, Identity, Meaning and
Empowerment. And of course, interestingly, missing from that list is no
symptoms. So I think the old understanding of recovery that has emerged from
psychiatry and mental health systems really isn't the modern understanding,
which is about supporting people to get on with their life, despite any life
challenges relating to mental health or other things that they might have. Does
your considerable work on recovery, a lifetime of work on recovery, give you an
impression of what somebody who's going to have the best chances of recovery,
how they need to act and think and do? I can answer that at two levels. I think
it's not really aligned with the best empirical evidence that suggests recovery
is partly a social endeavour. So for example, one route to recovery for many
people is getting a job. But if because of stigma and discrimination, no jobs
are available to someone with mental health issues, it's not really fair to
locate the responsibility for changing lives. So I think that's a very important
thing to think about. And I think that's a very important thing to think about.
But if you're not working as long as mental health issues, it's not really fair
to locate the responsibility for change at the individual level. Now, that said,
I think there are a number of things that we could really do better in our
approaches to supporting people. So the first is not to be communicating
indirectly or directly that we want you to be a good patient. One of the
challenges is from the traditional mental health system view, the job of the
individual with the treatment as prescribed, that is actually counterproductive
because what that does is increase dependency and reduce any sense of agency or
ability to make change. The second thing that individuals can do is to
deliberately seek out credible role models of recovery. Now, that might be
through online mutual peer support forums, or that might be what the mental
health system is starting to do of introducing mental health peer support
workers, people with their own lived experience. But finding people that can
provide them with some hope, some possibility of a good future is a really
central starting point. And the third thing, I guess, is about identifying and
really being in touch with and working towards dreams and passions. I mean, a
mental health clinician will call these goals, but that may not always be the
most useful term that individuals use. But just what would make life worth
getting up for? And there it speaks to societal opportunities to contribute. It
speaks to individuals having some level of choice and agency in the life that
they're leading. So if I can find my tribe, if I can find hope, if I can
identify goals and pursue them with agency, does your work show that I can
recover? Well, people are very different. So it's not possible to give invariant
answers, but broadly, that's a better approach than just taking treatment. And
indeed, what we find with recent research that's just been published, in fact,
is that there is a much higher rate of personal recovery, this idea of living as
well as possible, than of clinical recovery. And for some people, they go
together, that people get on with their life, they, quotes, get better, have no
symptoms and have a life worth living. But many people live with mental health
issues, and also find a positive way forward in their life. Now, that sounds a
kind of small academic distinction, but it's a huge difference, for example, in
what the job of the mental health system is. Can I ask you the question this
series is asking is, is psychiatry working? Do you think it is? I think
psychiatry is working for some people, some of the time. And the challenge is
that psychiatry acts as if it is working for all people, all of the time. So
choice and genuine choice is at the halt of the transformation that's needed in
the mental health system, I would suggest. So it's not that we want to or need
to or indeed should get rid of psychiatry and all its associated expertise, but
rather that should become one part of the options available to individuals
looking to recover. Femi, we started this series with a question about a crisis
in psychiatry. And I asked you if it was and you said it was and for the reasons
that you gave. And six episodes later, here we are, presumably, you wouldn't do
it, you wouldn't become a psychiatrist and give it your life. If you didn't
think it was working and capable of working better. Yes, it's been most
worthwhile career, over 45 years of it. And the people who work, if I specify
the psychiatrist, the people in psychiatry, the vast majority of them are
dedicated, committed, enthusiastic and totally devoted to the work for all sorts
of reasons, but primarily because it's a human subject. And the purpose of it is
to somehow relieve human suffering. Lots of patients of psychiatry feel for one
reason or another that they are subject to stigma. I suggest to you that
psychiatrists too feel stigmatised. Oh, no doubt about that at all. Yeah. So
there's as much, I don't want to put it that way, but it is true. There's as
much stigma against the psychiatrist from within the medical profession as
there's stigma against patients from the wider society. Why? Some of it is to do
with the fact that the conditions that we encounter remain mysterious. And most
of medicine deals with things which are clear-cut. And therefore, this aspect of
the mystery of the disorders that we encounter makes us different from the rest
of medicine. So that's one aspect of it. The second aspect of it is that it's a
contested territory. And because it's contested, that makes it very difficult
for people to want to work in it. So some people come when they're fourth or
final year in medicine, and because they see the contestation in the field, they
are appalled and disenchanted because they assume that they would work in a
field where there will be some degree of appreciation of their efforts. But
that's not necessarily true in psychiatry, whereas it's true, for example, in
paediatrics and in obstetrics. If psychiatry is waiting for its next evolution,
does that necessarily or solely come from a development of a new drug? Or are
there other things that psychiatry is pursuing in terms of knowledge and
practice that you're excited about? I don't think it's true to say, or it's not,
it's certainly not kind to say that psychiatry is a pro-compact with drugs. I
may just want to remind people that psychoanalysis was introduced by
psychiatrists, that cognitive behavioural therapy was introduced by
psychiatrists. So psychiatrists are always looking for other things, aside from
drugs, to aid and assist the people that we see. And so there will come other
forms of talk therapies. And I'm also sure that there will be new social
therapies that will be aiming not at talking, but at altering re-engineering
social fabric of society. And that may also make a lot of difference. But no
doubt, we will also get new forms of treatment, which will be medical in nature
and which will be of immense help to others. For my own purpose is I was reading
Emil Krepplin's book, which was published in 1919, and his description of the
patients that he was seeing in his hospital. And totally unrecognisable. If you
were practising in psychiatry today, because people are not that ill, or if
they're that ill, they're that ill for a very, very short period of time.
Whereas in his day, in the early part of the 20th century, people would have
been ill, consistently ill, and be in hospital for years, not for months or
days. So there's been incredible, incredible change, which is not as recognised
as it ought to be. But we have a long way to go to do as much good as all of us
wish. This journey through how psychiatry treats people in trouble has been
hugely heartening in many ways. The system brims with professionals of enormous
expertise and compassion who are devoted to helping people towards happier,
healthier lives. At the same time, there is no doubt that psychiatry faces
enormous challenges. The lack of progress in drug development and prescription,
the lack of oversight and contact with patients, the wish to treat people as
nuanced individuals, but the lack of tools and time to do so, the dire need for
more inpatient services delivered in wards which should all be well staffed,
well run, caring and healing places, but which too often are not. Psychiatrists
and psychotherapists know that every kind of suffering, from the most mild to
the most severe, can be helped. The knowledge, the treatments and the therapies
do exist. Recovery is everyone's right, but not everyone's experience. I wonder
whether psychiatry is doing enough to demand and deliver the changes that
clinicians know their patients need. All of us who are in recovery know how
lucky we are, and all of us know that luck alone is not enough. We need
psychiatry working, and we need it working better. Hello, this is Sharon Horgan,
and because this is radio, you can't see me, obviously. But if you could, you'd
probably be wondering why I'm sat in a wheelbarrow from Monte Don's garden
wearing Graham Norton's jacket holding a winners trophy from Pointless. Well,
there's a good reason, because these are just some of the iconic BBC items that
you could win this year as part of Red Nose Day. Oi, we haven't finished with
the wheelbarrow yet. To enter, find out more or donate to Comic Relief, go to
bbc.co.uk forward slash Red Nose Day. We'll find the terms and conditions and
privacy notice. You must be 18 or over to enter. The giveaway closes at 11.59pm
on Saturday 18th March 2023. Good luck. The Justice Secretary Dominic Raab says
crime re-offending rates in England and Wales have fallen significantly since
the Conservatives came to power. In today's More or Less, we'll ask whether
that's right. Also, are 13 million women in the UK really menopausal? And a
debate that sparked much consternation should the word data be treated as
singular or plural, more or less at half past four. Now, recorded live at the
Drill Hall in London in 2018, Mrs Hudson's radio show, the second comedy special
by Bob and the much miss Barry Cryer. Episode two, Wild Geese starring Patricia
Hodge, Miriam Margulies and Barry Cryer. Come with me as we once again take a
stroll down Baker Street. Go on, force yourselves. Ladies and gentlemen, it's
Mrs Hudson's radio show. Episode two, Wild Geese. Again, we begin our tale in
the rather well-worn Baker Street kitchen of our eponymous landlady, Mrs Hudson.
Once more, we find her talking to her late husband. Oh, Arthur, another
Christmas approaches without you, my dear. You gave me this silver angel on our
wedding anniversary. I always did wonder whether you stole it from your mother's
Christmas tree. But she doesn't talk to a late husband just to chastise him. She
likes to chastise other people too, mainly her tenants. Why, I only put up with
them because their payments are so princely. Mr Sherlock Holmes must be the very
worst tenant in London. And although Dr Watson seems trustworthy, I cannot say
the same for his bull terrier pup who has inflicted a succession of emerus
overtures on our cat, which has since gone missing. When I suggested to Dr
Watson that he might have to put his dog down, he replied, I'm a physician, not
a vet. Let's leave Mrs Hudson decorating her tree and move outdoors to where her
good friend and neighbour, Mrs Braley, is looking for the aforementioned missing
cat. Here, kitty, kitty, kitty, kitty. Oh, good morning, Mrs Braley. I want to
ask what brings you out this early. I'm looking for Mr Disraeli, have you seen
him? Westminster's that way. The Droll Inspector Lestrade. I am, of course,
referring to Mrs Hudson's cat. He got out the other night and hasn't returned.
Well, that is a shame. I'm afraid Scotland Yard can't help you there. Happy
Christmas to you. Now, old first, I might ask you, why are you out of this hour
looking so saucy with that goose rammed under your arm? Well, this, oh no, this
goose isn't mine. In fact, it's quite the funniest thing. Two nights ago, I was
returning from a small jollification. Does Mrs Lestrade know you tricky jumble?
Most assuredly. A Scottish eyewitness? Him too. I was walking along Great
Titchfield Street when a row broke out between an old man with a goose and a
little knot of ruffs. When I approached, they all fled and all that remained
lying in the middle of the street was a rather battered hat and a most
unimpeachable Christmas goose with a label reading, Mr Henry Baker. And you've
been carrying that bird around for two days? I don't know about unimpeachable
Inspector. Surely it must be a little ripe by now. No, no, no, no, no, no, no,
that first goose is now being readied for our Christmas table by the
aforementioned Mrs Lestrade. Well, we didn't want it to go to waste, did we?
What I have here is a replacement goose that was requested in order to lure this
Mr Henry Baker out of the shadows. Well, there must be plenty of Henry Baker's
in London, Inspector. And might I ask who requested this new goose? Oh,
typically nosy Mrs B. It was a man by the name of Sherlock Holmes. Mr Holmes?
You mean Mrs. Hudson's new tenant? I'm off to see him now. Are you heading that
way? Eventually. It's Mr Disraeli that preoccupies me at present. I have a few
more nooks and crannies to search. Good morning, Inspector. Good morning, Mrs B.
As Mrs. Braley and Inspector go their separate ways on Baker Street, it's time
for me to pay my usual visit to Mrs Hudson at the back door of 221. Mrs Hudson,
do you remember the time when the Duke of Avondale was up in court for shooting
at Golden Eagle? No, but I'm sure you're going to tell me. I bet you are. He was
on the stand in front of the judge and he said, I had no intention of shooting
at Golden Eagle. I was shooting a pheasant and in a split second the eagle flew
into my sights, complete accident, and the judge said to him, what did you do
with it? And he said, I ate it. And he said, you ate it? What did it taste like?
He said, rather like swan. Oh, you had to be there, I think. I don't get it. I
can see that. You're not allowed to eat swan. Why are you telling me this? All
this talk of geese. Haven't you heard? No, I'm more concerned about my cat. My
lard has infested with mice. That's not the mice, is it? That's my new tenant's
attempt at a hobby. The detective? He's been playing that violin all morning.
You'd think he'd have got the hang of it by now. Morning, Mrs Hudson. Morning,
Martha. Did you get the mouse poisoned? Yes, Mrs Hudson, I did. If he carries on
playing that violin, I'll be asking for some. Morning, Harry. Let me take that
bucket from you, Martha. Where would you like it, Mrs H? Oh, just in the yard
there, Harry. Thank you. To our ladies. To our Harry. Bye. Those little mousy
blighters have already been at my scones. I do so wish Mr Disraeli would come
back home. I loved that cat. Love? Cat, cat, Martha, love. We've not lost faith
yet. Thank goodness for that. Now we can get on with making lunch in peace. Mrs
Hudson! Mrs Braley, come in, come in. Have you seen our blinking cat anywhere?
I'm afraid not. Oh, the poor thing. But I have just seen Dr Watson in the
street. He was carrying a plaster cast in the shape of a human head. Whatever is
going on, Mrs H. Was he being followed by a frisky bull terrier puppy? I
wouldn't say followed. It was more attached to his leg. It seems that my new
tenants are turning out to be a bit of a handful, Mrs B. All that stamping
around, apparently Mr Holmes does it to help himself think. How? By stopping
everyone else. I've already worked out that he only does this when they're
discussing a case. Say? Who's they? Dr Watson's helped. Mr Holmes and Inspector
Lestrade. Mr Holmes doesn't tend to stamp about so much when he's talking to the
doctor. Because it excites the puppy. Precisely. I've not seen Dr Watson doing
much doctoring since he's been here. He spent the better part of yesterday
afternoon helping Mr Holmes make a dummy of himself out of wet plaster. That
explains him carrying that head down the street. That explains my moist anti-
maccassas. Know what's happening? Are they dancing? I think so, yes. I think
they're dancing a polka. Whatever it is they've stopped. Thank goodness for
that. Oh, that reminds me. I've managed to secure tickets to the tib tonight.
Will you join? I'll be especially delighted as Bellalomax will be performing. On
surrounded by emeters. The inspector is not happy. He's rarely happy. Always in
this kitchen having a moon about something or other. What else are kitchens for?
Oh, now we all know that sound. That means tea. Would you mind, Martha? Of
course not. Oh, wait on. Sorry, he wants coffee. Oh, wait on. Sorry, he wants
cocaine. Surely not more cocaine. We're nearly out. Shall I order some more on
my way back from the butchers? If you could, there's a good girl. Get down
James, please. And for the love of God, put that away. The doctor has returned.
You might want to pour some cold water on that puppy on your way out. Yes,
ma'am. Mrs. H, once the doctors put that dog safely away in its kennel, what say
we go and listen in on their conversation? I've heard that Mr. Holmes has quite
an incredible mind. I couldn't possibly spy on one of my own lodges. Wouldn't be
the first time. As the two landlady's chalky position on the stairs outside
apartment B, inside Holmes is filling Watson Inn on the day's events. Inspector
Lestrade was just here. Was he seeking help with a case that he will eventually
take credit for? Not this time, Watson. This was not so much a case as an
intellectual problem. I'm not sure intellectual problems pay the rent, Holmes.
He's bought you a goose, though, I see. That's a very seasonal gift. Two geese,
to be precise. They're the first goose is now back at Lestrade's house, roasting
in front of his fire. The replacement goose is the one you spy on the sideboard
there. Well, then, if I may, the game must be afoot. The geese are not strictly
game, Watson. Look at this hat. You mean, have a gander? No. What do you make of
it, Watson? I think I have the form by now. You would like me to put forward
some basic analysis of the hat's properties, which you will then render obsolete
by offering some lucidly brilliant deduction of your own? Correct. New analysis,
please. Well, I make very little of it, Holmes. It is a rather battered
billycock hat. A battered billycock that arrived here with a goose two mornings
ago. A billycock and a goose, eh? And I see on the table there is also a roasted
woodcock, quite the aviary. Judging by the size of that puny woodcock, I'm
rather pleased that neither of the geese came from Mrs. Hudson's larder. The
cheeky rat-bag. Thank you, Mrs. Hudson. We'll dine at seven. Neither leave any
remaining dropped eaves exactly where you found them, or just come in and join
us. I'm sorry to interrupt your work, gentlemen. I was just rather concerned
with the state of these runners, and I thought that I'd listen into your
conversation. Continue, if you wouldn't mind, Watson. Perhaps these ladies can
act as arbiters of our deduction. Let me see. There's no maker's name, but the
initials H.B. are scrawled upon one side. It is pierced in the brim for a hat-
securer. Ah, the elastic is missing. It is cracked, dusty, spotted in several
places, up, and there is some ink here. So there you have it. I see nothing. On
the contrary, Watson, you see everything. You fail, however, to reason from what
you see. Give the act to me! This bloke's got a massive head. I'll tell you that
for free. I suppose he might even be a professor with so large a brain. Oh, I
like a man with a large brain. He must have something good knocking round inside
of it. Indeed, Mrs. Braley. Well concluded. Now, if I may have the hat. Here,
Mrs. H, what do you think? Me? Are you sure? Oh, now let me see. I would spot
this kind of dust on a hat anywhere. It is not street dust, but there's sort of
fluffy brown dust I often find covering my corners in if I had a penny for every
inch I've removed over the years. Well, I wouldn't bother with a cornice in for
a spell. It shows that this hat has been hung up indoors for most of the time.
Thank you, ladies. That'll be awful. It's so extremely unloically that this man
has gas in his house. Why do you say that, Mrs. B? Look, there are no less than
five wax stains here. I think this man with his massive head walks upstairs at
night with his massive hat in one hand and some sort of massive candle in the
oven. It seems your methods are quite contagious, Holmes. Ladies, this is most
enlightening, but, Aloesia, you can't tell me the gentleman's name. That simple.
His name is Henry Baker. Goodness, Mrs. Braley, you are correct. Mrs. B, how the
devil have you deduced this from a huge, great, waxy billy cop hat? You can keep
your hat. Inspector Lestrade told me that Henry Baker was written on a label
attached to the goose's leg. How much was the wager, Mr. Holmes? That's
cheating. Mrs. Hudson, come quickly. Oh, what is it now? Inspector Lestrade has
just returned. Inspector? Mrs. Hudson, Mrs. Braley, Mr. Holmes, Dr. Watson.
Inspector, this is not a censor. Spit it out. The goose, Mr. Holmes. See what my
wife has found in its neck. By goof! I don't suppose you know what you've got
there. Erm, it's a diamond? No, child. It is a gemstone. What's the difference?
Not so idea. It is more than a gemstone. It is the gemstone. Well, not the
gemstone. Yes, the gemstone. What bloody gemstone? Not the missing blue
carbunkle. Precisely ejaculated Watson. It's a carbunkle, now. I thought it was
a gemstone. It's a diamond. Taken from the Cosmopolitan Hotel just five days
ago, its owner has been most distressed. I thought it was that plumber what
stole it, sir. Mr. Horner wasn't it? He stole him before, so the evening news
said. It is indeed a convincing case against him, but don't believe everything
you read in the papers. You are aware that the reward offered is £1,000? £1,000?
A great Lord of Mercy. Not within a 20th part of its market value, Inspector.
However, we can all say that the judgement will not be incommensurate, and an
erroneous verdict will be a conspicuously trenchant injustice. Not all of us can
say that. We need to return the carbunkle to the Countess of Moghar by midnight
tonight. The hotel informs me that she leaves for Germany tomorrow, and unless
she receives her gem, my fear she may press charges against our poor,
unfortunate plumber. The Countess of Moghar, you say? Do you know her? The
Countess of Moghar will be performing at the Tivoli this evening using her
maiden name, Bela Lomax. Good heavens! How does she come to me, the Countess of
Moghar? The late Count was an admirer until his heart attack. I read about this.
A riding accident? Something like that. Mrs. Braley and I have tickets for
tonight and could deliver the carbunkle, if you wish. It would certainly allow
us to continue our inquiries. Here is the stone. No, no, no, no. You can't send
amateurs. It doesn't stop Scotland Yard, does it, Inspector? Well, all right,
but with all these separate identities you'll need to be absolutely sure we've
identified the right person. Scotland Yard will have to prove she is exactly who
she says she is. Then you must accompany them, Inspector. If this is the same
Bela Lomax as you say, fetch me that scrap of baking parchment from the top of
the dresser, please, Martha, and that stick of charcoal there. Here you are, Mr.
Holmes. Allow me to sketch. You need to identify this rather crude illustration
of a very distinctive tattoo belonging to the Countess. And, er... this is where
it is situated on her body. Good Lord! Are those... Yes. And are they? Yes. And
is it on her... Yes! And I recognise the man on a horseback with a big
moustache. It's surely among the most magnificent. Indeed, isn't he magnificent?
How ever did you learn of this tattoo-ho? I heard it from the Prince of Wales.
He is also an admirer of Miss Lomax. Just a moment. Who's getting this reward?
You three can share it. As befits the season, no? Oh, well, I don't know what to
say. I do. Shall we get going? Can I have another look at that illustration? I
don't know exactly how we're going to do this, but I've got an idea. We go now
to the Tivoli Theatre on the Strand at the start of the second half. Just as
world-famous gambler, Archie Kempton, goes into his first position, supported
from beneath by the fire-breathing lefarthen, Hector Rocker from Buenos Aires,
better known to his fans as the Human Tinderbox. Have you ever seen anything
like it, ladies and gentlemen? Surely this is impossible. It is as if my weight
is nothing to this man. See how he lifts me up like a ragdoll. I had to be
careful with my cover-bar. See how we can pass a sicko and a bottle of brandy
from my foot-ties. Oh! Oh, bother. Oh, bloody hell, Archie's on fire. Get the
stage hands. Ladies and gentlemen, the Human Tinderbox and Archie Kempton there.
And now to our next artiste. It takes many years to make a great singer.
Unfortunately, 1845 wasn't one of them. She's a woman who sang Put Your Feather
in My Tip For and Johnny gave me his apene, so I gave him a bun. It is the one,
the only, the inimitable, the unsurpassable, Bella Lomax. Have you ever noticed
when you buy the sea the things that you can do there with impunity? If we did
the same things when we're up in town, moral Mrs Grundy on her face would wear a
frown. Father, mother, all the family, travel down to have a little paddle in
the sea. Mother takes her stockings off upon the sandy shore and shows a lot
of... that she's never shown before. We join our three car-bunkel carriers
backstage at the Tivoli now as they track down Bella Lomax, the enigmatic
Countess of Morca. Oh, please, may I beg of your forgiveness, Miss Lomax, but
we've got some urgent news for you. I knew this day would come. It was only a
matter of time before King Otto's Bavaria went public. No. Crown Prince Rudolf
of Austria? No. Monsignor Francisco Tardelli? No. The brass quintet of the band
of a cold-streamed guy? That's not why we're here. No, these two ladies have a
rather pleasant surprise for you. Could it be that we have your car-bunkel, Lady
Morca? I am indeed indebted to you ladies, but how can this be? I thought it was
that plumber what done it, the one who was responsible. The papers said so. Yes,
my associate, Mr Shaw at Combs, is at this precise moment busy identifying the
suspect. Thank you, ladies. Thank you, Inspector, from the very bottom of my
arm. Yes, if you wouldn't mind returning the car-bunkel to me. I have an ador in
public waiting for me at the stage door. Before I do, I really am such a fan of
yours, and I realise that this may seem quite forward, but I wondered if you
wouldn't mind showing me that can-can move you did at the East of Ghana. You
mean this move? Oh, yes, that's the one. I'm sorry. Now I appear to have dropped
the car-bunkel. Mrs B, that I do. Don't worry. I'll get it, ma'am. Although I do
appear to have, um... got caught up in your... Mrs Braley, please. Nearly there.
Nearly there. Nearly there. Get off me, you mug! My apologies. Car-bunkel safely
retrieved. Here you are, ma'am. I'll hold your horses. There is a reward for its
return, you know. Most asturedly. My valet, Carnaby, will furnish you with the
necessary paperwork. It used to be found in me dressing room. Quite often, I'm
told. Now my public awaits. Well, Mrs B, it's a lot bigger than I expected. But
that is definitely Suleiman the Magnificent. As a long day draws to a close, our
intrepid party returns to Baker Street to find Dr Watson taking his puppy for
another walk. Dr Watson, your puppy seems a little more obedient this evening. A
touch of gin in his water, Mrs Hudson. Works wonders. Poor thing. He looks ever
so disappointing. Are you a police to learn that Holmes tracked down the real
thief, an attendant at the hotel? I trust you got the car-bunkel safely to the
Countess? With not so much as a penny in return, Bella Lomax fled into the
night. Come, come, Inspector. Cos we gave the car-bunkel back. We've gone and
freed a plumber. The solving of the crime is its own reward. No, I think an
actual reward is its own reward. You grumpy sod. Inspector, it looks like you
could use a cup of hot punch. In fact, why don't you all come and join me for a
Christmas jolly at 1-9-7? Oh, that would be splendid. Well, I'm sure Mrs
Lestrade wouldn't mind. She's invited too? Yes, yes, of course she is. And
Martha and Mr Holmes? I'll let them know. Thank you, Mrs B. I just have a few
things to attend to here first. We'll follow on after. Come on, gentlemen. Don't
leave me waiting. Martha! I'm back! Yes, ma'am. Did our tenants finish the
roasted woodcock? I thought I might take some to Mrs Braille's tonight. You're
invited. Mrs Hudson, I spent the better part of the day placing mouse poison all
round the house. I'm exhausted. Where is Mr Holmes? I haven't seen him all
evening. Wait a minute. I must have missed that one. That might be the biggest
mouse yet. Ah, Mrs Hudson. Martha. I thought you'd both gone to bed. How long
have you been in the habit of conducting your violin practice in Melada? Ever
since Watson's puppy found my music, erm... stimulating. Mrs H, there's a dead
mouse on the jelly molt. Might I also ask what that is doing there? Very little
at present. Death resulted from apnea due to paralysis of the respiratory
muscles. Whereas this fellow is faring much better. Hello, boy. However did you
find Mr Disraeli? Are you familiar with the essentials of materia, medica and
therapeutics? I can't say that I am. No. I found Mr Disraeli comatose here and
surmised he must have been rendered so on account of the number of poisoned mice
he'd ingested. I felt it best to remedy his drama by giving him a pinch of a
vegetable alkaloid. What's a vegetable alkaloid? A cocaine. You gave mekette
cocaine. No harm done and a happy ending to boot, even if not for the mouse. And
with that, I wish you both a happy Christmas. Care you reind hot coffee in the
morning if you'd be so kind, Mrs Hudson? A happy Christmas to you too, Mr
Holmes. Well, Huzar, for that. Mrs Hudson, we must celebrate immediately at Mrs
Braley's gathering. You run ahead, Martha. I'll follow on shortly. Thank you,
Mrs Hudson. Happy Christmas. Now, where did I put that present for Mrs B?
Arthur, you'd know, you were always so good at finding needles in haystacks. How
you managed to find a bottle of cooking sherry in a Methodist meeting hall, I'll
never know. Mrs Hudson! Mrs Hudson! Are you coming, Mrs Hudson? The party games
have already started. Harry, Mrs Braley, just give me one moment. Oh, you found
Mr Disraeli, I say. Where was he? He was in the larder. I think he was looking
for Arthur. Well, he was looking in the wrong place. If there was a Christmas
party going on down the street, Arthur would already be there, totally sizzled
and leading a sing song, as well you know. And that's where you should be, Mrs
H. You're quite right. The revelers await. Excellent. All together now. God,
raise you merry gentle men, let nothing you dismay. On BBC Radio 4... We are all
a unique accumulation of our own unique experiences and knowledge. The poet Lem
Sisay looks at uniqueness. Rainfall, like applause, is utterly unique every time
at hand. Reflecting on the occasions he's stood out. In a room full of
graduates, people without degrees can sometimes get defensive about it. Not me!
Lem Sisay is the one and only. He like an all. Starting next Friday morning.