TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-06H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Gonzales Senorito and rapper, YouTuber and boxer KSI. This is the BBC World
Service, the world's radio station. It's five o'clock in London. Hello and
welcome to Newsday on the BBC World Service with Riddhi Klebi and James
Cottonall. Ukraine is our top story and Tuesday was a tale of two speeches.
First up was President Putin of Russia justifying his invasion of Ukraine,
falsely describing the Kiev government as a neo-Nazi regime. A few hours later
the US President Joe Biden delivered a speech in Poland saying that Ukraine was
fighting for democracy and freedom. President Putin's craving lust for land and
power will fail and the Ukrainian people's love for their country will prevail.
Democracies of the world will stand guard over freedom today, tomorrow and
forever. We'll hear from a former US ambassador to Russia. And Kenyan Senator
Gloria Oruova tells us why she made a very public gesture in Parliament to draw
attention to the problem of period poverty. That's after the latest world news.
This is Danielle Jauowiecka with the BBC News, hello. Days before the
anniversary of Russia's invasion of Ukraine, President Biden has given a defiant
speech painting Ukraine's struggle as a generational conflict for freedom.
Addressing a crowd in the Polish capital Warsaw, he said that Washington and its
allies would never waver in their support for Kiev. Mr Biden said that what he
called President Putin's lust for power and land would fail. Appetites of the
autocrat cannot be appeased. They must be opposed. Autocrats only understand one
word, no, no, no. In remarks aimed at Russians, Mr Biden said the West had not
plotted to attack their country, as asserted by Mr Putin in a stridently anti-
Western speech to Russian parliamentarians earlier. The head of NATO has accused
President Putin of being a terrorist,