TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-03H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The newsroom is next. This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio station.
At two hours GMT on the BBC World Service. President of the Russian Federation
Vladimir Putin. The State of California. Funerals in the West Bank for
Palestinian civilians killed in the latest Israeli raid. And Mozambique braces
for Cyclone Freddie. Plus we'll learn how our prehistoric ancestors got their
food. All that coming up after this bulletin. BBC News. Hello, I'm Gareth
Barlow. The head of the United Nations has condemned Russia's invasion of
Ukraine as an affront to the world's conscience. Antonia Guterres was speaking
at a special meeting of the UN General Assembly in New York. It's debating a
motion tabled by Kiev's allies nearly a year after the invasion began, calling
for Russia to pull out of Ukraine immediately and unconditionally. The Kremlin's
ambassador Vasily Nebyanza accused the West of wanting to defeat Russia at any
cost. He said the US and its allies were prepared to plunge the entire world
into war. I think that today, one year after the active stage of the Ukraine
crisis began, very few doubt that it's not Ukraine that's fighting Russia,
because Ukraine basically spent all of its military potential in the first weeks
of the special military operation. Rather, it's the collective West in the form
of the United States, NATO and the European Union. The Biden administration says
it's extremely concerned by levels of violence in Israel and the occupied West
Bank. The State Department spokesman Ned Price made the remark after a raid by
Israeli troops in Nablus left 11 Palestinians dead and about 100 wounded.
Several Palestinian gunmen were among those killed, as well as civilians. Mr.
Price called for calm. We had productive conversations in recent days with the
parties and US regional partners in support of efforts to prevent further
violence. We are deeply concerned that the impact of today's raid could set back
efforts aimed at restoring calm for both Israelis and Palestinians. Today's
events further underscore the urgent need for both sides to work together to
improve the security situation in the West Bank. A court in California has
sentenced a man convicted of killing the American hip-hop star Nipsey Hussle to
a minimum of 60 years in jail. Eric Holder shot the rapper four years ago in the
Los Angeles neighborhood where both men had grown up. Peter Bowes reports. After
a trial last year, Eric Holder was found guilty of fatally shooting Nipsey
Hussle in 2019 outside a clothing store the rapper owned in South Los Angeles.
As well as first-degree murder, he was also convicted of wounding two
bystanders. Nipsey Hussle was a rising star, a former gang member known for his
musical talents and community activism. He'd worked with artists including Snoop
Dogg and Drake and won two Grammy Awards after his death. It was a level of
success that eluded Holder, who'd been an aspiring rapper in the same community.
Media reports in the United States say the daughter and son-in-law of Donald
Trump have been summoned to testify before a federal grand jury. They say Ivanka
Trump and Jared Kushner have been called to give evidence on the former
president's role in the storming of the US Congress two years ago. Both had
served as White House officials in the Trump administration. World News from the
BBC. Vigils have been held in several Portuguese cities in support of victims of
sexual abuse committed by members of the Roman Catholic clergy. Organisers say
the gatherings were staged to express shame at recent revelations about the
abuse of nearly 5,000 children over the past 70 years. A report published last
week by an independent commission found that three-quarters of the perpetrators
were priests. Hundreds of rescue workers in northern China are attempting to
reach more than 50 miners still trapped in an open-cast coal pit that collapsed
on Wednesday. Two people are known to have died at the mine in Inner Mongolia.
Six others have been rescued. President Xi Jinping has ordered an investigation.
Although mine safety has improved in China, fatal accidents are still common.
British and Irish political leaders have condemned the shooting of an off-duty
policeman in Northern Ireland. He's in a critical condition in hospital after
being attacked at a sports complex on Wednesday night. The UK's Prime Minister,
Rishi Sunak, said he was appalled. His Irish counterpart, Lia Faradka, called it
a grotesque act of attempted murder. And the British government has announced
plans to make major changes to the way English football is governed. The
proposals include setting up an independent regulator. Dan Rowan has more. The
independent football regulator is designed to prevent a repeat of the failings
that led to the collapse of Bury FC in 2019, one of a host of clubs to suffer
financial crisis in recent years. The body would oversee a licensing system to
ensure clubs are run sustainably, be responsible for a strengthened owners and
directors test, and could block teams from joining breakaway competitions like
the European Super League. With the Football League wanting a greater share of
the Premier League's record wealth and the FA pushing for more funding for
grassroots football, the regulator could also intervene to decide how much money
flows down the pyramid. That's the latest BBC News. Hello, I'm Peter Goffin and
you're listening to the Newsroom from the BBC World Service. Joe Biden went to
Eastern Europe this week to consolidate and reaffirm support for Ukraine as it
approaches the first anniversary of Russia's invasion. On Tuesday in Warsaw, the
US president called on the democracies of the world to stand up for freedom. And
24 hours later, that plea was put into action. A block of former Soviet
countries within NATO, known as the Bucharest Nine, signed a declaration
condemning Russia. They also asked Mr. Biden for a stronger US defence presence
in the region. The Romanian president, Klaus Johannes, co-hosted the summit.
Almost one year ago, Russia tried to destroy the European and Euro-Atlantic
security and the rules-based international order. Russia is acting on a pattern
of aggressive conduct, which we have already witnessed in the Republic of
Moldova, in Georgia and in Ukraine itself. Vladimir Putin himself has been busy
touting his war as a fight for Russian freedom, against Western aggression. On
Wednesday, tens of thousands of people packed into Moscow's Luzhniki Stadium for
a patriotic concert and rally headlined by President Putin. Our Russia editor
Steve Rosenberg was there. The Kremlin put on a show to rally Russians around
their president and his war in Ukraine. At the stadium, which hosted the 2018
Football World Cup final, patriotic pop songs were the warm-up act, plus
speeches reminding Russians that their country had defeated Napoleon and Hitler
and would be victorious in Ukraine. The event was highly staged-managed. Tens of
thousands of people had been bussed in from colleges, factories and state
enterprises. Enter Vladimir Putin. Sharing the stage with Russian soldiers back
from the front line, the Kremlin leader declared, Right now there is a battle on
our historical frontiers for our people. They are fighting heroically,
courageously, bravely. Three cheers, hurrah! State propaganda here tells
Russians that it was the West that started the war in Ukraine. Many in the
stadium seem to believe that. We didn't start all this, Irina tells me. I trust
our president. Not everyone here, though, was so enthusiastic. In temperatures
of minus 15, we saw large crowds streaming away from the stadium, even before
Vladimir Putin arrived. Steve Rosenberg in Moscow. Well, in New York City, the
United Nations has called a special meeting of the General Assembly to consider
a resolution for just and lasting peace. If it's adopted, the UN would demand
that Russia leave Ukraine immediately and without conditions. Now, a vote is not
expected to take place until later on Thursday, but the UN Secretary General,
Antonio Guterres, has already condemned the Kremlin's war. That invasion is an
affront to our collective conscience. It is a violation of United Nations
Charter and international law. The position of the United Nations is
unequivocal. We are committed to the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
Antonio Guterres there. Our New York correspondent, Netta Taufik, told Charlotte
Gallagher more about this proposed resolution. Ukraine and their supporters,
obviously the West, are hoping that they get close to the number of support that
they've gotten with previous General Assembly resolutions. Those include two
from March that denounced the invasion, that called for, you know, the
humanitarian situation to improve and criticized Russia for it, and then one
from October that condemned Russia's illegal annexation. And in all of those
votes, they got more than 140 members out of the 193 bodies. So really only a
handful of countries voted alongside Russia. And those resolutions, many more
chose rather to abstain from the vote at all. So that is what Western nations
are hoping, because for them, leading into the one year anniversary, they're
really hoping to once again show just how isolated Russia is all these months
on. Obviously, it sends a message and it's symbolic if this is backed. But is
Russia paying any attention to this, really? Yeah, I mean, we have to remember,
right, that this is a General Assembly resolution. It's where Russia doesn't
have a veto, like the Security Council. So like you say, it is very much
symbolic. I don't think anybody is under the illusion that this is going to
change President Putin's calculus or change anything on the ground. But rather,
I think it's very important for the international community, from the West's
perspective, to be able to say that they are going to stand up to the principles
of the UN Charter. Netatafik in New York. For almost two decades after its
founding, the electric car giant Tesla was based in California. Then, in 2021,
its co-founder Elon Musk had a change of heart and abruptly moved its
headquarters to Austin, Texas. In a parting shot, he called California the land
of taxes, overregulation, and litigation. But now, he's back. We're excited to
announce that Tesla's global engineering headquarters will be right here, the
former headquarters of Hewlett Packard. This is, I think, a poetic transition
from the company that founded Silicon Valley to Tesla. And we're very excited to
make this our global engineering headquarters. Mr. Musk made the announcement
alongside the governor of California, Gavin Newsom. I'm appreciative of you and
appreciative of our partnership over the course of the last 20 years. And let's
see this as the beginning of something even more extraordinary on the journey to
dominate in this space and to change the way we produce and consume energy in
this state, in this nation, and the world we're trying to build. California
Governor Gavin Newsom there. So what's behind this move by Tesla? Our North
America technology reporter, James Clayton, told me more. This really marks a
vault fast from Elon Musk, another one. And it kind of shows you how much power
California still has in the world of tech. Because Gavin Newsom, when you saw
that press release, was smiling ear to ear that Elon Musk had decided to move
the engineering HQ of the business back to California. And it's pretty clear
that he thinks this is a bit of a coup for California. And I think there is also
in this a kind of impression that California is losing tech businesses,
particularly the area of Silicon Valley, San Francisco. So this is a bit of good
news for the area. So there's all sorts of things that this announcement kind of
displays. But I think in particular, it shows that California is a huge market
for Tesla. And Elon Musk simply couldn't move everything out of the state to
Texas. So seemingly, that relationship between Tesla and California is
improving. But at the same time, the company is still facing government
investigations and regulatory reviews by the state. Exactly. And if you look at
how tech is regulated, California is usually at the forefront of that. And that
is absolutely the case when it comes to driverless cars. And there's a
California rule that has come into place that you can't over exaggerate, or
exaggerate, I guess, how effective the driverless part of your car is. And I
think anyone who follows Tesla will tell you that Elon Musk has said time and
time again that by the end of the year, Tesla will reach pretty much full
driverless capacity. So it will essentially be able to drive itself. Year after
year, that does not come to pass. And in fact, he's being sued in a class action
lawsuit about those claims. And certainly, new California regulation should mean
that Elon Musk should not make these claims again. So you have all sorts of
regulatory pressure kind of almost aimed at people like Elon Musk that is coming
out of California. At the same time, you're getting Elon Musk saying, oh, I
actually am going to move my engineering HQ back to California. Once again, that
shows you the power that California still has in tech. James Clayton in San
Francisco. You're listening to the BBC World Service, our top headlines this
hour. The UN General Assembly is meeting in New York to discuss a demand for
Russia to withdraw immediately and unconditionally from Ukraine nearly a year
after its invasion began. The United States says it's deeply concerned after an
Israeli raid in the occupied West Bank left 11 Palestinians dead and many more
wounded. And a man who shot dead the American rapper Nipsey Hussle has been
jailed for 60 years by a court in California. Now let's shift our attention to a
cave in France, where researchers have found evidence of the first bows and
arrows ever used by modern humans in Europe. The findings published in the
journal Science Advances means European archery is 40,000 years older than we
thought. The newsroom's David Lewis is here to tell us more. David, what do we
know about this discovery? Yeah, it's really an astonishing find. Up until this
new study, the earliest known use of bows and arrows for hunting in Europe was
sometime between 10,000 to 12,000 years ago. Those tips were discovered in peat
bogs, mostly around modern day northern Germany. And this new evidence comes
south of there in Grotte Mandrin rock shelter overlooking the Rhône River. And
it wasn't the most straightforward find. The area was first excavated in 1990.
And amongst the horse bones, Neanderthal teeth and stone tools discovered, the
site contained multiple layers of archaeological remains stretching back more
than 80,000 years. There's evidence Neanderthals and their cousins, Homo
sapiens, both lived in the cave complex. The key discovery here was of tiny
stone points dating back some 54,000 years. These hand cut flints are key
because all the other elements connected to archery such as wood, leather,
resins, etc, are perishable and are rarely preserved in such ancient sites. So
how do the experts assess where they were from and how old they were? Well, the
stone pieces found by specialists in this so called archaeological layer E
attributed to Homo sapiens stood out as more finely sculpted than the flints in
the layers above and below. All right, our ancient ancestors using these tools
to hunt for food. How did researchers figure out that's what they were used for?
Well, it's not just the ancient people who are using them. As proof, researchers
took it upon themselves to produce or reproduce the tiny flint heads. They're
smaller than a penny coin, some less than one centimetre wide, and fired them
off as arrowheads with a specially produced replica bow at dead goats to see if
they could pierce animal hide. Lor Metz from Marseilles University, a co-author
of the study, said we couldn't throw them at the animals any other way than with
a bow because they were too tiny and too light to be efficient. In short, the
force of a shooting arrow was needed to bring down prey with such a small flint.
Interestingly, Metz also said there was evidence Homo sapiens in the anathals
met in the cave at some point, though she doesn't know if that was a friendly
encounter or otherwise. All right, thanks, David. David Lewis, a reporter with
many arrows to his quiver. The Biden administration says it's extremely
concerned by growing levels of violence in Israel and the Palestinian
territories. On Wednesday, the Israeli army killed 11 Palestinians and wounded
dozens more. In the town of Nablus in the occupied West Bank, within hours,
funerals were held for some of the raid's civilian victims, including a 72-year-
old man. Our Middle East correspondent Tom Bateman sent this report. We are in
one of five hospitals in Nablus now treating people with bullet wounds, and I've
just been up to one of the wards where the doctor described this as one of the
worst events of his kind he's seen in recent years. He called it a disaster. We
spoke to a 15-year-old boy who has a bullet wound to the leg. He told me that he
was standing near militants and he was hit by Israeli gunfire. And what is so
striking about this is the time of day this raid happened. It was the middle of
the morning when the old city of Nablus is packed with families and people
shopping, when the Israelis encircled a building where they said three militants
were holed up. Those men were all killed, all senior Palestinian militants and
members of the Lions Den group, which is a militant group that's been active in
the city over the last year. But the other thing that is so striking about
what's happened here is, first of all, the death toll, which matches the most
deadly raid in the occupied West Bank in the last two decades, and it's the
number of wounded. So the Palestinian Health Ministry is saying that more than
80 people have gunshot wounds. On the ward we were just in, they were treating
at least eight people. One of them also, they said, was shot in the back. Now,
the Israeli military says it operated because the men that it targeted, it was
trying to arrest them, they refused to surrender. It says the Palestinian
militants fired on them and they upgraded their response, firing shoulder-
launched missiles towards this building. It says that those men were involved in
the planning and the killing of an Israeli soldier last year, and also they were
planning imminent attacks. The Palestinian Authority, though, has described this
as a massacre, and amid reported concerns about retaliation, Hamas, the militant
group, has said that its patience is running out. And all of this, when the
United States have been trying to broker a kind of understanding between the
Palestinian leadership and the Israelis to ease what have been spiralling
tensions recently, this shows that those attempts are failing. Our Middle East
correspondent Tom Bateman in Noblesse in the West Bank. Now, Gareth has some
other stories from our news desk. Canada's military has said it recently
discovered evidence of Chinese surveillance efforts in the Arctic. The
discovery, first reported by the Canadian newspaper, the Globe and Mail, has
raised questions about China's activities in the far north. It comes after a
suspected Chinese spy balloon floated through US and Canadian airspace before it
was shot down by the American military. Brazil says it will suspend beef exports
to its biggest market, China, from Thursday after finding a single case of mad
cow disease. The agriculture minister said the sample was sent to the World
Health Organization for Animal Health for further checks. Brazil is one of the
world's largest exporters of beef. And 5 million seagrass seeds are being
planted off the coast of Wales to create underwater meadows to fight climate
change. On Wednesday, 50,000 were laid in sands off the northwest of the
country. Rory Francis from the World Wildlife Fund Wales said it would make a
real difference in terms of both absorbing carbon and also restoring really
valuable and important marine habitats. Thank you, Gareth. Tropical cyclone
Freddie has battered the east coast of Madagascar. Heavy rains, thunderstorms
and powerful winds tore roofs off houses and triggered a storm surge. At least
four people were killed. And UN officials now say Freddie is forecast to hit the
African mainland in Mozambique. This local resident gave his assessment of the
preparations there. I think work done so far is commendable by the government.
They have been caught off guard several times, so I think they've learned some
good lessons. One is that they're risky people themselves. They want to see so
that they believe. The second thing is the government itself. The sooner they
get on the ground, the sooner they act, the better for the population. They can
save more lives. We heard more from Jose Tembe, a journalist based in Maputo,
the capital of Mozambique. In some of the places the cyclone will pass through,
there has been a test of resilience over the last 48 hours. Even before cyclone
Freddie, we could see cars on television submerged, ceilings blown up and
electricity disrupted. Residents say flooding is worsened not only by the rain,
but also by ditches which are clogged. People are desperate. Their homes are not
resilient, and they have not been able to stock food and water for the cyclone
days because they can't afford it. People are talking food, fortifying their
houses. Awareness or early warnings are not enough. Jose Tembe in Maputo. Now
let's check in with Richard Newman for the latest from the world of sport. Thank
you. The Manchester City head coach Pep Guardiola says his players should feel
proud rather than down after drawing one all with RB Leipzig in their Champions
League last 16 first leg. At full time in Germany, he gathered his team in a
huddle on the pitch. He's explained why. There was heads down. I said, why are
you heads down? You had your heads up. It was really good. The game you played.
People were like, it doesn't matter. You play the way you play the game you
should play. We could be more at the end, look more early or what happened.
Yeah, of course, but it's going to happen. Romelu Lukaku scored a late goal in
Inter Milan's 1-0 win over 10-man Porto. The Women's World Champions, the USA,
have retained the She Believes Cup after beating Brazil 2-1 in Texas. One of the
other favourites to win the World Cup this August, the European title winners
England, won their own mini tournament, thrashing Belgium 6-1 to claim the All-
Ireland Cup. England will become the first major football nation to have the
sport government regulated. Plans will be formally outlined on Thursday, but the
BOSI will have power to block clubs from joining closed competitions like the
failed European Super League from two years ago. Strike actions being avoided by
the Welsh rubber union team after compromises on key issues were agreed in a
contract dispute with the governing body. It had put Saturday's Six Nations Cup
in the hands of England in Cardiff in doubt, but it will now go ahead as
planned. Captain Ken Owens says it's not been a good 18 months for the game in
Wales. It's got to be a long-term solution because Welsh rugby can't keep going
on this merry go round of crisis after crisis. Everybody in Welsh rugby, we
really need to pull together now to find the best way forward and we need to do
it collaboratively together to put Welsh rugby back at the top end of world
rugby and not the laughing stock, which I think we are at the moment. And in
cricket, England have named an unchanged side for the second test with New
Zealand, which starts in Wellington on Friday. It means James Anderson will play
after returning to the top of the bowling rankings at the age of 40. Thank you,
Richard. Now, there are just 10 weeks to go until King Charles's coronation, but
there are concerns that some church towers in the UK will be silent over the 6th
of May weekend due to a shortage of people who know how to properly ring the
bells. The BBC's Jo Black has been to the English town of Ipswich to meet a team
of campanologists preparing to ring for the king. On the waterfront at Ipswich,
the bells at the Church of St Clement ring out. It's a deconsecrated church and
this isn't the weekly service, it's a training session. Balance to balance, so
when we ring rounds in a big church, you can control, that's it. Now control the
backstroke. Most of the new recruits have answered the call to ring for the
king, a recent appeal by the campanology community to get more people interested
in acquiring this skill. Among them, Freya, a 17 year old A-level student who
has been ringing since November and says being involved on coronation weekend
will be something to remember. It's like being in a church, you know, it's like
being something I've been interested in, but I suppose ring for the king made me
think, this is the time to get into it. All yours. Amanda Richmond from the
Association of Ringing Teachers is guiding the new members and is pleased with
their progress. We want to make sure that there are ringers for every church so
that we can all ring out for ring for the king for the coronation. In some areas
of the country, bell ringing is thriving, but it's not the only way to get
people involved. Those here at St Paul's in Birmingham are aged between 11 and
80 years old and their bell ringing school is full. But in other places there
can be very few. Simon Linford is from the Central Council of Church Bell
Ringers. We probably had a couple of decades of not really realising that the
ringing community was getting older and failing to replace ourselves, but now
we're actively looking to replace ourselves. It takes around 10 to 12 hours of
one-to-one tuition to get a basic level of ringing. Still time to learn ahead of
May the 6th. That report by Joe Black and amongst a group of bell ringers
preparing for the coronation of King Charles. A reminder of the main news now,
the UN General Assembly is meeting in New York to discuss a demand for Russia to
withdraw immediately from Ukraine, nearly a year after the invasion began. And
that brings us to the end of this edition of the Newsroom from the BBC World
Service. Thanks for listening. Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, show me the
passport. At first I felt a little bit like I was limited in the way how I can
express myself. But then I like it even more because you close your eyes and you
just need to imagine. Ruslan Aldarov, not a Kazakh? Why isn't the nationality
stated in the passport? Why do you say he's not a Kazakh? He is a Kazakh,
absolutely. I would be happy if people just laugh and enjoy it. The man lost his
passport. He must give it back. Oh, what a face. The Passport, Saturday at 19
and Sunday at 12 GMT. This is Assignment on the BBC World Service, investigating
why, a year on from the invasion of Ukraine, many Russians support, or at least
accept, a war against their closest neighbour. Why they think they're the ones
fighting for survival. We find out how the Kremlin's alternative truth has been
constructed and how a nation's memories have been exploited. That's Assignment,
with me Tim Hewell and Nick Sturdy after the news. The United States says it's
extremely concerned by violence in Israel and the occupied West Bank. Earlier on
Wednesday, a raid by Israeli troops in Nablus left 11 Palestinians dead and
about 100 wounded. A US court has sentenced a man convicted of killing the hip-
hop star Nipsey Hussle to at least 60 years in jail. Eric Holder shot the rapper
four years ago in Los Angeles. Hundreds of rescue workers in northern China are
attempting to reach more than 50 miners trapped in an open-cast coal pit that
collapsed on Wednesday. Two people are known to have died. Six others have been
rescued so far. The Attorney General of Ecuador says she'll ask for corruption
charges to be brought against the former President, Lenin Moreno. He denies the
accusations, which are linked to the construction of a hydroelectric plant.
Severe weather warnings have been issued for parts of New Zealand's North
Island. Heavy rain and thunderstorms are forecast to hit areas still recovering
from a cyclone which killed at least 11 people. The British government has
announced plans to make major changes to the way English football is governed.
The proposals include setting up an independent regulator, which could block
teams from joining breakaway competitions. And Brazil is suspending beef exports
to its biggest market, China, from Thursday, after finding a single case of mad
cow disease. The agriculture minister said a sample had been sent to the World
Organisation for Animal Health for further checks. World News from the BBC. This
guy's got a gun in front of him. Is he pointing at me? It was a cold, grey
morning, almost exactly as it was forecast. Almost exactly a year ago. I was
filming at Khastomel Airfield, just outside the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv, when we
ran into three soldiers. He says get out. A Ukrainian patrol, I assumed, until I
saw their uniforms. Those are Russians. Here comes a helicopter. Here comes a
helicopter. OK, let's go. Get in the car. It was a Ukrainian counterattack and
the beginning of a full-scale war between two countries that had been so
entwined that just a few years earlier, a popular Ukrainian comic called
Volodymyr Zelensky had co-hosted Russian television's New Year's Eve show.
Today, one of those who swayed along in the audience, the Kremlin's top
propagandist, Vladimir Solovyov, calls for cities in the country that President
Zelensky now leads to be wiped off the face of the earth. And yet, many Russians
believe, as one of the country's biggest stars sings, that right is on their
side, that they're the ones under attack, fighting for survival. You're
listening to Assignment on the BBC World Service with me, Nick Sturdy. And me,
Tim Hewell. We've been covering Russia for most of our lives. And in this
programme, we're trying to understand how millions of educated 21st century
citizens have been persuaded to stay in the country. And how many of those
educated 21st century citizens have been persuaded to support, or at least
accept, a war with their closest neighbours, and inhabit what seems a parallel
universe. Maybe it's too easy to say they've simply been brainwashed, zombified
by Kremlin lies. You cannot be turned into zombie if you don't want to be
zombie. And we're not the only ones who have been forced to believe in this
truth. We're going to find out how Russia's parallel world has been built over
many years by playing on a nation's memories and fears. In the spring of 2014,
the year ushered in by Zelensky on Russian TV, Russia seized government
buildings across eastern Ukraine, including in Donetsk, where I was filming.
It's a mainly Russian-speaking city, and perhaps more than anywhere else, the
place around which the Kremlin's alternative truth has been built. Armed
separatists declared a breakaway People's Republic in reaction to the overthrow,
shortly before, of Ukraine's president Viktor Yanukovych. He fled after massive
protests against his refusal to sign a deal with the European Union. But many
Ukrainians in Donetsk and other eastern cities, who'd voted for Yanukovych in
democratic elections four years earlier, saw it as a Western-backed coup
orchestrated by Ukrainian nationalists. So too did volunteer fighters who came
from Russia itself to defend Donetsk, including one called Pavel Kukhmirov, who
cooked us a military supper of beef and macaroni in his barracks. Why do I say
Donetsk is Jerusalem? Because this is a holy war of the Russian people for its
future, its ideals and its great country that was cut into pieces 25 years ago.
Holy war? He meant that Donetsk had been retaken for Russia just as the
Crusaders retook Jerusalem. Then such lofty language seemed outlandish. Now it's
commonplace in Russia, thanks partly to the information war waged by
nationalists like Pavel. He's still in Donetsk, blogging prolifically on social
media. He's a rather intellectual crusader whose nom de guerre is Shakespeare,
because he loves the playwright so much. But he had to take up a gun, he told us
then, to help save Donetsk from a Ukrainian Nazi bloodbath. Now, when we speak
to him again on the phone, he claims it's only last year's Russian invasion that
finally averted that threat. If it hadn't struck first, there would have been
genocide, just like Rwanda, pure and simple. But where's the evidence for this?
For years before 2014, they had already been promising to slaughter Moscovoids.
Moscow is a slave! Moscow is a slave! A video clip, much shared by bloggers like
Pavel, shows young protesters in Western Ukraine in 2014, briefly chanting,
Moskaliyaku nahiliyaku, hang the Muscovite, an old contemptuous term for
Russians. It's just one of the tiny grains of fact used to build myths and
spread fear. And the shells that Ukraine has intermittently fired at Donetsk
since 2014, trying to regain its own territory, are also supposedly evidence of
its murderous intent. Pavel says he's lost comrades. Half the lads you saw then
are gone. After 30 were killed, I stopped counting. Ever since 2014, the
Kremlin-controlled media has kept the suffering of Donetsk near the top of the
news. And that's convinced many Russians that they'd already been at war for
eight years when Putin's so-called special military operation began last
February. Even now, relatively minor Ukrainian attacks on Donetsk are reported
in detail, with no mention of far worse Russian attacks elsewhere in Ukraine.
But the hyperbole, spread by bloggers like Pavel and repeated on talk shows,
doesn't stop there. If Donetsk falls, they argue, all of Russia may eventually
be lost. On many Western platforms, they say openly that Russia should be carved
up into 26 separate states. Who says that? Look, Ukraine's head of military
intelligence, Mr. Kirill Budanov, has a map in his office of Russia divided up.
Another grain of truth. Weirdly, perhaps it's a bad joke, but it's a good one.
Budanov does have a map a bit like that. You can imagine how Russia's
influential talk shows lap that up. On one 60 Minutes, host Yevgeny Popov told
viewers the map showed how Kiev dreams of decolonising Russia. And yet, when we
talked to Popov, he insisted, following the Kremlin line, that this isn't a war
against Ukrainians, it's just against their Western masters. We are at war with
NATO and Nazi regime of Zelensky. For security reasons, he says. Or is it just
too uncomfortable to put himself in his father's shoes right now? Popov's an
experienced correspondent, and yet there's something about his approach to his
work that takes me aback. You were chief correspondent of Russian TV in New York
for six years. Yes. I'm interested, did that change the way you thought about
the West? I knew everything about the United States before I came to New York.
Really? And I did not change my mind on anything, because I knew everything. We
have free press in our country. Who are you to dictate us how to live? That's
the main question I can ask the Western world. But if Russia invades a sovereign
neighbouring country, how is that not ultimate dictation of its will? Ask
yourself. Well, if Great Britain invades a sovereign country as Iraq, tell me,
how do you feel when you occupy Malvinas Islands? Talking about the Falklands?
Of course, it's Malvinas Islands, and they are Argentinian islands, not yours.
You're asking me about invasion? What's the hypocrisy, man? As he's talking, I
feel myself transported back to 1982, the year the Falklands, or Malvinas, were
retaken by Britain after an Argentine invasion. And I was a student in Leonid
Brezhnev's Soviet Union. And what was surprising in that then isolated country
was that many people I met believed, or claimed to believe, that they knew more
about the West than I did. Has anything changed, in your opinion, in the
relations between Russia and the West since Soviet times? I was born in Soviet
Union. I like this country, of course. And nobody asked me, when you destroyed
my country. And we made a great mistake when we hugged each other in the 90s.
Oh, really? When the Western Russia embraced, when it hugged, that was a
mistake? You destroyed my country. How do you think I can feel about that? But
today, in Russia, it's not just servants of the Kremlin's media who inculcate
scorn for the West. There are other voices who've started scoffing in similar
fashion on their own initiative, who appeal to a younger, cooler audience. Can I
introduce myself? My name is Ivan Kondakov. I was born in Arkhangelsk. It's a
northern part of Russia. Now I'm an engineer. I'm a scientist in aviation
structures. And also I'm a poet. I'm a singer. And I'm a comedy maker, to say it
like that. In this slick video, Ivan, a jovial character with full blonde beard,
is strumming his guitar and clinking champagne glasses with friends in his
kitchen as they tuck into plates of brawn. Brawn? Well, it's an old-fashioned
Russian dish that has to be boiled for hours. And that's the joke in Ivan's
song. Russia's not short of cheap energy. So we can enjoy our lovely pigs'
trotters in jelly, thank you very much, while you Western Russophobes who won't
buy our gas just shiver through the winter. Ivan's nationalism, like Yevgeny
Popov's, dates back to the 1990s, when I lived in Russia and I remember it well.
He was a teenager back then. As you know, we have lost the Cold War. Industries
have been closed. People lose their jobs. So, yes, it was a feeling of shame, a
feeling of absence of the future. But at the same time, the 90s was a point when
there was a democracy, was there not? Democracy is the same fairy tale as a
communism. They say you have some choice. In fact, you have no choice. Your
salary can be measured. Democracy and elections cannot be measured. That means
it is nothing. Territory, however, can be measured. And in 2014, Russia got more
when Vladimir Putin announced to a jubilant Moscow crowd what he called the
return of Crimea to Russia. It was that seizure of Ukrainian land that turned
Ivan, from a fairly apolitical aviation engineer, into a flag-waving patriot.
And eventually, into a Z singer and Z poet, part of what's now a whole cultural
movement, named after the letter that denotes support for the war. He's got
thousands of followers on his YouTube and Telegram channels, and his own radio
show, bringing him a measure of fame he quite enjoys. My life changed. I can see
when some people on the streets recognize me, and say, oh, hey, it's you, it's
you. I'm looking at this influence, and I think I'm doing right, because I know
the Russian mentality, know what people are worrying about, and I try my best to
make them a little smile. He mocks liberals and anti-war campaigners, who are
traitors in his book. But perhaps the biggest target of his humour, as he says,
is a group that the Kremlin also attacks ever more in its information war. LGBT
people. He has a favourite poem. Can I read it? Gay, trans, lesbians, queers,
everyone needs their own toilets. The right translation is that in English there
is a lot of words meaning genders. Everyone needs their own toilets. Sega,
megasexual, furry, curry, Harry Potter, Yuri, curry, Harry Potter, non-binary
helicopter, so plenty of them. We challenged him about his homophobia, but his
answers became ever more offensive. Do you like being intolerant? I don't
understand how people can like to be tolerant. Russia is for traditional values.
Frankly speaking, Western world now is for, we call it, satanism. You call it
what? Satanism. That's quite an apocalyptically black and white view of the
conflict, and one that Sasha Arkhipova, a social anthropologist researching
Russian attitudes to the war, has often encountered. Many, many people to whom I
was speaking, they are believers of the idea that we are living in this bipolar
world, and everybody is in the war against us. So we are not aggressors. We are
defenders, and we are defending our spiritual core. Speech from the left! To the
right! March! And the last time the Russians defended their country, their
values, and won, was in the Second World War. The Great Patriotic War, as it's
known in Russia, commemorated every year on May the 9th, Victory Day. As the
number of surviving veterans has dwindled, people carrying portraits of fathers
and grandfathers who fought have joined the parades, part of what was originally
a grassroots initiative called Immortal Regiment. The original idea was not to
commemorate victory, but to commemorate loss, and the main slogan was Never
Again. But especially after the annexation of Crimea, a lot of new people
started to participate, and the main idea for them became not Never Again, but
We Can Repeat. Why? Because they start to feel that the revolution in Ukraine is
something very bad, and the West is trying to steal Ukraine and steal our
victory, and this idea of going to war, of heroic behavior became more and more
popular every year. An idea strongly promoted by the state. Modern Russia is a
big country with different languages, and there's a lot of people who don't like
the Soviet past. So the victory in the Second World War is the only thing which
can unite people, and the presidential administration, they make this idea of
war against the evil, against the Nazis, the new common ground to the new
Russian identity. We are the sons and daughters and grandsons of people who
fight the evil, and now this evil is in the territory of Ukraine. Last year on
Victory Day, Vladimir Putin, carrying a portrait of his father, led a million
people through Red Square. He wore the orange and black ribbon of St. George,
originally a tsarist military decoration that was used again in the Second World
War. Since 2014, it's been promoted and worn as a symbol of the so-called
Russian Spring, the annexation of Crimea and Ukraine. And now a support for
today's war. That's why I'm talking about this cult of dead, like about the new
civil religion. It became a symbol on the battlefields too. Those young Russian
paratroopers I saw, who landed at Hastormal airfield a year ago, all wore thick
orange and black stripes sewn along the lengths of their sleeves, hardly
effective camouflage. Days later, pictures emerged of scores of dead Russian
soldiers in the outskirts of Kiev, all wearing the same stripes, dead
testimonies to a cult of reliving heroic history. Not long after me, Russia's
most celebrated war correspondent, Alexander Kotz, also reported from Hastormal
airfield, he called it a new site of Russian history. Its occupiers, though of
course he didn't use that word, were worthy successors to Russian warriors who
fought the Turks in the 19th century and the Germans in the 20th. By chance, I'm
an old acquaintance of Kotz. We've been in contact since we met in 2008, after
he reported on Russia's invasion of Georgia. Kotz reports for the popular daily
Komsomolskaya Pravda, which Putin himself says he reads every morning on his way
to work. Kotz's Telegram channel and those of other war bloggers are followed by
millions. They've become leaders of public opinion for certain social groups.
People may not trust official statements on TV, but they'll certainly read war
correspondents on Telegram. Kotz says openly that his aim is to raise Russian
morale, and he says he's learned a lesson about that from the enemy. Driving
through Russia early in the war, he saw no patriotic posters, whereas in
Ukraine... When we entered towns we liberated that had been under Ukrainian
control, we found every park had a monument to a defender of the fatherland,
every school had a portrait of a soldier. They had been building up their
ideology, and I have to say they'd done it rather well. So Kotz set out to
create Russian heroes. He wrote, for example, about a young airman called Pyotr
Kashtanov, shot down, along with his navigator, by Ukrainian anti-aircraft guns
over enemy territory. They started to walk towards our lines and we were 30
kilometres away, but the navigator had a broken spine and he said, just leave me
behind. But Kashtanov replied, we'll get out of this together, I won't leave
you. To Russians, his experience recalled the story turned into an iconic film
of a Second World War pilot, Alexei Mariasiev, who was badly injured in both
legs when he was shot down by the Germans and crawled through snow-bound forests
back to Russian territory. I was very touched when one man told me he'd read my
story to his child at bedtime and he said stories like that should be taught in
schools in patriotism hour. And yet, despite all the propaganda for the war,
anthropologist Sasha Arkhipova's research suggests most Russians just accept it,
rather than actually supporting it. Russian government punish you for any type
of street rallies, protests. So people feel more and more you cannot do
anything. That's what psychologists called enforced helplessness. One of my
informants, she gave me this image that I'm like a leaf in the stream. I'm just
going somewhere and I cannot influence on anything that is happening around me.
And I don't like this war and people are dying, but what can I do? Arkhipova
says that enforced helplessness may even lead to enforced patriotism, a feeling
of my country right or wrong, because if there's nothing they can do, opponents
of the war who stay in Russia may accept elements of the Kremlin's truth just to
stay sane. Even if you have a possibility to read, I don't know, Telegram
channel, maybe you don't want to do it because you are very tired of this
situation. So it's not brainwashing because people are choosing to believe in
this truth. But for how much longer? BBC Russian service researchers have
corroborated the deaths of more than 14,600 Russian military personnel in
Ukraine over the last year. But the real figure is thought to be at least twice
as high, probably more. So will the ever-rising death toll change what Russians
choose to believe, or will it just reinforce the Kremlin's truth, because no one
wants to believe that a son, husband or friend died in vain? The nine years that
Pavel, fighter, blogger and Shakespeare lover, has spent on the front line seems
only to have strengthened his patriotism. What makes Shakespeare a great writer
is that he is able to look at reality through another person's eyes. What do you
think the war looks like for ordinary Ukrainians? Look, how can I put myself in
the position of people who are trying to kill me every day? We are on our own
land, let's get out the whip. The words of the Zed singer Ivan Kondakov in this
video full of triumphant images of bullets, rockets, tanks and guns. There's no
wit here, only crude menace. And it's hard to remember that the performer is a
jovial, charismatic man with a PhD in scientific engineering who used to love
visiting London. Now the ugly language of songs like this is gradually filling
more and more public space in Russia, part of a tide of aggression and hatred
that citizens can't insulate themselves from. But what will Ivan and other
turbo-patriots do if the war eventually ends? Even Putin's go-to reporter
Alexander Kotz is worried about that. Defeat will really shake the trust of
those most loyal to the state. I don't even want to think about it, because it
won't be like the uprising in Ukraine in 2014, it will be far bloodier than the
one in Ukraine. It will be a lot more brutal. And it will be a lot more brutal
than the one in Ukraine. It will be a lot more brutal than the one in Ukraine.
And it will be a lot more brutal than the one in Ukraine. A coup or uprising by
the nationalist right? It's no longer inconceivable. As Ivan Kondakov sings,
this is the time of Z. And whatever happens in this war, the stories that have
built Russia's parallel world may have changed the country forever. I'm Marie
Keyworth, uncovering the hidden world of high-end mass catering. The Food Chain,
today at 11.30 and 23.30 GMT. In 50 minutes, witness history. Today we're taking
you back to 1958, when the most notorious plastic explosive in the world,
Semtex, was invented in Czechoslovakia. For more on the world's biggest drug
dealers, Outlook is next. This is The World's Radio Station.