TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-11H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Our magical wildlife revealed, close to home. Wild Isles with David
Attenborough starts on Sunday night on BBC iPlayer. BBC News at ten o'clock. The
Home Secretary has defended the government's proposals aimed at stopping illegal
immigration after UN officials warned they were a clear breach of the Refugee
Convention. Suella Bravman said that up to 80,000 people would cross the Channel
in small boats this year and the plans would ensure that number would fall
dramatically. She also insisted the measures were lawful. The Shadow Home
Secretary, Yvette Cooper, said Labour agreed with the objective of stopping the
boats but accused the government of focusing on gimmicks. People will still
arrive, they won't have asylum decisions made and they won't be returned so you
potentially have tens of thousands of additional people simply in asylum
accommodation and in hotels. That's going to make the problem worse, it's going
to be even more chaotic. It's going to add to the hotel problem that really is
completely inappropriate the way that that's working across the country at the
moment. The Met Office says last night was the coldest of the year so far. The
temperature at Kimbrace and the Highlands dropped to minus 15.2 Celsius. A
number of yellow weather warnings were in place across the UK for snow and ice.
The UN Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres, is in Ukraine to hold talks with
President Zelensky about how to extend a deal allowing the export of grain. The
United Nations and Turkey brokered the deal with Russia last July which enabled
the shipping of Ukrainian grain from Odessa via the Black Sea. It's due to
expire in ten days' time. The government has announced Â£600 million of funding
to create equal sporting opportunities for girls. Schools in England will be
required to make more sports available and deliver a minimum of two hours of
physical education per week. A major survey of plant life shows there's been a
dramatic decline in native species across the UK and Ireland. Botanists say
intensive farming and climate change are reducing the range of many well-known
plants such as heather, while invasive species planted in gardens are escaping
and spreading, threatening native plants. BBC News. In an hour here on Radio 4
we continue the story of Shamima Begum and look at how a series of media
interviews came to shape how she was perceived. But now it's time for Woman's
Hour with Nuala McGovern. Hello and welcome. The self-described feminist,
Foreign Secretary James Cleverley, in a moment, on why he is heading to his
mother's birthplace off Sierra Leone on International Women's Day. He also gives
me a cast-iron guarantee that Britain will not leave the European Convention on
Human Rights for the new small boats migration policy. And why he also feels
sometimes you have to negotiate with the Taliban. Also, we'll talk about this
quote from one of my guests today. When I joined the fire service at 18, only 1%
of us were women. Now I'm a chief fire officer and there are more chiefs called
Chris than women of the same rank. I'll be speaking to Dr. Sabrina Cohen-Hatton
on how it is to be in that space and also ask her whether the fire service is
having its Me Too moment. The poet, Kim Moore, she'll also be with us. And she
says she finds it easier to broach the topic of everyday sexism through poetry
than around a kitchen table with friends. We'll find out why. And the seven
metre woman who's only 5'4". I'm talking about Jasmine Sawyers and her record-
breaking long jump. And what about this from Jazz, talking about her younger
self. For 10 years it's been something I wanted. Over and over it's been that
pushback on my own belief. I felt like I proved my younger self right. I was
right to prove my younger self right. My question to you today, when or how have
you proved your younger self right? Do send your stories in. Because I was
struck by that but also this from the actor Ciara Knightley. She says, I'm in
awe of my 22-year-old self because I'd like a bit more of her back. It's only by
not being like that any longer that I realise how extraordinary it was. There
was never an ounce of me that wasn't going to find a way through. Is that
resonating with you this morning? Well, you can text the programme. That number
is 84844 on social media. We're at BBC Women's Hour or you can email us through
our website. Or if you want to leave us that story via a WhatsApp message or a
voice note, that number is 03 700 100 444. Well, as I mentioned, today is
International Women's Day. And we mark this by talking to the Foreign Secretary
James Cleverley, who's about to launch the UK's first international women and
girls strategy while on a visit to Sierra Leone. I caught up with him yesterday
as he was preparing for the trip and began by asking if he considers himself to
be a feminist. Yes, absolutely. Without hesitation. And I know, so the irony of
having a bloke talking about women and girls strategy on Women's Hour is not
lost on me. But absolutely, I regard myself as a feminist. And I'm very, very,
very, very proud of the work that we've collectively done getting this strategy
together, actually. Well, let's talk about it. Your connection to Sierra Leone.
Tell our listeners a little bit about that. Sierra Leone is where my mother was
from. She's not with us anymore. She passed away about 10 years ago. But that
was the land of her birth. I'm very proud of my Sierra Leonean heritage. And she
was, in a very real sense, a trailblazer. So she was born in Bow, which is
Sierra Leone's second city, and initially was a teacher. But then in the 1960s,
she came to the UK. In mid-1960s, she came to the UK to study to be a nurse and
then went on to be a midwife and spent her whole professional career working in
the NHS. And so throughout her life, she was involved in all the things that
we're talking about, or many of the things that we're talking about, in the
strategy, educating women and girls, reproductive health. And she was an
inspiration. She was an inspiration. She was an icon, a bit of a heroine to me.
And that's why I chose to perhaps slightly abuse my authority as the Foreign
Secretary and launch this women and girls strategy in Sierra Leone, in Bow,
where my mum was from. So let's talk about that. As you go to Bow, what are you
hoping to achieve, or what can the people of Bow or Sierra Leone, in a larger
context, expect? This is about a couple of things. And so some of it is about
highlighting the work that we are already doing, whether it's on sexual and
reproductive health, whether it's on preventing violence against women and girls
in conflict. And it's also about making the instruction that we are giving to
ourselves to make sure that by 2030, 80% of our bilateral programming will have
to be able to demonstrate a positive impact for women and girls. So it doesn't
mean to say that that's going to be spent exclusively on women and girls, but
it's about making sure that we stay focused on the specific needs of women and
girls when we are designing programs, when we are delivering programs, to make
sure that our commitment to women and girls is delivered through the action that
we take. You know, some would talk about parts of this strategy, it is funding,
as you mentioned, women's groups and different projects, but there has been a
cut to the aid budget, gone down from 0.7% to 0.5% of GDP. Some might say, isn't
it lip service? That budget, in fact, if it were higher, would be much more
impactful on the most vulnerable women and girls around the world. Of course, we
would always want to be able to deploy more money. I think it's worth reminding
the listeners, your listeners, that despite the fact that we, in response to the
economic hit that we got because of COVID, despite that, we are still, both in
percentage terms and absolute terms, one of the largest aid-donating countries
in the world, and we're very, very proud about it. Of course, we would like to
do more, but we have taken the circumstances forced upon us by that, the
economic impact of COVID, to look differently at how we do things, to make sure
that all the money that we are spending is done as efficiently as possible, that
we are maximising the impact of the money that we spend. These are all very,
very good disciplines. Actually, as the UK economy recovers, as our ODA, as our
aid budget increases, we can make sure that, as well as working smart and
working hard, we do so with a bigger budget. These are good disciplines to
impose now, so that as our budget increases, we know that we will continue to
deploy that money really, really effectively and change the lives of girls.
Because talking about developments, what has happened, you're a Foreign
Secretary, but that role widened since 2020 because it's not just the Foreign
and Commonwealth Office, but an enlarged Foreign, Commonwealth and Development
Office. There was a report by your own department last year that found there
would be a harmful impact to the merger and also cuts. We've talked about that
reduction in the aid budget. Is that something that you would look at again?
Andrew Mitchell, who's the Development Minister, he said aspects of the merger
were sub-optimal, and one of his priorities was to repair those structural
difficulties. Is that something that you would also like to see happen? Well,
actually, one of the things that we have seen is that having our development
expertise absolutely interwoven with our diplomatic work has made a real
difference. So as well as the development expenditure, which has helped us, I
mean, this strategy is going to build on the 10 million women that we are
determined to help us directly off the back of this strategy. So in addition to
those women that we are helping directly, through our diplomatic efforts, we can
make sure that we are helping women more broadly. Let me give you an example.
Through our diplomatic work at the UN, we worked with a number of countries to
expel Iran from the Committee on the Status of Women. We thought it was perverse
that a country that was abusing its women so egregiously at home had this status
on the world stage. Now, that was diplomatic work. That didn't involve
deployment of money. It was about diplomatic work. And that action will have a
positive impact for women around the world because we won't have that disruptive
voice on that committee. So bringing the two functions together is absolutely
key. We will, of course, always look to evolve what we do to make sure that we
are most effective. But the merger is here to stay, and it's about making sure
that we maximize the opportunity of that merger. Of the money, though, coming
back and diplomatic, I understand what you've outlined there, we'll want to know
how much money is there and how it will be spent. So getting back to the aid
pot, for example, the projects you're talking about, like ones you'll be
visiting in Sierra Leone or new initiatives, it's also been eroded, people say,
because it hasn't been ring-fenced. I was taking a look at some of the figures
because it's been used to fund refugee arrivals in the UK. The figures vary
massively. Some say one billion of UK aid spent on refugees. That's back in
2021. Some say 10%. Other figures go up to 30%. And I'm wondering if that money
is being spent within the UK, how can you expect to have that impact
internationally that you're talking about? Let's remind ourselves exactly who we
are spending that money on. We are spending that money on women and children who
are fleeing the conflict in Ukraine. I know you've done a lot of work in terms
of covering the brutality that is happening in Ukraine, perpetrated by Russian
troops, rape as a weapon of war, and the brutalisation of women and children. So
those women, disproportionately women and children, who are fleeing conflict are
recipients of that money. And I think that is completely appropriate. Of course,
what we want to do, and what we are doing, is working very, very hard to try and
bring that conflict in Ukraine to a speedy conclusion with a Ukrainian victory,
so that we can redeploy our effort and our money on situations around the world.
But the recipients of that aid money are absolutely deserving of
disproportionately women and children. Yeah, and it depends, of course, where
people are coming from. You talk about people from the Ukraine. If we move on to
channel migrants, instead the majority, according to Migration Watch, 7.4 of
those would be men that are coming to the UK. We do know that there is a new law
set to go before Parliament on Tuesday that's going to introduce new measures
aimed at removing migrants entering the UK on small boats. And it is expected
the illegal migration bill will prevent those arriving illegally from claiming
asylum or returning to the UK in the future. The Home Secretary, Suella
Braverman, said the bill would push the boundaries of international law without
breaking it. We've heard that Prime Minister Rishi Sunak says the small boats
policy will not require the UK to leave the European Convention on Human Rights.
Can you give a cast-iron guarantee that Britain will not leave the European
Convention on Human Rights in any circumstance, no matter how much pressure
there is from some conservatives over the issue of small boats and refugees?
Well, I hear you say there's pressure from some conservatives. Obviously, I deal
with this daily. That's not pressure I've received. And you've got the quote
there from the Prime Minister. And I think when it comes from the very top of
the party and the very top of government, you can take that as rock solid. The
point is a disproportionate number of those people who are coming into the
asylum system are young men. And actually, when you see the pictures from the
places where people are fleeing, you see a much broader demographic mix, old
people, young people, women and children. Yet the people arriving on our shores
are disproportionately young men. We know that many of these people are coming
from safe countries. We know that much of this travel is facilitated by
criminal, people-smuggling gangs, some of the most evil people in the world. And
what we want to do is we want to make sure that we are able to support the
people who genuinely need our support. And we are a very, very generous country.
Over the last five years, we've had 480,000 people who have come to the UK
through safe and legal routes and who now enjoy the umbrella of our protection.
We're very proud that we are able to do that. But to have the buy-in of the
British people to be generous like that, we have to show that we are preventing
those people who are abusing our system from doing so. This is about having a
robust but fair and humane immigration system that supports the people that
deserve and need our support. I mean, some would question the countries that
people are coming from, whether they are safe or not. That is a debate that has
raged for many years. But I know you referred back to the Prime Minister, but
would you give a cast-iron guarantee that Britain won't leave the European
Convention on Human Rights as Foreign Secretary? Well, I'm very happy to echo
the words that the Prime Minister has made. We were one of the founders of the
ECHR. It's incredibly important. As I say, we've got to address this issue. And
it's an issue that affects not just the UK, but countries right the way across
Europe. We have to address that, but we absolutely take seriously our
international obligations, and we will abide by those. We will make sure that
the actions that we take are compliant with the ECHR. Let me turn with Ukraine,
and particularly the issue of violence against women and children overseas. You
launched a strategy last month outlining how you want to stamp it out. But many
would say the reality is actually there's very little that can be done in terms
of tackling rape and assault in war. We could think about Ukraine in that
instance. We spoke to one of your colleagues, Lord Ahmad, the Prime Minister's
Special Representative on Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict. And heard
about the difficulty in dealing with this. I mean, are you hopeful in any way
people can be brought to justice, the prosecutions can really take place? Well,
I refuse to be fatalistic about this. And the sad truth is that women and girls
are still disproportionately affected by conflict that we are seeing in many
parts of the world, including in Ukraine. Rape is being systematically used as a
weapon of war. We must never, ever allow this to be normalized, or for anyone to
think that this is just an acceptable byproduct of war. It is not. It must never
be thought of in that way. And we must always pursue the perpetrators. So things
like gathering evidence, gathering witness testimonies in a way that doesn't
retraumatize them. These things are incredibly important. It will remain tough,
but we will remain committed to it because it's such an important issue. That is
one, of course, the headlines that there have been over the past year. The
other, I suppose, really Afghanistan and the Taliban taking over the country,
also banning girls and women from education and certain workplaces as well. Do
you agree with negotiating with the Taliban? Well, we have to make sure that we
influence the Taliban. Now, I am realistic. Sadly, I have to be realistic about
how much they will listen. But we have found that there are some voices within
the Taliban, some leaders within the Taliban who are more reasonable and can be
reasoned with, and we have to try and find a way of exerting influence there,
whether we do it directly or whether we do it via countries in the region who
also maintain a dialogue with the Taliban. But we are not going to abandon the
women of Afghanistan. So it is tough, incredibly tough, but we will keep working
to protect the hard-fought gains of women in Afghanistan. So that is a yes to
negotiating with the Taliban, as I take it? Well, as I say, sometimes we do
these things through third parties, but we seek to influence. And at the moment,
we recognize that is incredibly difficult, and there are definitely people
within the Taliban that we cannot and will not have any engagement with. But of
course, they are the de facto government in Afghanistan at the moment, and
therefore, to exert influence, we have to find a way of, as I say, often through
intermediaries, exerting influence on the Taliban. On a more general point on
government and women, it is International Women's Day, so let's address this.
I've been reading about Rishi Sunak's woman problem, or women problem, as the
Daily Mail newspaper calls it. They go on to say that there's a distinct lack of
senior government women being allowed or being put forward to go on air. Well,
that doesn't shine with the interactions that I've seen with my female
colleagues. Obviously, you've got the Home Secretary, one of the most senior
positions in government, the Education Secretary. I haven't had the opportunity
to do an audit of who does or does not take to the airwaves, genuinely. There
has been audits, though, which I've taken a look at, and it's an awful lot lower
for the women than it is for the men within his cabinet. Okay, well, look, I
know that we have incredibly effective female colleagues around the cabinet
table and throughout the tiers of government, and it's a pleasure working with
them. Of course, I'm representing a party that's had three female prime
ministers, and as I said, one of the reasons that I'm going to Bow is because of
an inspirational woman in my life, and one of the reasons I'm a Conservative is
because of an inspirational woman in the late 1970s, early 1980s. So as a party,
I know we absolutely value the contribution of everybody, and we promote on
talent, and we have incredibly talented women at every level within government
and every level within the party. I'm very proud of that. That was Foreign
Secretary James Cleverley talking to me yesterday. Number 10, I should say,
dispute that female ministers are not making it onto the airwaves. You may have
heard this morning, Suella Braverman, she was speaking on the Today programme as
part of what is believed to be her first ever broadcast round as Home Secretary.
I was asking you before that interview, when or how have you proved your younger
self right? That was on the heels of Jaz Sawyers and Ciara Knightley's comments.
I asked you to send your stories in, and you have. Kirsty, here she is. Success.
It has been my lifelong dream to become an equine vet. I applied to university
and was rejected two years in a row before finally achieving a place at the
University of Cambridge. Kirsty, well done. It was amazing to finally chase my
dream, albeit as the proud owner of nine rejections from various vet schools. I
happily graduated four years ago, and I'm now working for one of the top
hospitals in the UK. Like Ciara Knightley, I sometimes wish that I had more of
my 22-year-old self, but it is important to look back and see how far we have
come. Here's another from Marion Suffolk. Looking back, I feel really proud of
her. I'm hugely dyslexic and struggled a great deal at school. My teacher told
my mother that I would struggle to work the till at the supermarket, and she
didn't know what else she could do for me. I never let that negativity stop me.
The younger me seemed to be impervious to it, and I kept striving despite my
teachers, but I did have the support of my mum. I now work for myself. I'm
actually pretty successful. I definitely would struggle to work a till, but I
have other skills that school did not foster. I'm so proud of my younger self
for never giving up. I wish I could show her a picture of me now. Lovely stories
coming in. Let us turn to my next guest, Dr. Sabrina Cohn-Hatton, one of the
most senior firefighters in the UK, the current Chief Fire Officer of West
Sussex Fire and Rescue Service. And she has, in her 22-year career, covered
major incidents such as the London Bridge terror attack, the Finsbury Park
terror attack, and the aftermath of Grenfell. Last month on Women's Hour, we
discussed the fire service after recent allegations of bullying and sexual
harassment of female firefighters at some services. Last year, an independent
review found the London Fire Brigade to be institutionally racist and
misogynistic. Just 7% of firefighters are women, and there are even less in high
leadership roles. Sabrina joins me now to talk about her new book, The Gender
Bias, the barriers that hold women back, and also how to break them. And it
unpicks why women are judged differently and how we can tackle those biases. But
first, does the fire service have a problem with its culture, in particular
women, Sabrina? And welcome. Morning. And it's a really good question. I think
that like all industries, we have challenges. And what I would say first and
foremost is that those women that have come forward to share their experiences
are incredibly brave, and I'm so proud of them for doing it. And whilst those
experiences are really difficult to hear, they're people's experiences, and we
have to do something about that. And so whilst I think that the fire service
that I serve in today feels very, very different to the one that I joined 22
years ago, we still have a lot more work to do. But the service is a microcosm
of wider society. And if you ask me, I think that we've got a lot of work to do
as a wider society as well. It's interesting, it's actually you're echoing what
one of my guests yesterday, Harriet Wistrick, had said about police culture very
much reflecting society. We did have Naseer Afzal on Women's Hour last month,
and he carried out the review into the London Fire Brigade. And he told us since
his report, he'd heard stories from other female firefighters across the
country. One story that stuck with us was he was even told that equipment had
been tampered with when they complained, and others were told to watch
themselves. Have you heard such stories? Well, I read the report with interest,
and I'm really pleased that Naseer had brought those stories to the surface,
because it's important that they're heard. And I think that whilst those stories
are quite extreme, we shouldn't have to wait for extreme stories to be shot,
because I think that we've got a huge amount more to do. And I think one of the
strengths that the fire service has is you're working in a small team and you
can become very close knit, and that can make a stronger team, and you can do
things in really challenging circumstances that you might feel that you can't do
on your own. But the downside to that is if you don't fit within that team, it
can be really difficult to break through. And I've been very open about my own
experiences in the past in the service, and I haven't always felt welcomed,
particularly when I first joined. But I also recognise that there's been a huge
amount of work that's been done, and we are definitely moving in the right
direction. But what I would say is it's so easy, isn't it, to think of these as
a few bad apples. And what I want to try to do is create a culture where bad
apples can't sit and rot, because ultimately what I know is that there are
40,000 firefighters throughout the UK, many of whom have been utterly shocked
and dismayed at some of the stories that they've heard, and who wear their
uniform with pride and a right to do so. However, whilst there is even one
person having this kind of experience, it's one person too many, and it's not
down to those individuals to be the ones who have to call it out. We should all
be doing that. So we'll talk about some of the solutions, but getting back to
Nazir Asal, I mean, he thought this was really the fire service's Me Too moment.
Is that how you see this point in time? I really hope it is. I really hope it
is. And I think there have been a number of industries that have had similar
moments. And I think what this has provided is a real impetus to have a really
solid discussion around it. And I don't think that it should take a single story
for us to need to do this. I think that this should have been a conversation
that we were having a long time ago. But I am heartened. I am genuinely
heartened by some of the work that's going on. When I speak to other senior
colleagues around the country, they've also been utterly dismayed by some of the
stories that have come through, and are genuinely keen to make a difference. The
key is not just being genuinely keen to do it, but actually taking action to
make sure that we shift the dial and move further forwards. And I know that
there are people committed to doing that. Yeah, it's interesting because some of
it is culture and changing behaviours, but I know where you are, there's also
been physical changes, like trying to design your way out of a problem. Talk us
through what that was when it came to the locker room, for example. Yeah, so
traditionally we'll have locker rooms, and they're supposed to be unisex locker
rooms, and you're not supposed to get changed in there. You're supposed to go to
another area to get changed in private. But when you are in a predominantly
male-dominated environment, what you find is people just get a bit lazy, and
they get changed in the locker rooms. And so, so many times it's happened to me,
it's happened to other women, it's happened to lots of other people. You walk
in, and all of a sudden you're met with a sight that you really don't need to
see. And so actually, that then makes it a difficult space, doesn't it? It's
embarrassing. It's embarrassing for them. It's embarrassing for you. But
frankly, it shouldn't happen in the first place. So we are designing a new
training centre at the moment. We're building it at the moment. And we've looked
at ways that we can try to design out some of the cultural problems so that
we're not relying on human behaviour all the time. And so our locker room, for
example, rather than it being in a self-contained room, with then private spaces
where you go off and get changed, rather than just having a self-contained wall,
we're putting a glass wall up. So you can't get changed in there, because
everyone walking past will see you getting changed. You have to go into a
private area to get changed. So it just removes that temptation and that element
of human behaviour and human error that can creep in. And I think that there are
really good examples of being able to design out problems. However, it does take
money. And as a public service, we haven't always got the resources that we
might particularly want or need. So there are challenges around that. We're
fortunate to be in a position where we're designing a station from scratch. Not
everybody has the same luxury in doing that. And so then there's ways that you
might be able to retrofit and think more broadly outside of the box about how
you can design out some of those other problems in other ways as well. I mean,
some might say, why not just tell the fellas, don't get changed there, you're
making people uncomfortable. Well, that's been done. And what, it didn't work?
But I think that it's too easy when you're trying to do something quickly, when
it's only guys there to just get changed there. And once you do it once and it's
okay, it happens again. Because what we're dealing with here is human beings.
And with human beings comes human error. And so I think if you can remove that
possibility in its entirety, well, that's even better because there's no margin
for error. It's an interesting one. I'd be curious what my listeners think about
that. It's 84844. You are just a handful of female chief fire officers. I was
seeing on your book, what, there's more guys called Chris that are chief fire
officers than women? Yeah, that's right. And the last count, they were the same
number of Johns as well. That is really quite something. But, you know, you do
say that women are judged differently and you're working to try and tackle those
biases. Talk us through the example that you have in your book of having to tell
a guy at work that his work basically wasn't up to scratch and how you feel the
gender differences kind of played into those interactions. Yeah, this was a
really interesting one. So I worked with a colleague in the book. I refer to him
as Joe. And he was really, really good. I championed him for a long time and he
was going through a promotion process. I really crossed with me for criticising
him to the point where then he started to behave in a way that and it came in
the day before it was due to be presented, which was exceedingly late anyway,
and it just wasn't up to standard. So I had to bounce it back to him and we had
a conversation about this and he got really cross with me for criticising him to
the point where then he started to behave in a way that was quite unfortunate.
He would brief against me, have those toxic corridor conversations, didn't want
to take any kind of direction for me. I kind of got the impression he thought
that he was entitled to my job rather than me. And it really bothered me at the
time. And I'd reflected on it. I thought, well, have I dealt with it okay? Did I
say the right thing? Was I a bit hard on him? And it was only when I started to
write the book and I read about all the research around this that I started to
realise that this is actually a thing. This is a phenomenon. And the rationale
for it might be a bit more human than you think. And so there's one school of
thought that recognises that if somebody's self-esteem is threatened, then to
protect that, they will do down the other person. And in a gendered context,
they'll draw on a negative gendered stereotype that they might not have
otherwise used to be able to essentially discredit the criticiser. And when I
was looking at the research, there's some really interesting stuff about this.
So, for example, there was one study that looked at teachers that were giving
out grades, male and female teachers, about 200 of which. And when the women
teachers gave out good grades, everything was fine. But when they gave out poor
grades, they were judged more negatively by their students. The same phenomenon
didn't happen with the men. And there's a whole host of studies that looked at
this, and even one that looked at women that was providing criticism, evaluated
criticism to someone. And when those people received it afterwards, they rated
the women and the male evaluators. And even though they were reading off the
same script, they all viewed the women evaluators more negatively and didn't
think that they had as much credibility. So what do you do with that? How do you
tackle it, either in the case of Jo, or, you know, I'm sure it might be
something that somebody listening has come up against. Well, do you know, we
absorb social information all the time that reinforces our categories, our
mental files, if you like, of women and men and gender roles. So actually, it
could be very subtle, some of the experiences that we have, which makes it
challenging but not impossible to deal with. So one really elegant study looked
at a woman called Heidi Royson, who was an amazing businesswoman. And a
professor at Harvard Business School made a case study of her and decided to
create two versions and gave it to his students. Half had Heidi Royson, the
other half had a woman who was a woman who was a woman who was a woman. And the
woman who was a woman who was a woman was a woman who was a woman who was a
woman. And he gave it to his students. Half had Heidi Royson, the other half had
Howard Royson. That was the sole difference. And when he surveyed them
afterwards, they all thought Howard was an inspirational leader. Everybody
wanted to work for him. But Heidi, they thought she was very cold, very
political, very out for herself, and no one trusted her. The only difference was
the name. So coming back to your point about what we can do, nobody would have
stood by the water cooler that day and said, we really don't trust Heidi because
she's a woman. But the very reason they were feeling negative about her was
simply because they were drawing on that negative gendered stereotype. So I
think to change this, we all have to be more open about our own biases. And we
have to move away from the point where I think that people feel ashamed to have
biases or there's blame associated with it, because we have to be able to
recognise it in ourselves to be able to do something different about that. And
language is hugely powerful. And so just being cognisant of that, I think, will
really help us to start to shift the dial and think about things differently. So
in those examples, women also were looking at other women negatively? Yes, yes,
absolutely. It was fascinating, absolutely fascinating writing this book. There
were so many examples. In fact, there's one, you'll love this. There's one that
looked at something called the implicit association test. So I say you'll love
this, I love this, so everyone's got to love it, right? The implicit association
test essentially looks at your unconscious biases, how you might link two things
together in your mental files, well below the level of consciousness. And in one
study, despite 83% of the respondents being women and 86% identifying as
feminists, there was still an unconscious bias linking men with leadership and
women with support roles. Even though that's a group of people who would
consciously and rationally argue well against that, you can see how powerful
these messages that we're absorbing through the media, through our everyday
experiences, through everything that we do, they're so powerful and we absorb
them and they inform our mental categories, which become our biases, which
become our frames of reference and our shortcuts that we go to every single day
to navigate a dynamically changing world. But it feels almost insurmountable
when you put it that way and also about putting out there, accepting your
biases. I feel with what I've read with some of the FIRE services that the men
are way too open about their biases already. And I don't know, I'm trying to see
exactly how that would turn into a resolution of this culture problem that there
is with women. Don't get me wrong, I'm not saying it's OK to have biases and we
should all go out and embrace them tomorrow. I'm talking about being open about
the fact that you might have one and then challenging yourself to do something
differently. It's not about accepting your biases, it's about recognising them
and being open to being challenged and doing something differently about it. And
I think that has to be the key. But people will only recognise it within
themselves without being defensive or pushing back against something or saying,
no, it's all other people, it can't possibly be me. Unless we make it OK to talk
about it and really, really challenge ourselves as well, every single one of us,
to be able to unpick what our unconscious categories tell us and what we do as a
result of that. I have a question for you I've been putting out to my listeners,
which is about your younger self. When or how have you proved your younger self
right? Oh, that's a wonderful question. Well, I had a very different start in
life. I actually experienced homelessness when I was 15, nearly 16, up until the
age of 18. And it was only when secure accommodation became a reality for me
that I started to think about the future. And that's when I started to think
about the fire service. And everyone I said that I'd like to join the fire
service to laughed at me. They said I was too small, I'd get in the way, it was
ridiculous, it's not for me. Even the optician, my eyes were borderline, because
I used to have to pass eye tests when I joined. Even the optician told me to
give it up and that I would never make it, I'd never make the cut. But I didn't
give up. I carried on. I think I applied to about 33 different fire and rescue
services. 33? Yeah, yeah, I really, really went for it, because it would take so
long. When I joined, there were 9,000 applicants for about 12 jobs. And the
process would take so long that to wait to get to the end of one and then start
another, it just wouldn't have worked. So I just sent applications off
everywhere and eventually got my dream job and joined the fire service. And I
look back now, 22 years later, and I think, do you know what? I'm really glad I
didn't listen to them. I'm really glad that I persevered, because as much as
we've got challenges, we've also got amazing opportunities. And some incredible
people and some awesome women. And for me, the opportunity to do something to
make that a bit better, that far outweighs any challenge I've ever experienced.
Dr. Sabrina Cohn-Hatton, one of the most senior firefighters in the UK. Her new
book is The Gender Bias, The Barriers That Hold Women Back and How to Break
Them. Thank you. Now, we're also talking about the women who inspire you. We
have International Women's Day 2023. We asked some of our most well-known guests
about the women who have made a huge impact on their lives. And we've made a
lovely video. So maybe you want to check it out. Head to our social media
accounts, BBC Women's Hour, to watch it. Some of the people that you will see
there, we have Gina Davis, for example. We also have Motsi Mabuse. We've Mel
Giedroyc and others picked. Text us 84844, text CHARGED at the standard message
rate. On social media, it's at BBC Women's Hour. Of course, you can email us
through our website. One more, Anastasia. I have cerebral palsy. I was told I
would never get to university when one is constantly told that it is soul
destroying. I eventually attended university. I now have my degree in
philosophy. Thank you, Anastasia, for getting in touch with Women's Hour, with
your stories, which leads me to my next guest. Because Sunday marked the end of
the European Indoor Championships in Istanbul, a golden weekend for Team GB's
women. It's Saquile Hutchinson to retain her 800 metre title before the team
captain, Jasmine Sawyers, won a stunning long jump gold, earning her the first
major title of her senior career. That jump, seven metres. Record breaking.
World leading. And Jas, who now holds the British Indoor Record, joins me on the
line. I've watched your win a few times now. Such a feel good moment. And your
reaction as well. I just loved it. Such an upbeat and uplifting moment. How are
you feeling today? I'm feeling great. Still feeling great. Still sort of riding
the high from the weekend. The reaction, I sort of laugh when I watch it back.
In the studio, as it was happening, Gabby Logan and Denise Lewis were saying,
she's just got no poker face whatsoever. And it's true. I can't hold in what I'm
feeling, even out on the track. And yeah, I was really, really enjoying that
moment. Yes, well, we all were. And I loved the hug with Keeley as well, I have
to say. I was like, go for it, female camaraderie. Oh, Keeley abandoned her own
interview to come and give me a hug. I mean, Keeley is somebody that, while
she's only just turned 21, she's been a big inspiration to me on the team. And
she's a friend. And to have a friend right out there in a moment is so important
to me. It's a real pivotal moment in my career. It was special for me for her to
be able to come over and give me a hug. So I appreciated that. So the seven
metres, I also was looking, you're five foot four. I'm five foot three. That
information keeps floating around. I did double check because I thought maybe I
don't know. And I've gained an inch. But no, unfortunately, five foot three. And
me, I'm a total novice learning about the long jump. But I would have thought
being taller would be more useful. But you talked me through it because you also
changed your technique. I know this winter. Yes. So being taller seems to
generally be more useful because most long jumpers are much taller than me.
There are a few of us on the circuit that are sort of around the five, three to
five, six mark, but not many. Most, most are much, much taller. It just helps to
have longer levers when you're trying to launch through the air like that. But
the key component for long jumpers is a lot of speed. So being able to take off
at high speeds and then have that sort of springy ability off the ground. I
started out as a gymnast. And so I think that is where my spring came from. And
I did have a few people, more than a few, say that they thought at five, three,
there was no way that I would maybe I'll get over 680. But there's no way that I
can be sort of a proper world class long jumper. But I disagreed. Yes, you
disagreed. And I love this disagreement, because when I was watching your
interview afterwards, you knew it was there, the seven metre jump. You were kind
of waiting for it to happen. Not totally expecting it on that day, if I have
that correct. But this unwavering self-belief. Where does that come from? Part
of it came from a foul jump that I had when I was 18, where it was over the
plasticine, but I landed at seven metres. And so I've known since then that I'm
physically capable of it. But over the last 10 years, I haven't managed to
replicate it. And even before that happened, I just thought I could do it. It's
one of those things that I'd always wanted to go to the Olympics, not just go,
I'd wanted to win. And so I thought, OK, how, what, you know, how far do I need
to jump to do this? And seven metres looked like a sort of good target there.
And I always thought that that was possible for me. And it's the thing we talk
about, about being young and just having belief for no good reason. But I did.
And I thought, well, why, why shouldn't I be good enough to do this? If I work,
if I put in the hours, I think I can achieve that. And that just stuck with me
despite not doing it for so long. See, that's the other bit that I find really
interesting about you, Jaz, is that, yes, it happened. So you knew it could. But
it's been quite a long wait for that to be able to sustain that self-belief. And
also, you know, if we take a look at some of the people you were competing
against, right, there's some of the best in the world, but you just hold your
nerve and you made it happen. I'm just wondering what's going through your head,
even as you're making that run, you know, that very speedy run before you
actually take off and leap through the air. So in the moment, I'm not thinking
about a distance. I've gone through that over the years where I would focus too
intently on how far I was trying to jump. And then you start to kind of try too
hard. It is possible to try too hard. You stop focusing on exactly how to do it
and you just think about the outcome. So what I was actually thinking about was
how I was running physically, how my feet were striking the ground, making sure
that I was continuing my speed through my takeoff. The technique that I use, I
kind of run through the air. So as I'm sprinting down the runway, once I take
off, the movement of running keeps happening through the air. So I'm just
thinking, keep running, keep running, keep sprint. And I talk to myself on the
runway. So you'll see if you watch a video of me standing on the runway before I
jump, I'm always saying something. Well, obviously you listened. And it worked.
But, you know, for people that are getting to know you as well, there was a
brief foray into bobsledding for a bit. A singing appearance on The Voice.
Multi-talented woman. It's been a busy time. I have a tendency to just say yes
to things, which sometimes has me a little too busy. But a lot of the time just
opens doors and gives me great opportunities. So bobsleigh, I was training at
the time as a heptathlete. And that's how I started my sporting, my self-serious
sporting life as a combined eventer. I wanted to be a heptathlete. And I had
just moved, got a scholarship to go and train full time at a boarding school.
Because it was a sports boarding school, when British bobsleigh were looking for
athletes for the Youth Olympics, they turned up at that school saying, look,
we're scouting. Our criteria is a 30 meter sprint, a standing high jump and a
standing long jump, which is the stuff I was doing anyway for my heptathlon. And
I thought, well, that just sounds fun, doesn't it? And decided to get involved.
I thought, cool, running is a, people do sprints and then go over to bobsleigh.
That was a true story. So I'll give it a go. And I did. And I made the team. And
Misha McNeill and I ended up going to the Winter Youth Olympics in 2012 and
winning a silver medal. Which so much fun. Terrifying, I've got to say. So much
fun. Rather you than me. But I love the story. You know, it's interesting that
you talk there about some of the opportunities the government have created.
We're seeing today a Â£600 million package for schools to create equal
opportunities for girls. So basically, they'll need to offer equal access to
sports and a minimum of two hours of physical education per week. What sort of a
difference do you think something like that makes? I think that can be massive.
We lose so many young women from sport in those sort of school years. And some
of that could be because they're not getting access to the sports that they
could love. You know, not every sport is for everybody, but I think that is a
sport for everyone. And so the idea that young women will now get the chance to
do all the same sports as young men. I hope and really believe that that will
keep more women in sport. You know, your younger self would be very proud of you
now. Keeping the faith. And thank you for spending some time with us. We are
asking, Jaz, our listeners today, you know, about their younger self and, you
know, how they would have proven them right, just as you did as well. And we're
getting lots of stories in. So thank you for that, for being the catalyst for
some of the stories we're getting on Women's Hour today. That is Jasmine Soares,
who won the stunning Long Jump gold just on Sunday. One of your stories, Lee
says, I always told myself as a very young woman that I would never get married.
At 60, I never have, despite societal pressure. I'm a strong person,
independent, self-sufficient, creative and caring. There needs to be less
pressure on people. Not all of us are meant to be in a couple. Thanks so much
for that, Lee. Keep your stories coming 84844 as we talk about exactly what you
tell your younger self or what your younger self would tell you, I suppose, is
the better way of putting it, kind of when you think back and whether you want a
little bit of her still, as Ciara Knightley talked about. But Jasmine said, you
know, she had the belief, stayed with it and look where she is now. I want to
turn on to poetry next. What is it like to be a poet, a woman and a performer of
poetry in this particular moment in time? Well, Kim Moore aims to answer this
question in her new book. Are you judging me yet? Poetry and everyday sexism.
It's threaded through with poems from her collection, All the Men I Never
Married. There's one for you, Lee, who just got in touch for which she won the
Ford Prize last year. In part, it examines why poetry is the perfect medium for
exploring sexism. Kim Moore, welcome. Hi, thanks for having me. So why did you
want to examine everyday sexism? And I'm also curious about why through poetry?
I think I originally I went to a reading with Claudia Rankine and when she read
from her book Citizen, which looks at experiences of racism and it completely
changed how I felt about how I thought about racism. And that kind of that was
like an eye opener for me because I thought if poetry, poetry can be
transformative like that and it can change the way I think and feel about it and
the way I'm going to behave in future. I want to try and do that with writing
about sexism. Because I was struck, you talked about that it's easier to broach
it through poetry than perhaps sitting around a kitchen table with friends. Why?
I always think of the brilliant Sarah Ahmed. She just got a new book out, The
Feminist Killjoy. I think you become the feminist killjoy if you bring something
up around the table with friends. And some yeah, sometimes I think it can kind
of stop stop conversations or it's often minimized or sometimes you can be told
that you're imagining it or oh, it's not a big deal. It gets brushed over
whereas when you put that experience in this space of a poem, the white space
and kind of elevates it I think to an important moment. Hopefully if it's a good
poem, like a moment of epiphany, it transforms it. Well, why don't we move on to
one of your poems? And as I mentioned from the collection, All the Men I Never
Married going through the book. This one about the taxi driver. Yeah, so this is
All the Men I Never Married. I've lost my page. That's all right. Take your time
because you're good. Yeah. OK. Yeah. So this is coming back from a festival that
I was reading at. All the Men I Never Married, number 13. Although we've only
just met, he's already telling me that no, my suitcase isn't heavy at all as he
lifts it with one hand into the boot. He's not even reached the end of the road
and he's already telling me I have a crazy soul, that he can tell how crazy I
am. He asks me, do I know what he means? And I smile and pretend that I don't.
He says all the women he knows who are artists or poets or musicians are crazy.
Crazy, crazy, crazy, he says. And I wish I'd told him I was an accountant
instead. But on he goes, taking his eyes off the road to tell me all women who
are artists are crazy in bed. Do I know what he means? They want to try crazy
things in the bedroom. If he stops the car, I could open the door and run or
pull out my phone and pretend someone is calling or ask him politely what's
wrong. I could laugh at the next thing he says, while the voice in my head
whispers that somehow I've led him on, that I was asking for it. I remember a
train journey. Everyone crammed in and a stranger's penis pressed against my
leg. Convincing myself I was imagining it, or he couldn't help it. Where else in
the place could he put it? When we pull up at the airport, my arm flings open
the door before I give it permission. My left leg finds the pavement before I
can think. Still, I turn back to give him a tip. And he's laughing, saying,
relax, just relax. And I know that he knows I'm afraid, that I've been afraid
all my life. But it's not this that makes me ashamed. Wow. I think so much of
that will resonate with our listeners. What is it that makes you ashamed? I
think it was something about the complicity of that moment, of that kind of
pretense that nothing was wrong. And also, I think it's quite a complicated
thing because I think nothing really bad happened and that was a survival
mechanism as well. And I used to give myself quite a hard time about not
responding in the correct way or the best way in those situations. But now I try
and give myself some grace and think, you know, I got out of it and I kept
myself safe. That word nothing or nothingness, I know you've thought about that
quite deeply as well when it comes to everyday sexism and its place in poetry.
Yeah, so I think like maybe years before, many years ago, I wouldn't have told
anyone that story. I just thought it was just one of those awful things that's
over and just move on because it was deciding to write poems about it that made
me realize that it was bigger than it was. So often I would minimize those
moments and think, and again, that's a coping mechanism, just think, oh, it's
nothing. It's not even important enough to tell because it's so everyday. It
happens, you know, it happens all the time. But the act of writing the poem made
me realize a lot of the things I was minimizing or even calling sexism were not
really, like sexism is such a funny word. Like sometimes I would set out to
write about a moment of sexism and it would actually, through the poem, I would
think that's not sexism. That's an assault that happened to me, to my body, but
I dismissed it or minimized it. So the word nothing, very, very powerful. You
put yourself out there, you know, you are doing your poetry readings, which are
so interesting to read about as well. Tell us about performing in that space and
the responses that you get from women and men. Yes, I get lots of I was feeling
guilty the other day because I was thinking I could have written about some of
the nice, more about some of the nicer responses. So I do get a lot of
supportive responses and lovely conversations with people. But through the
performing of as I was writing the poems about sexism, I would start performing
them as part of the editing process, really. And then would get kind of quite
strange, strange reactions from some from some mainly men, but some women as
well. So, for example, so I've had so I talk about in the book about a woman who
said, oh, you know what you're doing. You know exactly what you're doing,
reading poems about men with your legs out. I've had men come up to me and say
that poem about sexism made me feel guilty for being a man. I've had men come up
to me after a reading and say that the poem was objectifying men. And that's
that's been used quite a few, quite a few times. And I think it's just just not
used to men being looked at. I've had a man even so I was given a lecture about
my PhD topic, which was everyday sexism and a man interrupted to tell me that
sexism doesn't exist, which I thought was quite ironic and beautiful. Almost a
performance piece. Yeah. I start like through the PhD. I started to enjoy those
moments instead of the first time it happened. I got really defensive and really
upset. And then I started to reflect on those feelings. And after that, and I
wrote about it and then I started to really enjoy those moments and think, good,
I'm going to get another 3000 words of my thesis out of you. But what about
because you're talking about sexism at times, intimate moments of your life,
like you shared with that poem, but other times performing poems about desire
also in that same space. Yeah, so I think the book started, it started with a
poem, a list poem of ex-boyfriends. I was kind of bored and just kind of messing
around. And I really enjoyed writing this list poem. And then the first time I
performed that poem, I got heckled by a woman in the audience. The poem has a
line, are you surprised? Are you judging me yet? And a woman shouted out, yes.
And that kind of made me realise that there is a connection between female
desire and sexism, which would be interesting to explore that often reading
poems about men, ex-boyfriends or plurally, kind of uncovers sexism in the room.
It's so interesting. Poetry is fabulous. Thank you so much for coming in to us,
Kim Moore. Her new book is Are You Judging Me Yet? Poetry and Everyday Sexism. I
want to thank everybody who's got in touch, talking about proving your younger
self right. Lovely to have your stories coming in. I also want to let you know
that tomorrow on Woman's Hour, actor Emily Watson will be joining Grupa PÃ¡dÃ­ to
talk about her new film God's Creatures and its theme, how far a mother will go
to protect her son. I instead will see you next Monday. Thanks for spending some
time with us today. Woman's Hour was presented by Nuala McGovern and produced by
Sarah Crawley. The studio engineer was Duncan Hannans. In a couple of minutes,
the Shamima Begum story continues. And this week, we look at how a series of
interviews came to shape how Shamima Begum came to be perceived. First, we'll
have a look ahead to Saturday afternoon. On BBC Radio 4. You're different. Of
course I am. I like that about you. The iconic novel Porgy, updated. He's
coming, Porgy. He's coming for me. You'll have to kill me first. A musical love
story featuring new music by the acclaimed producer Swindle. Yeah, it's on now.
Performed by the BBC Concert Orchestra. Best Loves Porgy. On Radio 4 and BBC
Sounds, beginning on Saturday afternoon at 9pm.