TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-16H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 out of maydays tomorrow at the same time or later on BBC sounds. BBC News at
three o'clock. Political leaders at Stormont have urged the Democratic Unionist
Party to quickly assess the new post Brexit trading agreements for Northern
Ireland, with Sinn FÃ©in saying it's time to get the devolved assembly back up
and moving without delay. The Prime Minister spent the morning in Belfast where
he's been selling his so-called Windsor framework. The DUP said it wanted to
take its time with the new plans. The father of Constance Martin, the woman who
disappeared with her partner and baby in January, says it's very alarming that
his grandchild is still missing. A huge search is taking place for the newborn
in Brighton, where officers have asked the public to check their sheds and
outhouses for the baby. Ms Martin and her boyfriend were arrested last night.
This woman lives in the area where the couple were found. We've had police
search in the back of the woods from our house this morning. I mean there's a
lot of people with like sheds around here as well so obviously everyone's being
asked to look in their sheds and any outhouses that they've got. Today just
doesn't feel like a normal Tuesday, it's just it's so eerie everyone's just not
themselves. A transgender rapist has been jailed for eight years for attacking
two women while still identifying as a man. 31-year-old Isla Bryson committed
the crimes in 2016 and 2019, while known as Adam Graham. Last month, the case
caused controversy when Bryson was housed in an all-female prison while waiting
for sentencing before being moved to a men's jail. China has accused the United
States of overstretching the concept of national security after the White House
ordered government agencies to wipe the Chinese social media app TikTok from
federal devices within 30 days. Beijing said the US was abusing state power.
Staff at BBC local radio in England have voted for strike action in protest at
plans to share more programmes between stations. The National Union of
Journalists said 83% of its members were in favour of walking out. No strike
dates have yet been set. The BBC says it needs to modernise its local services
by boosting the amount of online content. BBC News. The master of satire David
Sedaris is back with his unique blend of wit and wisdom. I know that people are
now taking pictures of themselves at funerals because when I looked up selfies
at funerals was the third option. The humorous laughs at life and himself. I've
been studying Japanese and I'll say something to Hugh, I'll say, oh did you know
that this is how you say and he says we're only going for four days. A new
series of Meet David Sedaris, your Thursday evening comedy at 6.30 on Radio 4
and BBC Sounds. Now on BBC Radio 4, Jay Rayner and a panel of culinary experts
are in Grimsby ready to answer your questions in this week's The Kitchen
Cabinet. Hello and welcome to The Kitchen Cabinet. This week we're on the Humber
Riviera, Grimsby docks to be precise, at one time said to have been home to the
largest fishing fleet in the world. Despite the decline of the fishing industry,
the port remains one of the busiest in Europe. There's even a sign declaring it
Europe's food town as you drive in past its iconic red brick dock tower and the
multitude of food processing factories turning out fish fingers, crispy
pancakes, frozen peas and everything else in between. For our part, we've cast
our net far and wide to bring some of the finest food experts to shore. They are
Chef Rob Owen Brown, food writers Melissa Thompson and Fliss Freeborn and a
barnacle-encrusted Dr Annie Gray. Ladies and gentlemen, your Kitchen Cabinet
panel. Now this week's show is our 250th. That frankly sounds sarcastic. Still,
it's a major milestone. So panel, I want to know about your own personal food
milestones, please. Melissa Thompson. Oh, probably. Like my dad is a serious
critic of mine. You know, everyone else, well, this is lovely, Melissa, and
he'll be like, this is horrible. And my grandma, his mum made the best curry
chicken and I made it for my parents. And when my dad said, he was like, you've
nailed this. That's probably the best milestone I can think of. I can see that.
Thank you. Thank you. Thanks. Rob Owen Brown. I got sent on a foreign exchange
as an 11 year old boy to France. I'd always been rummaging around in the woods
as a kid and catching things and never quite knowing what to do with them when
I've got them. Going to France taught me that everything they did, everything I
did, taught me that everything they did, if it was walking the dog, they were
picking mushrooms. If they were catching fish, it was for lunch. If you went to
the beach, it was to get oysters off the rocks and catch more fish. That was my
food thing because I finally put two and two together and realised it wasn't
that weird. I was just going to be a chef. Excellent. Let's go to our next minor
milestone with our first question of this 250th episode from Paul Braben from
Grimsby. A one pot solution to what to do with leftover chicken is usually curry
for me. Can the panel suggest an alternative? Right. I'm going to very briefly
come to you, Dr Annie Gray. Leftovers. What are leftovers? A 20th century, late
20th century concept which has no real meaning. Leftovers. They are pre-cooked
food. They're just ingredients that are really convenient because you've already
done a lot of the work. Right. So you, Paul, have got a big fridge full of
chicken and you need something to do with it. I'm just going to go down the
line. Fliss? So I like to, with leftover chicken, I like to fry off an onion, as
you do with most things, add in the chicken, add in a couple of fillets of
anchovies and then pour in some tomatoes, let that simmer for about 20 minutes
and have that as a pasta sauce. Really, really simple. Okay. So we've gone pasta
sauce. Melissa? If I'm feeling virtuous in a salad, if I'm not, then I would
probably mix it with some gravy, thicken the gravy, get it into a container,
flatten it, refrigerate it until it's set solid, cut it into cubes or whatever,
breadcrumb it, fry it, bit of mayonnaise. I think part of the laughter is the
admiring glances from Robbo and Graham. I like you. You're looking practically
aroused, actually. Oh! Rob? I'm not sure what that lady said. I haven't done
what that lady said. It's got to be a pie if it's a leftover chicken, isn't it?
You know, but if you don't want to go to a faff for making a pie, shred that
meat that you've got left, yeah? You can buy a packet of bean sprouts, can't
you? Yeah? A couple of chilli flakes in there, mix those together, get a bit of
sriracha sauce on it and just leave it for a minute or two. That sriracha will
wilt those bean sprouts down. Sheet of spring roll pastry, make a little sausage
roll out of it, deep fry them. Ooh. If in doubt, deep fry it. Excellent stuff.
Let's take our next question from Anne Schlachter from Laus. Hello. My question
is, have you ever got someone to eat something they said they would never ever
eat? Ooh, right. Well, there's an interesting challenge. Melissa, have you ever
got someone to eat something they said they would never ever eat? Yeah, I have.
I might get in trouble for this, but what the hell. So my partner is a
haematologist and so works with blood. So for her, bone marrow is obviously
important in the creation of blood, not something you eat. And the thought of
eating bone marrow, I love bone marrow. Ever since I was a kid, we used to fight
over it, my brother and I, and the thought of eating bone marrow. If I talk
about it, she's like, can you stop talking about it? It's making me feel sick,
but I have snuck it into burgers, into burger patties. If she's listening to
this, will this be the first time she's realised this? Possibly. Possibly. I
love you. We made her tell you. Rob? Yeah, I mean, there's a couple of things,
but I suppose the one that mainly sticks in my mind is tripe. And everyone pulls
their face about tripe, you know. Nobody likes tripe until they eat tripe cooked
properly. You have tripe up here, don't you? Yeah. Yeah? I've not come that far
north, have I? No. Right. Yeah, cooked tripe, honeycomb tripe it's got to be,
cut it into really thin strips, and you're going to hate me for this. Roll it in
flour, roll it in egg, and there's some breadcrumbs with some English mustard
powder in it. And deep fry it. And I have served that at so many functions to
lovely people in cocktail dresses and dinner jackets with a little English
mustard dip, and they've all thought it was calamari. And it's not. You're
listening to the Kitchen Cabinet, which today comes from Grimsby, just down the
road from us here on the docks is a famous local landmark, the Ice Factory.
There are a small handful of these still in existence around the UK, but
Grimsby's is arguably the most well preserved and the only one with the ice
making machinery still in place. With us to tell us more is Emma Lingard from
Associated British Ports, who own the docks where the Ice Factory sits. Emma,
thanks for joining us. So what was the function of the Ice Factory and why was
it so important to the town? So the Ice Factory was built to produce artificial
ice and it opened in 1901. And the reason for its existence was because we had a
growing fishing fleet. Now, with the railway and the finding of new rich fishing
grounds on the Dogger Bank, it lured a lot of fishermen from the south. And of
course, going out fishing, they needed preservation. And basically in winter,
what they would do is they cut the ice from the rivers and the lakes and the
ponds rather, store them in the ice houses. Or at the point in the 1880s, when
the fishing fleet had grown that much, they were actually bringing ice in on
ships from Norway. But that still didn't meet the demands. So how transformative
was this ice house for the fishing industry? It was huge because when it was
built and opened, it was producing 300 tonnes of ice a day. It's about 93,000
tonnes a year. And 10 years later, they had to build an extension, add more
tanks, so then they were operating at 500 tonnes a day. But what it meant was
that the fish that was coming in, because the method that they used on the
sailing smacks, they'd go out in what was like a fleet system. So the sailing
smacks would go out, catch, a mothership would bring the catch back to the dock,
and the fish would be kept live in wooden tanks submerged in the dock, and then
obviously gutted and cleaned when needed. But they needed the ice to prolong its
life, especially when it's going on further journeys. When did it finish working
as a factory? It ceased working as an ice factory in 1990. And that was mainly
due to the demise of the fishing fleets. They no longer needed a building, which
in its heyday was producing about 1,100 tonnes of ice by the time it finished.
Now, before I let you go, I'm told there are exciting plans for the development
of the ice factory. Can you tell us anything about that? Unfortunately, Jay, my
lips are sealed on that one. But all I have to say is watch this space and the
future looks bright. All right, fair enough. You heard it here. Emma, thank you
for your time. Annie, we now take frozen food for granted, but when did general
frozen food, as we know it in our home, freezers first come into existence?
Well, you've got two factors, really. You've got the development of the freezing
process to give us frozen food, and then you've got freezers really going into
the domestic context. In terms of frozen food, people were experimenting with
the idea of freezing food to preserve it, really from the 1840s onwards. There
are patents looking at that. Most of that used ice and salt, which obviously we
were well used to using to freeze ice cream. But it didn't really freeze the
food very well. It kept it kind of what I would call slightly off frozen, so not
brilliant for things like fish and meat in terms of modern food hygiene. We
started importing frozen meat in particular from Australia and from South
America as well in the 1880s, 1890s, and that would come in just frozen, and
then it would be sold by butcher shops, chain butcher shops started opening
deliberately to sell this unfrozen meat, because by then it had defrosted, to
the public as fresh meat. Not passing it off as fresh, but just this was meat,
and it was much cheaper than meat that had been produced in this country and
slaughtered on the hoof. So it was a really important thing for the diet of the
working classes. But that was sort of as far as it got for a long, long time.
Vegetables ended up being frozen in the 1920s, 1930s, a lot of that developed by
Clarence Birdseye, who was a real pioneer. But most homes didn't have freezers.
They might have ice boxes filled with ice and salt, but they'd only keep things
kind of cold. And when you think about it, electricity, which is really what
powers the modern freezer, was not in most homes until the 50s and 60s. So
modern freezers were invented in the 1930s, but most people didn't have them.
It's something like 3% of people had freezers at the beginning of the 1960s. Now
it's about 95%. The big growth time was the late 60s, early 70s. And if you
think back, those of you that can remember the 70s, all those adverts for things
like really cool frozen foods to save the stereotypical Harriet Housewife or the
really bad dad who can't cook. All of that advertising was really, really
successful in persuading people. They not only wanted to buy freezers, usually
chest freezers, but also then buy the foods to go inside them as well. Fliss,
any sense of nostalgia for frozen foods? No, I'm too young to have any sense of
nostalgia. Oh, for God's sake. All right. So no nostalgia, but how do you use
the freezer? I use my freezer for absolutely everything. I wouldn't live without
my freezer. I always have bags of frozen veg in there. So that's frozen peas,
frozen green beans, and frozen spinach. They're like absolute staples.
Alongside, I tend to have frozen berries. I'll have like frozen banana and
frozen mango on occasion if I want to make a smoothie. But most of all, I use my
freezer for ingredients because I am a fully unpaid up member of the zero food
waste brigade. So I'll have stuff like Parmesan rinds. I keep all of those put
in stocks and stews. I keep all of my citrus peelings if I'm only using the
juice. I grate them in from frozen into dishes. I keep everything that I need to
make stock and stews. So that's animal bones, onion skins, and veg scraps. They
all have their drawer where they sit. And of course, I have ice lollies on hand
at all times. A vital use of the freezer. Let's take a question on frozen foods
from Heather Pickwell from Grimsby. This is my question. I always have half a
bag of frozen peas loitering in the bottom of my freezer. Any ideas on how to
use up frozen peas in a tasty way, veg or non-veg? Right. Frozen peas, Annie,
actually, certain foods are actually better frozen, aren't they? Yeah. And peas
are one of them. I've grown peas. Many of you may have grown peas. They're
terrible. Every single one has a maggot. And they're dry and horrible, and they
take forever to grow. And then you cook them, and they say they're only going to
take five minutes, and 20 minutes later, you're still boiling them. And just
know, I wouldn't bother with fresh peas ever. It's all about the frozen peas. So
frozen peas are a useful thing to have. We need ideas. Fliss, what can you do
with frozen peas? You do everything with frozen peas, if you try hard enough. My
favorite thing to do with frozen peas, if I do want to use them up and get them
out of the way, I'll make a pea pesto. So I'll blanch them really, really
lightly, and then I put them in a blender with a bunch of parmesan, some pasta
water, and some basil, and possibly some pine nuts, mostly often walnuts,
because they're a little bit cheaper. And that all goes in and goes around
spaghetti, and it is delicious. Melissa? I make fried rice often, and usually, I
have left at the starting point is the leftover rice, and I will look in the
fridge, and I'll look in the freezer for any vegetables I've got that can go in
it, and peas are something I use a lot, and I just think they're lovely, nice
little pops of sweetness. Rob, I do remember interviewing you, right, the first
time we met, and it said on your menu, I think it was a Barnsley top with little
peas, and when I said, why are they called little peas, you said, because we're
in England, they're not petit pois, they're little peas. They're not petit pois.
They're still not. Okay. I think it's just a market's implored to charge a
little bit more on a menu. You know what, I love frozen peas. I think they're
one of those few things that you can take out of the freezer, and finest
restaurants in the world use frozen peas. I don't care what they tell you.
Soup's the simplest way of getting rid of them. I am intrigued as to why you've
got half a bag. What did you do with the first half of the bag? It went into a
risotto. We'll do the same with the next bag. No, I'm sorry. But I wanted ideas
from you. I wanted good ideas. Soup, yeah. Get a shallot or an onion, a little
bit of carrot, a little bit of onion, a little bit of carrot, a little bit of
celery. You know, those odd-sorted little vegetables you've got. And then, sweat
that off really quick. Get some chicken stock in there. Get a bag of peas in at
the very, very end, because you don't want to lose any colour. Put a stick
blender on it. Done. Thank you. Heather, does that give you a few ideas for that
other half a bag? Yeah, it absolutely does. Thank you. And a big thank you to
Emma Lingard from Associated British Ports for joining us on the stage today.
You're listening to the Kitchen Cabinet, which this week comes to you from
Grimsby. We've heard all about freezing as a technique for preserving food, but
it's not the only one that Grimsby is famous for. Smoking has long been another
method which not only helps keep the fish longer, but imparts a fantastic
flavour too. Annie, why was smoked fish so important historically? Mainly
because for half of the year, back before the Reformation, we had to eat fish,
because that was what you did if you were Catholic. So we had what were called
fast days, which was quite a lot of the week, plus any form of Saints Day, plus
the whole of Advent, the whole of Lent. And on those days, you could eat no
animal products. So obviously that meant we ate a lot of fish. If you were rich,
much of that was fresh fish, because you would have your own moat, probably
surrounding your own castle. So not a problem. If you were somewhat poorer, then
you would eat preserved fish, which tended to mean either air dried or salted or
smoked. And a lot of the time, the way those fish were described was relatively
fluid. So for example, smoked haddock in a lot of books is referred to as dried
haddock. And you get dried coming in a lot as just a generic word for preserved
fish. And even after the Reformation, we kept eating a lot of fish. I mean, I
don't know how many of you eat fish on Fridays, but that's the kind of hangover
from that pre-Reformation period. And again, the rich would often eat fresh fish
and the poor would eat dried fish. And some of it was terrible. I mean, some of
the dried stock fish you would get would require soaking for four or five days
and beating with a hammer in order to eat it. And then, of course, once you get
to the 19th century, that idea of smoking to preserve and to preserve and drying
to preserve fish goes slightly out the window because you get the railway
network coming in and then everyone can access, if not afford, fresh fish. But
fish remains really, really important because the rich want to put it on their
table as part of their, well, nine-course tasting menus, which is effectively
what a rich person's dinner was. And the poor need that fish for protein because
it's so very, very difficult to afford meat. So fish is really important, both
for rich people to show off and poor just to access the calories and the protein
they need in everyday life. Now, with us is Rob Moore, head smoker from Alfred
Enderby on Grimsby Docks, who have been smoking fish using the traditional
Grimsby method for over 100 years now. Rob, welcome. Good to see you. Hello.
Traditional Grimsby smoked fish was awarded protected geographical indication
status back in 2009, which means that only fish prepared and smoked in Grimsby
using the traditional method can be labelled traditional Grimsby smoked fish.
What does this mean exactly and why the resulting fish is so different to the
stuff we might find in most supermarkets? Well, firstly, most of the fish
prepared and smoked is done in a mechanical kiln, which is mass produced. So
that's the stuff in the supermarket? In the supermarkets, yeah, mass produced.
And it just doesn't have the flavour traditional smoked halibut has, Grimsby
traditional smoked halibut. So Alfred Enderby will have big brick chimneys
instead of electronical kilns. And they are laden with tar. As 100 years after
it's sold, our smokehouse has been in operation, and it's full of tar. That tar
will give the fish tannins. The sawdust slowly smoulders overnight. 16 hours
we'll smoke it for. Whereas a mechanical kiln could be two, three hours mass
produced in and out, and it just doesn't have the same flavour. What wood do you
use? It's a secret, but it does come from trees. I'm delighted to hear it.
Fliss, you've got some of the smoked haddock in front of you. Start passing that
down to the panel. Tell us more about the process. Where does it start? Well,
the key to any good ingredient is the start process. So we'll be Grimsby fish
market we'll go to in the morning. We will pick out, single out the best fish we
can buy. Usually does cost more, but we'll get the best ingredients we can.
We'll bring it back. Everything's hand filleted in the smokehouse. It's then
brined, which is the start of the curing process because the salt will draw the
moisture out of the fish. We'll then hang it on metal racks for two to three
hours before loading it into the smokehouses. And then that's where the magic
happens. Coming in the morning and it's done for us. Everything's done in there.
And that's cold smoking? Cold smoke. So the fish is high up. There's no heat.
And because it's high up, as well as it not being near any heat, the smoke isn't
so thick as it would be near the bottom. So it's delicate and it produces a
brilliant flavor. Rob, just to be clear, you don't dye the haddock that you
sell? No, we don't dye at all. No. And Patrick, the owner always says, don't eat
yellow haddock, do not eat yellow snow. So he does say that. He does say that.
There is a reason for that is, first of all, it brings absolutely nothing to the
party. So there's no flavor into it. It's just a dye. And the reason people used
to dye it is people used to try and hide old fish to smoke. So it sort of made
it look bright again, made it look fresh again. But the quality of the
Alphalindaby is that good. We don't want to dye it. We want people to see how
fresh it is, how good it is. And we're not hiding anything. Annie, how have we
smoked haddock historically? Well, I mean, a lot of it was associated with
poverty because preserved fish was for a long time. And then in the 19th
century, we really got into it, largely as a breakfast dish. I mean, I suppose
today, still smoked haddock's got kind of breakfast association. So there's lots
of breakfast dishes, things like sort of kajaris and things like that. And then
also by the end of the 19th century, it was really, really popular as what were
known as savories. So those were the sort of end of meal things that would
really punch above their weight in terms of their intense umami. That's the sort
of savory flavor that you get from things like parmesan and tomato. So you get
recipes for things like tartlets and croutes, so bread crusts with a tiny bit of
smoked haddock in various sauces. Might be a light curry sauce, might be a bit
of smoked haddock with a mushroom on top or a pickled walnut. All things that
really make your mouth absolutely water. So it's things like that that were
highly flavored, really. And then you get a few kind of weird dishes, like
there's a iced fish curry souffle thing in one book from the 1880s, which I
wouldn't necessarily recommend we try. Okay, let's not do that. Rob Owen Brown,
is cooking smoked haddock something you enjoy doing? How could you not want to?
You know, I mean, it's just got that beautiful gelatinous, you can't taste it,
I'm sorry, but the sort of gelatinous texture between the two flakes. All of
that trim off the edge, wonderful in a little sort of quiche or something like
that or folded through an omelette, but the main loin piece, I love to just get
a frying pan, pre boil some new potatoes. Yeah, not many. Pan fry that little
loin of smoked haddock, get a little bit of color on it, lots and lots of
butter. Drop my new potatoes in there and bash them up into that smoked haddocky
buttery sort of flavor. Get some pepper on there. Always got to be a little bit
careful with salt on smoked fish, I think, when you're cooking, because you can
sometimes just tip it over the edge, throw a handful of spinach in there, get
that nice onto a plate, nice little poached egg on the top, that'll do it, won't
it? I think it will. And a big round of applause for Rob Moore from Alphalendo.
Let's take a question sort of associated with this subject from Gary Gray from
Grimsby. Hello, panel. You've heard how we've got some really great fish
products here in Grimsby. What would you say are the essential elements of a
really good fish pie? So I have to start by asking, does smoked haddock have to
be in a fish pie? Yeah. Rob says yes. Absolutely 100%, but not a lot. And just
the trimming bits. I wouldn't dream of putting a nice loin in. If you put too
much in, you'll kill everything else. Now as this is radio, I will have to tell
you that the other three panelists all shook their heads. So we're talking about
really good fish pie. Fliss, what do you put in yours? I love a really good fish
pie. In all honesty, I'll put whatever fish I can find in the supermarket in it,
because I love the stuff. But the trick for fish pie for me is really not to
cook the fish very much at all, if you can help it, before it goes in the oven
with the roux and the mashed potatoes on top, because there is nothing worse
than getting a fish pie, opening it up, and having a chalky bit of fish that
can't stand that. So if you're going to cook it, either poach it in the milk
really, really lightly, so you get the milk flavoured with fish and you make the
roux out of that, or really don't cook the fish at all before it goes in and put
it in the dish raw. Vigorous nodding from Melissa. Yeah, agreed. And for me, a
fish pie is a really good vehicle for whatever fish you have. I do like to have
something smoked in there, whether it's a bit of smoked salmon or a bit of
smoked trout. And also, I like to pop in some peas into my fish pie. So yeah,
that's another option. Annie Gray. Well, I quite like to put cheese on top of my
fish pie, because there's nothing that doesn't go with cheese. Obviously, I
would prefer to put pastry on my pie, because it's a pie, and puff is really
good with fish, because texture is everything. But if you must go down the
mashed potato route, the only way to cook fish pie, I agree with the peas, and I
also agree with not cooking the fish too much, is to put loads of cheese on top,
put it under the grill so you get crisp from the cheese to complement the kind
of mushiness of the mash, and then you get your kind of glorious texture from
the not too well cooked fish. And I quite like a few prawns in mine to give a
bit of boing. All right, I'm going to go back to Rob, who must have made many of
these. Give us a quick version of fish pie. Really lightly poached fish in milk,
if you can, with a little bit of bay leaf and nutmeg in there. Drain your fish
off, turn that cooking liquor into a thick white sauce. Fish in the dish. No
peas are going anywhere near this, because what happens to the peas while
everything's cooking and you're getting all that mashed potato on the top, all
glorious and golden and crunchy and a bit gnarly around the edges, all them
little peas are losing colour and starting to look like a camouflage. No, that's
disgusting, Rob. No. Frozen peas. Yeah, frozen peas. So anyway, you've got your
fish, white sauce over the top, make sure you've got lots of salt and pepper in
there. Good, good layer of really lovely, unctuous mashed potato on the top. Get
that into a really hot oven, get it all golden and brown, get it out. And
cheese. But no peas and no cheese. A bit of cheese on top. All right, we have to
quickly go back to Gary. So now we have a heated debate. Where do you stand on
peas in a fish pie? Well, I have to agree that I would want my peas on the side.
OK. I would want the peas, though. But on the side. In fact, let's throw this
open to the audience. If you think peas should go in a fish pie, shout peas
after three. One, two, three. Peas! And if you think they should not, shout no.
One, two, three. No! Rob and Gary, both, I think you have won there and the rest
of the panel have lost. Cheese on a fish pie? Yeah, yeah. A bit of cheese.
Definitely, though, the crusty top with the voluptuous underneath. Why did we
even bother to get the panel to answer when clearly... There you go, Gary. I
hope that helps. We have time for one more question from Caroline John from
Cleethorpes. Hello, panel. I'd like to know what is the worst meal you've cooked
yourself? Right, the worst meal you've cooked for yourself. Fliss? Only one meal
I've ever made has gone in the bin and it was when I added too much flour to
mashed potato to make a frittata and it just went really gloopy in the pan and I
thought, no, I can't eat that. That's the worst thing I've ever cooked for
myself. Rob? I once roasted a rabbit with all of the offal in a plastic bag.
Isn't it great? You just got a round of applause for winning at bad. Annie? I
once cooked a really awful 17th century pear and chicken pie and I used my
entire pear crop and it's a biennial tree and it was horrific. And on that
tragic note, that's all we've got time for today. We'll be back next week,
though, when we'll be in Manchester eating steam puddings. It's a tough life but
we do it all for you. As ever, we'd love you to get in touch. You can email us
your stories, tips and photographs of both triumphs and, as the panel was just
discussing, disasters to tkc at bbc.co.uk. But for now, it's goodbye from me,
Jay Rayner, Melissa Thompson, Dr Annie Gray, Rob Owen-Brown, Fliss Reborn and
our audience here in Grewsby. The Kitchen Cabinet was produced by Dominic Tymon.
The assistant producer was Dulcey Wodcock. It's a Something Else production for
Radio 4. Six Music. The year is 1978. Kate Bush releases her seminal debut
album. The Kick Inside. And on the record's 45th anniversary, we're celebrating
the icon that is Kate Bush. Six Music's deep dive into The Kick Inside. You can
find archive interviews and exclusive performances, as well as playlists and
programmes featuring artists she's inspired. She was in her own world that she
had created herself. Way, way ahead of their time. For all this and more, open
BBC Sounds, click the music tab and scroll to find Kate Bush's artist icons
collection. Now on Radio 4, Costing the Earth with ever-rising sea levels, Kasa
Alom asks how realistic it is to continue to defend our coastal communities. I'm
in Fairbourn on the north-western coast of Wales, about 50 miles south of
Carnarvon. It's a small, pleasant village. There's a primary school, a railway
station, and people say hello as you walk by. Right now I'm walking along the
Shingled Beach, this bank of thick, round blackened stones and sand. That's the
only thing between the roaring waves and the neat row of bungalows that rest
about 50 metres away from the seafront. Fairbourn first came into the news about
10 years ago, and it's been in and out ever since. Computer models suggested
that rising sea levels could mean this place having to be decommissioned as a
village, and its residents were then called by some the UK's first climate
refugees. We'll find out what this means for Fairbourn later in the programme.
But this isn't just a story about one Welsh village. Sea levels are rising
everywhere, and that means coastal communities across the UK are going to be
under threat as the waves creep ever nearer to homes and businesses. In today's
Costing the Earth, I'm asking whether we're facing up to that yet, or are we
still burying our heads in the ever-moving sands? Well the challenge we face is
that climate change is causing rising sea levels and more extreme weather, and
that is putting more communities at risk of flooding. Now in most places we can
manage that risk, we can build flood defences and make communities more
resilient so that when flooding happens they can get back to life more quickly.
But there are some places on our coasts where those rising sea levels and
erosion are eventually just going to take away the land on which some
communities sit, or will simply make those places uninhabitable. James Bevan is
Chief Executive Officer of the Environment Agency, which handles flood defences
in England. He's realistic about the fate of some coastal communities. We will
not be able to protect over the long term communities forever with flood
defences, and that means some will eventually have to move. Now that doesn't and
won't happen immediately, but we do need to start the conversation about what
options those communities have, what kind of future they want, and start
preparing to help them get there. And we also need of course to continue to
tackle the cause of the problem, which is the climate emergency itself. How soon
are we going to have to look at giving up this land, I suppose, or moving
communities from the coast right now? How soon is that going to have to happen,
or those conversations, to use your words, how soon are those conversations
going to happen so communities can prepare? Well those conversations are already
starting. So we work, we the Environment Agency, we work very closely with the
local authorities who are responsible for coastal erosion, we are responsible
for coastal flooding, so we work together all around the coastal areas where
there are risks to identify the best way to manage those risks, both in the
short term and in the longer term. So for most parts of the coast where there
are large communities there is an agreed approach which we call hold the line,
and that means we will seek to keep the coastline more or less where it is to
protect those communities. There are other options, one is called managed
realignment, which is where we will work with nature to realign the coast but to
protect communities as far as we can. Managed realignment often means moving
existing flood defences further inland and allowing more space for natural
defences like salt marsh. And then there is another option called no active
intervention, which means what it says, the approach is to let nature take its
course, and which approach we take depends on a range of factors including the
size of any threatened community, how feasible and affordable it is to protect
it, and how sustainable that protection is in the long term. Here in Fairbourn
there could be a sizeable threat to the community. My name is Georgina Salt, I'm
current chair of the Arthog Community Council and I've been a resident of
Fairbourn for 20 years. Tell me what happened here in 2013. Well in 2013 there
was a shoreline management plan developed to assess the risks of flooding and
over-topping of the sea for the whole of the Welsh coastline. And in that
shoreline management plan Fairbourn was identified as needing to be in
realignment. Unfortunately we didn't know very much about it at the time.
Obviously it stimulated the finer examination of the position of Fairbourn. And
so more detailed measurements were taken and basically they were saying that
because the village lies under high tide level at least twice a month, that
there was a very good chance that if the sea wall breached that we could have up
to one and a half metres of water coming into the village. And so it sort of
gave the impression that the whole place was going to go under water. They then
produced a document called the Fairbourn Master Plan. And the Fairbourn Master
Plan coined this phrase of decommissioning the village, taking it out of action.
This had been commissioned as a consultative document, this was never really
explained. And so it was taken as being absolute fact that this was going to
happen. But the real hassle happened when in 2014 in the winter storms, which
were excessive at that time, we had a national TV programme that had picked up
on the shoreline management plan and then produced a programme that turned
around and said Fairbourn was going to be decommissioned and was no longer going
to be in existence, it was going to be razed to the ground. When the programme
was aired, the village was stunned. And we were never particularly disabused of
that notion until recent times when we found out that really and truly Gwynedd
Council had never signed off on actually decommissioning the village and that
this document was going to be dependent on the science that was coming through.
It created so much angst in the village as you can imagine. And overnight the
properties were devalued by 40%, house sales fell through, people panicked and
did cash sales at a much reduced rate. And then it became impossible to get
mortgages in the area. The end result was that the Fairbourn project board was
created, mixing together all the stakeholders that had an interest. So that
became the Welsh Government, the Gwynedd Council, National Resources Wales, the
railway line and they basically supported the village in trying to move forward
from the position it had been placed in. Right now the long-term fate of
Fairbourn is still unclear. But some places have already taken radical decisions
about whether they should continue to defend against the waves. At the other end
of the country, on the Gower Peninsula, the National Trust is one of them. Time
to put my walking boots on. Well as far as winter walks go, this is going to
take some beating. I'm in South Wales, Cwm Ifi to be exact, walking along a
medieval sea wall which is about 5 feet high, surrounded by beautiful salt
marsh. On my left we're about half a mile in from the sea. There are ponies
grazing lazily along the green and ore-burned salt marsh. And on my right, a
little bit of a different picture. Plenty of mud and ditches and rotten trees,
lines and lines of them. What's going on? I'm here with Alan Kersley Evans from
the National Trust. What happened here? As I say, we're on the old sea wall and
this used to separate salt marsh from farmland effectively. We had some nice
green fields over here with some fresh water ditches in. And once upon a time,
this sea wall very clearly separated the two. In 2015, this sea wall started to
collapse. In line with the policy that we take in the National Trust on these
things, we decided to actually not intervene, to let nature take its course, to
let the sea find its own place and just to let that happen and see how the land
responded really. How did that decision come to be? It must have been quite a
difficult one given the fact that nothing like this had ever happened in Wales
before. Yeah, no it was. It was a really exciting decision to take actually.
Today we stood here and made our plans and that was a very exciting thing to do.
But you're right, in England there's a few sites like this actually, but in
Wales there hadn't been anything at all up until this point. So clearly we're
here right now on the medieval sea wall and I imagine a number of times the sea
would come surpass it and then it would break it down and then you'd have to fix
it again. How many times would you have to do this? Probably every 25 years or
so it would need a fairly major repair, packing soil and rocks and stuff behind
it and a little bit of concrete. Rather than just the cost of the thing, it was
actually just whether it was sustainable in the future. With sea level rise,
actually this wall would eventually have been overtopped. On a high tide it got
to be very close to the top anyway. Although we could have kept defending this
and said, oh we're going to hold the line, we're going to hold the line,
eventually it would have gone over the top and made a bit of a mockery of our
decision. So rather than throw good money after bad trying to defend a thing
that couldn't be defended, we just decided to see what we could do to allow that
to happen more naturally really. You must have been nervous when the idea not to
fix this wall, to let nature have it, was floated and then executed. That must
have been quite a worrying time. It was, especially because it was my decision
to start with so I felt like this might be the end of my career at this point.
There was definitely a moment when the sea wall finally breached and the sea
water came in and I stood almost exactly here on the day it did it. And it was
quite a shocking moment for this land that was farms, farm and fields, suddenly
was full of water. It was a big tide like today so the water came in a long way.
That was quite a scary moment but it was also a very proud moment if I'm honest.
So Alan, on our right we've got a whole line of dead trees, completely in the
middle of the salt marsh. Why don't you take me over there. Oh we're going right
through the squelchy marshy mud now aren't we Alan. Yeah this is what it's like
all the time now, it's just permanently wet. Glad I brought my wellies. So we've
come back from the sea wall into the reclaimed land which is now salt marsh and
we're just heading up towards this area where we've got a line of trees that are
completely hollowed out. There's no leaves, there's nothing on them. At first
glance it looks like something's gone horribly wrong. Fresh water trees and
grasses and stuff don't like salt water. So essentially when the salt water came
in the trees all died away and actually what we decided to do is to not tidy
that up and not to take them away to make it look neat and tidy. One of the most
important things that we've got here is that nature's able to look after itself
essentially and nature really hates it if you tidy up too much. If you try and
make stuff look neat and tidy you are basically taking away homes for insects
and beetles and stuff like that and fungus that all live on these dead trees.
They are amazing habitats in their own right and actually although at first
glance you kind of think well what on earth has happened, actually that sort of
slow decay, that slow sort of collapse into the ground is extremely important
for nature. And although nobody ever wants to say well we're going to kill some
trees, actually when we kind of look at the large scheme of it and say well
we're going to lose 50 willow trees but we're going to gain 40 hectares of salt
marsh, in the end that felt like the right decision. What has that meant having
this reclaim by nature? What has it meant for the local ecological system? It
feels like quite a strange thing to stand here where we've got this enormous
landscape off to our left where you can see salt marsh as far as you can see to
say we need some more salt marsh. That feels like quite an odd thing to say but
actually globally, nationally salt marsh is a very, very threatened habitat.
There's a real lack of salt marsh, it's been lost over the years. Globally and
nationally that's really important. Why is it important? The plants and the
creatures that live in salt marsh won't live anywhere else other than in a salt
marsh habitat. You can't create that in the uplands, you can't create that
anywhere other than at the sea so these things have got a limited amount of
space where they can live anyway. And also from a carbon point of view, so from
a climate change point of view, salt marsh is amazing at locking up carbon. Does
it feel like this is something that nature has reclaimed? It really does. It's
nice to be able to see how it makes its own decisions. At Comivie, the decision
was effectively to stop maintaining the sea walls and surrender the land to
nature. But there are a number of coastal sites implementing managed realignment
and someone who knows all about it is Dr Stuart Oliver, a senior lecturer in
geography at St Mary's University Twickenham and author of a book called Land
Abandoned to the Sea. At the coast what we seem to have is an appointment with
the future. There seems to be a growing recognition that we cannot fix the coast
in place. We cannot stop it from changing. Currently there's something like 27
square kilometres of land in Britain have been given up on 52 sites to managed
realignment. To give you some comparison by the way, Town of Oldham is 18 square
kilometres. So something like approaching two towns of Oldham has been lost to
the coast as it were, lost to the sea. Currently about 2% of the British
coastline has been affected by managed realignment. The plan suggested by the
Government's Committee on Climate Change is to increase from that 2% of the
coast affected by managed realignment to something like about 16% by the year
2105. So a much greater expansion. So what we see when we look at managed
realignment sites now is an archipelago of change. Eventually there'll be much
more of it and eventually much less of the coast will be protected by concrete
walls. Much more of it will be a zone in which the coast moves to and fro. So
what happens to these areas that were very often fields that had themselves been
claimed from the coast, that actually they're given back and they go back to
being the coast of marshlands that very often they were until the medieval
period or even the early modern period, even up until the 18th, sometimes even
19th century. It's a return to the past. What are the problems with managed
realignment? Oh, well, they're very substantial. Really we can look at them in
terms of, I suppose, being physical problems, in terms of being political
problems, and in terms of being psychological problems as well. The physical
problems are it's a hard process to go through. It's actually hard to organise.
It's costly. It takes a great deal of time. Politically there are problems too.
It's something which is risky and many realignment sites have been welcomed by
much of the population, but a lot of them haven't been. Some have been actually
very unpopular indeed. That's a big risk for any political organisation in terms
of local government, in terms of representatives to parliament. It's scary for
the electorate. The main problem is loss. People find this very painful. There's
a psychological barrier to managed realignment. Many people do feel much safer
when they are surrounded by what feels like solid technology, things which will
hold back a rather threatening nature. I think the idea of what happened at
Kermivi is in theory really seductive, giving the land back to nature. But when
people's homes and livelihoods are at risk, there's a whole lot more at stake,
just as there has been here in Fairbourn. Here's Georgina Salt again. It left
the people terrified about what was actually going to happen, when was it going
to happen, how imminent was it, and basically in the complete state of flux, it
was an awful thing to lay on a village. How do you feel and people around you? I
mean this is a small, close-knit community. When you were walking down the
street, seeing other people, were you having this conversation? We're still
having that conversation. People try to rally together to create an action group
so that we could generate movement, find out what's going to happen, what was
going to happen to the people. But I must say, you know, the outcome of that has
been very positive at the end of the day. Over the last few years, what has it
been like living with this, that the village may potentially be decommissioned
and people may need to have to be relocated? What has that been like for
people's mental health, their stress levels? We found that people have fallen
into sort of like three different sort of categories. We've had the people that
have been very worried and very scared and one older gentleman nearby turned
around and said it was just like waiting in the war for the Germans to arrive
and constantly living with that. You then have people who say, no, it's not
going to happen or it's not going to happen in my lifetime, so I'm not going to
bother about it. And then you get people who get really angry about it,
resentful, you know, because places that they saved for, that have been the
result of their life's work, were just going to be annihilated. Let's talk a
little bit about the future. Sea levels are going to rise. Do you acknowledge
that something is going to have to be done here in Fairbourn? Fairbourn has been
salt marsh, etc. in the past. I dare say that it will result in going back to
salt marsh sometime in the future. The problem is the specifics of dates. So
we've got to take a flexible approach to things. And so yes, in the future we
are going to lose parts of our coastline and probably Fairbourn will be part of
it. And so will many other communities as well. In a statement Gwynedd Council
told us that although the Fairbourn Master Plan does make reference to
decommissioning with a date of 2054, in fact no formal decision has ever been
made by the Council to decommission the village. Perhaps what's happened here in
Fairbourn is a perfect example of the sensitivities and difficulties these
decisions involve and it's attracted media attention from all over the world as
a result. Since 2013, the municipality of Gwynedd, which the village of
Fairbourn depends on, has adopted proposals to put an end to the maintenance of
the village. Predicting faster sea level rises and more frequent and extreme
storms due to global warming, officials said that by 2054 it would no longer be
safe or sustainable to live in Fairbourn. Fairbourn is not going to be the only
place where tough choices will have to be made. Paul Sayers is the author of a
report published last year called Responding to Climate Change Around England's
Coasts, the Scale of the Transformational Challenge. He told me about the size
of the problem. In some locations we won't be able to continue to just modify
what we've been doing and just do a little bit more of it. We will have to think
about a more transformational change. And for some communities that may well
mean relocating from the coast. When we talk about sea levels rising, how much
of the UK coastline by 2050, for example, do you think is going to be affected
or by the end of the century? Our analysis suggests that around about 30% of the
UK's shoreline will become increasingly difficult to maintain on its current
position. And as sea levels rise, we'll have to think about either spending
increasing sums of money to maintain that line, keep it where it is, and in
doing so really change the nature of that shoreline, because as sea levels rise,
if we're maintaining the current position of the shoreline, then our beaches,
our salt marshes, our natural areas will get squeezed between the shoreline,
hard shoreline position and the tide. How many homes do you think would be
affected here? We estimate between 120 and 160,000 properties, both residential
and non-residential properties. So not just homes. Will come under increasing
pressure to think about realignment. We're not saying they will be realigned,
that the coast will be realigned and they will have to move, but a large number
of properties will come under an increasing pressure to think about how we might
adapt to the coast. But at the moment, it's unclear how we do that. And it's
unclear when we will do that in our planning processes. If we're looking at
things for say 2050 or the end of the century, that's going to take a lot of
planning and we need to start that pretty soon. Is that what you're saying
there? The key thing is we need to start planning now for that, because doing a
transformational change takes time and we need to engage the communities and
support the communities about how that happens. And it can take 50 years to make
that transition. That's not an overnight choice and at the moment we're not
having that honest debate about those locations that we will maintain and we
will defend and those locations that we won't and a realigned location is
needed. And where it is needed, we need to support those communities through
financial mechanisms to think about how that happens. And without that longer
term planning, it's really hard to engage the communities to make that
transition, really hard to get the financial support in place. Finances. That's
always going to be a sticking point. And decisions about spending money will
depend on the value of the infrastructure you're paying to defend. Paul Sayers
again. For some places, like London for example, we'll always defend London. So
we expect large urban areas, not just London, but around the UK coast to
continue to be protected because one of the cost effective approaches will be to
continue to defend those large urban areas through conventional engineered
protection. For more rural communities and more sparsely populated communities,
it will be more difficult to justify the investment in a hard defence as sea
levels rise. Nobody wants to lose their house, absolutely. And at the moment,
there isn't that clarity on how we're going to maintain our defences in the long
term or our coast in the long term and what kind of financial mechanisms there
are to support communities that are affected by it. What we're seeing with the
arrival of managed realignment, argues Stuart Oliver, is a return to a previous
way of thinking when it comes to our relationship with the sea. The sea defences
that we have around Britain, some of them may date from as early as Roman times.
And then during the medieval period, there was what's been called land reclaim
for need and greed. It's been called by the church, by landowners, initially by
the church in fact. From the 18th century, there's been an attempt to apply
science to control the natural world. There was a change which occurred in
European culture, really from the end of the medieval period, an attempt to
change the way in which nature was seen. And really up until perhaps around the
18th century, nature was seen as being a source of bounty. It was seen as being
something which was there to be drawn upon, something which came from the divine
and was something which could keep the community alive. After that period, there
was an organised, increasing and organised control of the natural world. And
indeed initially it was hoped this might enable the natural world to be brought
totally under control through technological and economic solutions. What we now
have though, since the 20th century, since the late 20th century, is the
beginnings of a return to that old approach. People are having to acknowledge
that actually sometimes we have to give way and that seems to be a new way ahead
to what extent that will be adopted and how quickly and whether adopted quickly
enough is a different matter. Lands of the past, coastlines of the future,
whatever they look like in the years ahead, one thing I know for sure is we need
to be making decisions about them right now in the present. Costing the Earth
was presented by Karsa Alom, the producer was Emma Campbell. And we'll stay with
the topic of climate change and its causes after the news. In the early 2000s,
an oil field with a potential 800 million barrels was discovered just off the
Shetland Isles. In 2021, with public sentiment about fossil fuels cooling off,
the entire project was shelved. But now, with war raging in Europe once again
and energy prices soaring, the Campbell Field, as it's called, is being
reconsidered. The journalist Jen Stout has travelled to the Shetlands to find
out more about the many questions around Campbell, about energy security, the
lives of local people and of course climate change. We'll join her in a couple
of minutes. Music education in the UK has been in decline for years. We've
actually seen an overall decrease. We are making changes to the way BBC live
streams are distributed via third party services and platforms, and the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds. Alive. Rethinking music on Radio 4 and BBC
Sounds. That's next Tuesday morning at 11am.