TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-04H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Stay with us. Eitlich is next. This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio
station. Coming up on Outlook, Gérech Soudé grew up on a tiny French island
dreaming of adventure. I was going on sea on my own when I was like six, seven
years old. I had my boat and I was just going out fishing and my dream was to
cross oceans. At 21 he decided to sail the world with just a chicken for
company. I was thinking to have a pet with me. I think about hand to have fresh
eggs and I say, oh yeah. And when I stopped Canary's Island I met Monique and we
fell in love together. He and Monique ended up travelling for years, visiting
both poles. It was to be a harsh Arctic winter. I know I will have a very hard
experience to be stuck in the ice, in the middle of nowhere with no
communication, with no sun for 70 days. It's very hard. That was when Monique
came into her own. Their story after this. This is Danielle Liao of Yetsuka with
the BBC News. Hello. President Volodymyr Zelensky has said a world order based
on rules and humanity depends on how events play out in Ukraine. Speaking after
President Biden's highly symbolic unannounced trip to Kiev, he said Ukraine's
victory over Russia depended on resolve and he saw such determination in Mr
Biden. For his part, Mr Biden said America would back Ukraine in its fight
against Russia for as long as it took. Our international editor Jeremy Bowen
reports from the Ukrainian capital. President Biden arrived here by train like
all the other leaders who visited Kiev. The Americans warned the Russians at the
weekend that the visit was happening but tried to keep it secret at home.
President Zelensky welcomed his guest at a brief ceremony at his official
residence. Thank you very much for coming, Mr President. I had a huge moment of
support for the Ukraine and what can I say? He said President Biden was visiting
at the most difficult time for Ukraine. President Biden responded with strong
words of support. Russia's aim was to wipe Ukraine off the map. Putin's war
conquest is failing. The president of Belarus, Alexander Lukashenko, has ordered
the formation of a new territorial defence force saying every man should know
how to handle weapons. His defence minister said the force should have at least
100,000 volunteers and be present in every village and town. Mr Lukashenko is a
close ally of Vladimir Putin and has allowed Russia to use Belarus as a base for
attacks on Ukraine. Rescue services in Turkey are again searching for people
trapped under rubble after a new tremor in the southeast near the border with
Syria. This is the same region where 46,000 people were killed two weeks ago by
a much larger earthquake. Officials say three people died and 200 were injured.
Some structures weakened earlier have collapsed, including a bridge. A spokesman
for Turkey's Disaster and Emergency Management Authority said it had been
difficult when the tremor first started. It was very shaky. We hardly stood up.
It was very difficult. But in the camp, everything is fine. We checked the
tents. Everybody was fine. We were expecting that. So right now we are expecting
more. So everybody should be more prepared about this. The number of people
killed by flash floods and landslides in southeastern Brazil has risen to 40.
Rescuers are searching for survivors after record rainfall devastated a stretch
of coast in São Paulo state. President Lula da Silva has visited the worst-hit
area around the city of São Sebastió. If each one of us works alone, we do less
work. That's why we need to stick together. That's why we need to share the good
things and the bad things because together we'll be much stronger and we'll
recover quickly. You're listening to the World News from the BBC. Israel's
parliament has voted to push ahead with a highly controversial overhaul of the
judicial system proposed by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's religious
nationalist government. Tens of thousands of people gathered in the streets
outside to protest against the plan. The opposition in parliament vowed to fight
for what it called the soul of the nation after the bill was approved in a first
reading. Two top Spanish transport officials have resigned over a botched order
for new commuter trains that proved to be too wide to fit through non-standard
tunnels in the mountainous northern regions of Asturias and Cantabria. Ana
Pizarro has more details. Two managers of the railway companies in charge of the
project have already been sacked since the oversized train scandal broke earlier
this month. The latest heads to roll are the boss of Spain's state rail operator
and the secretary of state for the sector. The Minister for Transport apologized
to the regions involved and said there would now be a delay of two or three
years for the new rolling stock. 31 trains costing nearly $300 million. While
the government argues diagnosing the mistake in the design stage will avoid
financial loss, costs may yet rise. A United Nations torture monitoring agency
has cancelled a visit to Australian detention centres because two states have
barred unhindered inspections. New South Wales and Queensland have refused
permission for the panel to check some prisons and mental health patient
facilities. The Australian government said it was deeply disappointed at the
cancellation. Botswana says it has seen a big jump in rhino poaching. The
tourism minister told parliament that 138 rhinos were killed over the past five
years, though numbers dropped sharply last year. Official figures say just two
animals were poached in the five years to 2017. The minister attributed the rise
to continuing international demand for rhino horn, especially in East Asia. BBC
News. Hello, I'm Jo Fidgen. Welcome to Outlook, the place to come for excellent
company. Today, courtesy of French adventurer Guéric Soudé and a very special
chicken called Monique. She's a red-roared island from Canaries Island, so she
was speaking Spanish and now she learned how to speak French, so that's good.
And she's a very nice hand, very courageous and very adventurous. She most
certainly is. Together, Guéric and Monique sailed around the world. They crossed
the Atlantic, travelled to the North and South Poles, across to Cape Horn, back
to the Caribbean and home to Brittany on the northwest coast of France to a
tiny, privately-owned island called Ivanec, where this story begins long before
Monique entered the picture. It's where Guéric grew up in the only house on the
island and with just the sea for entertainment. This island makes me, you know.
My parents get divorced when I was seven years old and I was living with my dad.
And there was only one house, so it was my family house and my dad house. And
maybe I learned how to swim before it worked, actually. And I was always in the
water, and so I spent all my times on this island and I was going on sea on my
own when I was six, seven years old. I had my boat and I was just going out
fishing. And my dream, since later, was to have a boat and just to cross the
ocean to discover a new country, new culture. So just you and your dad on this
island? Actually, it was just my dad and me and one of my sisters. Actually,
I've got six sisters, but I'm the youngest. OK, so just you and one sister and
your dad on this little island. I mean, your dad must have been a huge figure in
your life then. Oh, yeah, he was like my example, because he was a very brave
man. He had a lot of character. He was very respectful from all the people, and
he was always smiling, always happy. And he sailed before, and he told me so
much story about sailing across Atlantic. And this is why I wanted to do that
after, you know. So he had already sailed across the Atlantic? Yeah, yeah, yeah.
He was a very good friend with a very good sailor in France called Jean
Rigidell. And yeah, he showed me so much picture about this trip, and I was just
dreaming to do the same when I was older, no? You say you were out sailing by
yourself from the age of six. So, I mean, your dad must have had quite a lot of
trust in you, I'm guessing. Yeah, he had a lot of trust of me. He gave me a lot
of freedom. I don't know if I can say too much. I remember my family, my sister
said to my dad, oh, you must be careful to your son because you leave him on bad
weather, go out on the sea, and something can happen. But he was believing in
me. I learned that this is like a school for me, and this is how I grow up, and
I think I get a lot of maturity very quickly too. So yeah, I'm thinking I'm very
lucky to grow up on this island and to have a dad like him. Géréc would go on to
name his sailboat after the island, but he had to buy one first, and that meant
making some money, which he did first opportunity he got. I was not good in
school, and it was very hard for me to be focused on something. I had to be
outside because I was hyperactive. Yes, hyperactive, yeah. Couldn't stop going.
Yeah, exactly. And I didn't change a lot actually from that. And when I was 18,
I quit school. I fly to Australia. I arrived there actually with no money at
all. I was sleeping on the street. I didn't know how to speak English. I didn't
know nobody there. And my dream was to make some money, to buy this boat, and to
learn how to speak English. In the beginning, it was quite hard, and I did a lot
of different jobs. With my first salary, I bought a pushbike for a bicycle, and
I did also a Swiss of Australia. It was a very nice experience. And when I was
20 years old, I came back, and I bought my sailing boat. So you buy a boat,
which you plan to sail across the Atlantic solo in. Tell us a little bit about
this boat, would you? So yeah, I was looking for a boat, like a strong boat, to
be safe inside, you know, because sometimes on the sea you can hurt like a
container, you can hurt some piece of wood. And so it was very important for me
to have like a steel boat. But the trouble of the steel, it's like corrosion,
you know, the rust. And when I buy my boat, I was thinking to make a good deal,
but very quickly I make some boat inside the hull, because it was full of rust.
And I start with this boat in very, very bad condition. And all the people
around me told me, no, you can go like that. It's just not possible. It's just
too dangerous. Maybe you will think. And so I start my trip with a boat in very
bad condition and with like normally, and no experience on sailing actually,
because I did a lot of windsurfing when I was young. But I never sailed on my
own more than maybe two or three hours on this boat before. You'd gone out for
two or three hours alone on this boat, and now you were going to cross the
Atlantic, and who knows what? Yeah, this is true. And you know, when I start,
had no communication on board actually, and something happened, it was not
possible for me to call anybody. And I remember my parents told me, if something
happened, can you call someone to take you and to rescue you? I said, yeah, of
course, no worry. Because they know my boat was not in very good shape. And they
told me, if something happened in the middle of the ocean, can you call? Can you
like make an emergency? And I said, yeah, of course. And had nothing of that,
because I had no money to buy this kind of stuff. So I had no communication on
the beginning for the few months. I wonder what your parents would have said if
you'd been honest about that before setting off. I don't know, but I didn't
start with something very hard, because my dream was to sail in ice, you know,
like Greenland, everything like that. But I was thinking to start from something
quite easy. So this is why I crossed the Atlantic after Canaries to Caribbean,
because you've got the good wind with the wind pushing you with the wind and
currents. So you set off in early January 2014. How did Monique come to join you
on that journey? When I started my trip, I was thinking to have a pet with me,
to have a company on board. And I was thinking to have a dog, to have a cat. But
I was just telling to myself, oh, this is too complicated. And after a few
weeks, I think about hand, you know, like a chicken to have fresh eggs. And I
said, oh, yeah, this will be very nice. And I asked some people around me in
France, like farmers, and they told me if the hand is stressful, you will have
no eggs. So I was very disappointed. And I started my trip on my own from
France. And when I stopped to Canaries Island just before to cross the Atlantic,
I met Monique and we fell in love together. You met and fell in love with
Monique. And you thought, right, okay, she can come. She can be my only company.
Yeah, exactly. And she was very, very brave, actually. And first day she made me
an egg. And so we crossed the Atlantic together in 28 days. And she gave me 25
eggs. And she was just free working on the deck. And sometimes I had a little
bit of some stress because I was steering the boat and on quite bad weather, I
saw waves coming, you know, and I just saw Monique drifting from the deck. And
at the last moment, she gave her a small flapping, you know, with this wing. And
she just stayed on board. And she came back so wet. So she had good sea legs,
did she? Oh, yeah, she, yeah. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. I mean, I can see the
advantage of having a chicken on board in that, you know, if she's going to lay
eggs, you've got a fresh food supply. And I guess if she doesn't lay eggs and
you get fed up, she could always make you a, you know, another kind of meal.
Yeah, exactly. Now I can say that, yeah, in the beginning, I say maybe I will
hit her. Maybe she will fall in the water. But very quickly, she came, a very
good friend. And I was very close from her and I was laughing about her. And we
share everything, her meal. And she was coming, you know, on my legs when I was
steering the boat, when I was reading, when I was sleeping. Sometimes I wake up,
she was just so close for my face. It was so funny. And so this is why we
decided to keep going. So, OK, those are the benefits of having a chicken on
board. I can see some disadvantages too. For example, a chicken is going to
create a lot of unpleasant mess all over your boat. When it's on the deck
outside of the boat, it's fine, you know, you just take your bucket of water.
But when she does that inside the boat, like on your computer, like on the food,
that's not very nice. But it's also two mouths to feed. Yeah, but she was eating
some feed, you know, so I'd feed on board. But Monique can eat everything. It
was very funny actually when we crossed our first ocean. She was eating flying
fish. Wow. So flying fish would leap into the air. Yeah, like sometimes hundreds
of flying fish, like just flying next to the boat. And sometimes they're just
coming straight away on the deck. I was liking to the flying fish and sometimes
was like a competition between Monique and me, who were the first ones to get
the flying fish. And she was just much more frustrated than me. And she was
winning the most of the time. And she eat the flying fish that's still alive
straight away in this mouth was so funny. Is it normal for a chicken to eat
fish? I don't know. It was my first chicken actually. So I think she is very
special. But it's funny too, like after the eggs was testing a little bit salty
and like fish was not bad actually. What about swimming? Did you ever check out
whether Monique could actually swim? Yes, not on the beginning, but when we
crossed Atlantic and when we arrived in Caribbean in St. Bart's, I teach Monique
how to swim. I teach Monique how to surf, to wind surf and actually she does a
lot of sport now. Okay, I've got some questions about that. So number one, how
do you teach a chicken to swim? So she likes so much water actually. And when we
were on the beach in St. Bart's, she was coming in the water because she was
following me all the time like a dog, you know. I just take her on my hand and I
drop her very slowly on water and she was just moving this leg and she was just
coming next to me. And windsurfing? Yes, and windsurfing too and surfing
actually. And she likes very much the water and I think it was very important
for me to teach her how to swim because if from the boat she will fall in the
water and that happened a few times after actually. And she knows if she falls
in the water and she will wait for me somewhere and I will come grab her. Wow.
So would she go out on the surfboard with you? She didn't have her own
surfboard, surely? No, no, no. She was coming on with me like on the big
surfboard, like a stand-up paddleboard. She always wants me to take her in every
activity I can. This chicken sounds quite incredible, I have to say. Yes, she is
incredible. So you cross the Atlantic, you find that, you know, very easy. And
so you set yourself a bigger challenge, which is to go to Greenland and spend
the winter there frozen into the ice. Now, why did you want to do that? Well, it
was a dream, you know, I've got so many dreams actually and it was a dream to
sail to Greenland and to be stuck in the ice, yeah. In the middle of nowhere,
far away from people and to be on our own, to be cut off the world actually. And
this is what we did. To be cut off from the world, you wanted no contact with
the world. Exactly. Yeah, no contact. It's good, I think, some time to just
spend some time for yourself. You've got no people around you, you've got no
internet. And for me, it was very important to be far away and to be on my own
with Monique. You arrive before the big freeze. So, you know, you've got time to
stock up and this, that and the other. Can you describe for us, as you're
approaching Greenland, your first sight of icebergs? Yeah, I remember like the
first iceberg we see like maybe one or two days before we arrived in Greenland
and the Ora Borealis. Oh, the Northern Lights, fabulous. Yeah, Northern Lights,
yeah, exactly. Yeah. And so we arrived in south of Greenland and the plans was
to sail on the west part and going north. We were so exciting, you know, because
we arrived from far away with Monique. We start with no experience, we both in
very bad condition. And now we just arrived in Greenland sailing through the
ice, through this huge piece of iceberg. We just sailed in Greenland with still
no experience and so it was just amazing to see like the big mountains after
weeks of sailing and the ice and all the animals. And it was so nice experience
and we stopped in many villages to learn with the Inuit people. Actually had to
be careful because they never saw a chicken alive because like in Greenland, 70%
of the year, the land is just frozen. So there are no chickens there. The only,
from the only chicken you would see, it's on the plate, you know, ready to eat.
And so they eat everything there. So had to keep money very close for me. What
did people think of her? They were very happy to see a chicken. All the people
want to test the eggs. And I remember some kids was a little bit scared of
Monique actually. Because yes, there are no live chickens. I think Monique may
be the first chicken to come in Greenland. I think she should have been a bit
scared as well because, you know, as you say, a lot of animals end up on the
plate in Greenland, including... You tried seal meat and dolphin meat for the
first time and probably the last time? Yeah, probably the last time. Exactly.
Because they don't have the same animals than us and they are far away from
everything. And like the nature, it's very hard and there's a condition, it's
very difficult. They will catch everything they can to try to survive. And one
of my first meal, I was invited by Greenlandic people and they gave me exactly
some dolphins. They eat well. And seal too. But of course, I didn't want to eat
that. But I had no much choice and it was actually a good experience. But they
have a lot of respect for animals too. And with the seals, like they will kill
seals. But just enough to eat and they will keep everything on the animal. They
will keep the skin to do gloves, shoes. They will eat the stomach, they will eat
the eyes, everything. You didn't eat a seal eye, did you? No, no, no, I didn't.
But I tried the liver. The seal liver. Oof, what was that like? Yeah, it's not
so good. When you see what is it, they eat that straight away, it's still a
little bit hot. It's like candy for them. They like that so much. And dare I
ask, what was the dolphin meat like? Well, yeah, a lot of grease was very hard
for me because when they told me it was a dolphin, I was like, oh no, I can do
that. It's just not possible. They were all washing me and I said, okay, well, I
had to be polite and I had no choice to eat that. And yeah, a lot of grease was
not good at all. And of course, the other animal that was on your radar that you
were going to need to be aware of, at least were polar bears, you needed to be
prepared. So you needed a gun. Yeah, to make some noise in case if it's polar
bear come. Right. Okay, just to make the noise. How did you get hold of a gun?
It's so easy in Greenland. It's the biggest island in the world. There are only
70,000, maybe less people on the island. So all the small villages around the
coast, there are maybe 50, 100 people, 200. And on the small villages, there are
only one shop when you can buy your food. And in the same shop, you can buy your
gun. And every people can buy your gun, actually. It is very strange because
you've got the fruits and next to the fruits, you've got the ruffles. On the
first village called Koko Tuk in south of Greenland, I was taking some food. And
in the same time, I bought a gun to protect me. So the winter is setting in, the
ice is getting thicker. You need to go and find your isolated spot to settle in
for the winter. I mean, I wonder what the villagers said to you about your plan
of cutting yourself off completely. What was their advice to you? They didn't
understand too much why I wanted to do that. But it was not easy to speak with
them because they don't know how to speak French, of course. And they don't know
much to speak in English. So it was very hard for me sometimes to have a
conversation with them. I guess you don't speak Greenlandic. No, not much. I had
to learn a few words. How do you say hello? How are you? So it's a hallo, hallo,
halyongi. So you can open a conversation. Yeah. So before you set off then for
your remote overwintering spot, you've got a last chance to make some phone
calls. Your last phone call was to your father. What kind of conversation did
you have with him? It was, I just told him, so this is like the big day. So I'm
starting my new adventure, my new life. I was waiting that scene so long and I
was so happy and I know he was so happy. And actually the plan was to my dad to
come to see me after that. So maybe around June. And so that's it. And actually
at this moment I had a satellite phone and I was keeping a few minutes to call
him when I arrived on the spot. Okay. So you set off for this spot a few miles
away from this, the village where you'd been staying. How did you feel on
arriving there? And like you say, this had been your dream. Did it feel like
that when you got there? Oh, yeah. So I was, yeah, a few hours from the first
village and I find a small bay there. I was thinking it was a good spot, but it
was not so much protected from the wind. I was so happy. And yeah, I was waiting
that scene so long and had to fight a lot to arrive. And for me it was a bigger
accomplishment. But I knew it would be very hard because I will have some maybe
bad condition. But from the first day I had a very bad news from a friend who
arrived from the village. So this was a village you'd met in the village where
you'd been staying before. And this is the very first day, full day that you'd
spent in your winter spot. So he arrives by boat to tell you what. Yeah. So he
arrived by boat after a few hours of like sailing. And I was very surprised to
see him, but I was quite happy, you know. And Uno tried to tell me something,
but I didn't understand what he wanted to tell me. So he came on board and he
showed me this phone. And I had a message of my sister. And when I read this
message, I just learned from my dad just passed away the first day when I
arrived on my bay to start this new challenge. It was very, very difficult for
me. I was not prepared for that. And for me it was a hard thing I never had to
live in my life, actually. We'll take a short break for the news, but when we
come back, we hear how Girek grieving for his father and struggling to deal with
icebergs and high winds and solitude came to rely on his pet chicken Mornique to
keep him going. This is Outlook. 50 years ago on the 29th of March, all American
forces will be withdrawn from South Vietnam today, a small group of US veterans
now in the seventies have returned to live there permanently. I was expecting
people to hate me when I came back. People welcomed me like I had just left the
day before. I am now farm and I'll be finding out why they choose to retire in
Vietnam. You're ashamed of what you've seen and what you did. I say this is the
only thing that makes sense, me living in Vietnam. I came back to fight the war.
I kind of explain it as when you're a little kid, you've got a monster under the
bed. I had to look under the bed and the monster wasn't there. No place like
Nam, Saturday at 12 GMT. Coming next on Outlook, Girek Soudé is sailing around
the world with his pet chicken Mornique and has just settled into the pack ice
ready for an Arctic winter when he learns his father has died. I had to turn my
sadness into something positive and I was just telling to myself, you're not on
your own anymore, you're with Mornique. How Mornique kept Girek alive through
the dark winter months after the news. BBC News with Danielle Yowowiecka.
President Zelensky has reaffirmed his belief that Ukraine will defeat the
Russian invasion after President Biden visited Kiev to show a man who is not a
man. He said the outcome of the war would determine the fate of the rules-based
international order. China's foreign minister has said Beijing is deeply worried
about the escalation of the war and the danger it could spiral out of control.
Chinggang said certain countries should immediately stop fuelling the fire. A
new earthquake has caused panic and several deaths in the quake-stricken border
region of Turkey and Syria. Rescuers have once again been searching for people
trapped under rubble. Structures already weakened have collapsed, including a
bridge. Israel's parliament has given initial approval to a highly controversial
overhaul of the judicial system proposed by Benjamin Netanyahu's religious
nationalist government. The vote was preceded by intense protest inside and
outside the Knesset. The number of people killed by flash floods and landslides
in southeastern Brazil has risen to 40. Record rainfall devastated a stretch of
the coast in São Paulo state during carnival celebrations. There's been an
outcry in Colombia after a former member of the National Truth Commission went
into hiding because of death threats. Leona Palacios played a leading role in
the Commission's report on atrocities committed during the long internal
conflict. A United Nations torture monitoring agency has cancelled a visit to
Australian detention centres after New South Wales and Queensland barred
unhindered inspections. Two top Spanish transport officials have resigned over a
botched order for new commuter trains. They proved to be too wide to fit through
tunnels in the mountains of Asturias and Cantabria. And parkkeepers in New York
have captured an alligator that was spotted in a lake in Brooklyn. Hello,
welcome back to Outlook. I'm Jo Fidgen. We've been hearing about the
extraordinary adventures of Geric Soudin, a young Frenchman who set off from
Brittany in a rickety boat to sail around the world with just a chicken for
company. A Rhode Island red called Monique who were taken to the high seas like
a natural. The two of them had made it to Greenland. It had been Geric's dream
to spend an arctic winter without human company or communications packed into
the ice in the everlasting nights until the return of the sun. On his last day
in a village, he called his beloved father and told him how happy he was. His
father was very proud. And the very next day, a villager sailed for hours to
bring him the news that his father had died of a heart attack. Conditions as
they were, there was no way he could go home. I was just too far away to come
back to France for no choice to keep going. So I had to turn my sadness into
something positive and make me stronger. And I was just telling to myself,
you're not on your own anymore. You're with Monique and your dad is with you.
You have to fight stronger. When you say your dad is with you, what did you
mean? You know he's in the sky. I said, so maybe he's just next to me. He will
help me because it was very hard for me. And in this situation, you just want to
be with your family. And for me, it was just not possible. I know I will have a
very hard experience to be stuck in the ice, in the middle of nowhere with no
communication, with no sun for 70 days. And the first day you learn, then you
just lost your dad. It's very hard, you know. You said, you know, okay, I've got
Monique for company, but Monique is a chicken. I mean, I know that she had been
a great companion to you, but how could she help you in that situation? Because
she was with me, I was speaking to Monique all the time, and I'm sure she was
understanding me. And she was like, yeah, a companion. She was like a pet, you
know. And I think it would be very different if she would be not with me. I was
very happy to have her and to have these eggs too, because actually on this
trip, I only take some rice because I was thinking to catch fish. But there was
no fish at all. And so I survived because of the eggs of Monique too. And yeah,
she gave me a lot of love, we can say. So she gave you sort of psychological
support and kept you nourished. Exactly. Yeah, she gave me 106 eggs in the 130
days stuck in the ice. And this was a chicken you'd been told wouldn't lay
because she'd be too stressed. And she clearly wasn't stressed. Oh, no. No, I
think she's the best chicken in the world, and I think she's a more happy
chicken in the world too. What did she make of the extreme cold? So Monique had
a cabin outside, and when we planned to go to Greenland, I make a cabin inside
the boat too. She had the choice to go out or inside, but when it was very cold,
she was inside the boat, of course. How cold did it get? We had some time like
minus 60 degrees Celsius. That's icicles on your nose weather, isn't it? Yeah,
no, it's everybody. You had to move because if you don't move, you just freeze.
You made Monique a jumper. Yeah, I make Monique a jumper, exactly. It was a
Christmas present for Monique, and I make her a slag for Monique too. When the
weather was not too bad, I take her on the slag. You went out sledding with your
chicken. Yeah, exactly. You've got quite a lot to deal with on this boat stuck
in the ice, not least the emotional things that you're going through, but also
the very practical problems. When the pack ice is breaking up, you've got
icebergs appearing by the boat, you've got terrible winds. You mentioned that
the wind was really bad where you were. Were you scared? Yeah, actually, we had
very bad condition, and sometimes the wind was just pushing the iceberg next to
our boat. I had no visibility most of the time. I said before, 70 days with no
sun, so it was very dark. The boat was full of ice and had to break the ice all
around the boat every day. Take me maybe two hours, found it was very hard. We
had a huge storm arrived, and the waves were coming under the ice. The ice was
quite thick, actually maybe 40 to 60 centimeters. After a few hours, all the ice
broke like a huge puzzle. The boat was squeezing. I just said to Monique, okay,
now something will happen, not very nice. We had to take off some piece of wood
from the boat to try to make a small cabin on land. I was on the dry suit with a
tan sleeping bag, just ready to lost the boat. Ready to go and camp on land with
Monique, and you managed to avoid that? Yeah, we were very lucky one more time
because after hours, hours, the wind turned and the ice came out from the bay.
We had been on the water again, on free water. You started out thinking this was
your dream. It sounds awful, frankly. Yeah, I think this experience was harder
and better one. It was so interesting, but very stressful because by a few
times, I was thinking to lost my boat and to lost everything. Including your
life? Did you think you might lose your life? Yes and no, because I always try
to stay positive. I was not always sure about the end of the story, but we
always fight and we just try to stay optimistic. As you say, 70 days without
seeing the sun. What was it like to see the sun rising for the first time? It
was very, very nice. I think we were crying. I hesitate to use the word sweet,
but it does actually sound really sweet. You always say we. You never say I.
Monique is with you every step of the way. Oh yeah, she's part of the family. We
did that together. If I was on my own, maybe it would be very different and
maybe something bad will happen. So yeah, we did that together. It's more than a
chicken. She does sound like more than a chicken, I have to say. So after 130
days in that place, the ice breaks up. You're back on the open sea. You're off
around the north and west coast of North America, briefly imprisoned by Canadian
coast guards on your way for bringing a firearm into the country. This gun that
you'd got to scare off polar bears. How did that go? When we left from Greenland
with Monique, the plans was to do the Northwest Passage. We had to stop in
Canada. And when I stopped to a small village called Pointland, the customs
asked me some questions. You've got drugs on board, you've got guns, you've got
animals. And I said, no, I don't have that. Don't worry. They told me, okay, we
will come on board to check everything. And I said, oh no. And when we arrived
on my boat, Monique was just working on the deck, you know, and had my rifle
inside the boat and they were not very happy. When you lied. Yeah, when I lied,
exactly. They didn't like that you lied. Yeah, I think so. They said, okay, no,
we will keep your boat and you have to go to jail. You know, I said, oh no,
that's bad news. And after like six, seven hours, they take me out from the
jail. They give me someone on the phone and I told him I was not a bad person.
You know, I'm just a young French, strange man, you know, and he was very nice
and he told us, okay, you will go back on your boat with Monique and we will
give you back your rifle because we know it's very important to have that in
North Pole in case something happens. Why do you think they showed you mercy in
that way? Maybe they were thinking in the beginning I was maybe a terrorist or
something like that, you know, and they checked my website and they see, okay,
well, they are just a young man with his pet and they just want to have fun and
to describe the world. So they said you're going to need this gun. Did you
actually see, did you actually come across any polar bears on your trip? Yeah,
yeah. We saw polar bears like swimming next to our boat, maybe one or two meters
was just crazy. But I just keep Monique safe because I was thinking if the polar
bears saw Monique, they will maybe want to test it. But you didn't have to fire
your gun. No, no, no, no, no, of course not. No, no, no. So you continued on
your journey and you did make it through the Northwest Passage between the
Pacific and the Atlantic. And the Northwest Passage is a pretty terrifying sail,
I'm guessing. And you became the youngest sailor to navigate it solo and indeed
Monique the only chicken to go through it as far as anybody knows. What is it
like? So yeah, exactly Monique being the first chicken who did the Northwest
Passage. So I was very happy about that. And yeah, the sailing into the
Northwest Passage was quite difficult because not much people going there
actually. And the charts are not very accurate. So maybe two times we touch with
the bottom of the boat and there are a lot of drifting ice too. So sometimes you
have to climb on top of your mast. You can fly your drone to see a small
passage. But it's hard when you sail like on your own, you have nobody to steer
your boat, you know. Monique sometimes comes to help me on steering but it's not
so helpful. I've got autopilot on my boat but when you're too close from the
North Pole. When you're that close to the North Pole, yeah. Yeah, the autopilot
don't work. So you have no choice to stay outside and to steer your boat. And so
it was very, very difficult for me because I didn't sleep with Monique. We did
the Northwest Passage in 32 days, something like that. And I didn't sleep so
much on this trip. So sometimes I had hallucinations on board. I was thinking
there were people on my boat because I didn't sleep so I was just too tired.
Continuing your journey then. So you sail all the way south to Antarctica and
from there to Cape Town and then north to the Caribbean and finally back home to
Brittany. I mean this was a trip that you'd set out to cross the Atlantic and
you'd ended up covering 45,000 miles over five years. Yeah. I mean some
marriages don't last that long and you've spent all this time with Monique.
Quite an adventure you've had together. Yeah, it was a very... because at the
beginning we didn't know so much where we would go for how much time we would
take, how trip and we just want to keep going to discover everything we can. And
all the while, all through this journey, you're taking all these photos and
posting them on social media. Getting a huge following. People just delighted
with what you're up to. But of those photos that you took, do you have a
favourite? If I've got a favourite, we saw so many nice things. You know, like
in the North we saw the polar bear, we saw whales. In the south, we've been to
Antarctica to see the penguin but I think one of my best pictures is Monique
walking on the ice next to the boat in Greenland. I was with my camera and
Monique was just so happy to walk on the ice and actually was a little bit windy
and she had the wind coming in her wing and she was almost like sleeping on the
ice, you know? Slipping on the ice? Mm-hmm. How can you tell when Monique is
happy? I know her, she's almost smile, you know? Actually, she's always happy,
you know? Just one time she was not very happy. When I left her, when I was in
San Francisco, I had to leave Monique a few weeks and she was making a
depression because she didn't see me and she was in a bad mood. But when I came
back, she was much better. Oh, dear. What was it like to get home to Brittany
after that long, long trip? Well, it was so nice to arrive after so much
experience and I was talking about Brittany to Monique since the beginning and I
was telling to Monique, you will see one day we will come to France and I will
show you Brittany's island. You will love it, I'm sure. How does she like the
island? Yeah, she likes that so much. Now she's got some friends too on the
island and that's very funny because Monique, like, sometimes goes with her
friend just on the beach to take, you know, like, the seaweed and to go, like,
almost fishing, you know? So always close from water. This is the secret for
Monique. And when you say she's got friends, are these chicken friends? Yeah,
chicken friends, exactly. Yeah, and a dog too. And a dog too. And one other new
occupant of your island, your partner, who is about to have a baby? Yeah,
exactly. Yeah. Are you worried that Monique is going to be jealous of the
competition for your affections? I hope not. I think Monique will take care of
how new baby I'm sure about that and she will share all the story, you know?
She's got so much to say. Is she allowed into your house? Yeah, of course. And
do you still go out on the boat together? Yeah, we're still going out on boat
together. I just come back actually from crossing the Atlantic on the roaring
boat, but I didn't take Monique with me because the boat was too small and it
was too dangerous. So I think now we can say Monique is quite retired on the
small island in Brittany. After all your years with her getting to know her, do
you have some chicken wisdom to pass on? No, but I say if Monique did it, all
the people can do it. Live your dream because a chicken can live your dream.
Exactly. Look at what Monique just did. So if you want to do something in your
life, you just have to fight for that. Try to enjoy and to keep going, yeah,
fighting and to never give up. How long could she live? They can live for, it's
hard to say, but I think the average is 10 years, 13 years, sometimes it can be
20 years actually. So yeah, I'm very, very close from her and I hope she will
live for 100 years. Girek Soudé speaking to Outlook at the close of 2021. Soon
afterwards, he became a father to a little girl called May. Her middle name is,
of course, Monique. Monique the chicken is now nine years old, less active than
she was, but enjoying her retirement. Girek tells us he's now in training for
next year's Vendée Globe Challenge, the famous solo and unassisted race around
the globe without any stops. Thanks for listening. Do come back tomorrow for
another fabulous story. BBC World Service. And now, witness history with me,
Ilona Tola. Today, I'm taking you back to the newly reunited Germany of 1991 and
the vote to decide which city would become the country's capital. It's the 20th
of June, 1991, and the German Interior Minister Wolfgang Schäuble is at the
makeshift government building, the Wasserwerk in Bonn. He's about to give one of
the most important speeches of his career. And then about 45 minutes before the
session, I got myself a coffee and lit up my pipe and I thought about how to
start my speech, because the beginning is the most important part. After World
War II, when Germany was split into two halves, lawmakers decided that the small
and unheralded city of Bonn should become the temporary capital of West Germany.
And it stayed that way as it became clear that the division of the country
between Capitalist West and Communist East was there to stay. Bonn thrived as
the capital of West Germany, which underwent an economic miracle to recover from
the Second World War. The world looked at a small, modest Bonn, which was a
quiet... Bonn's citizen, Jung Nimmt, who would later become the mayor of the
city. Queen Elizabeth was visiting us, John of Kennedy, Mikhail Gorbachev, and
so on, and so on. A lot of people and the citizens of Bonn passed in the
splendor, and they did well because the federal government provided jobs,
prosperity, and a lively cultural life. Berlin, located east of the border, was
separated in two by the Berlin Wall. This giant scar across the landscape of
Germany. Political aggression and a pretty nasty piece of calculated inhumanity
to boot. But in 1989, the fall of the Wall made headlines around the world.
bulldozers breaking holes in the Berlin Wall, the most sinister fortified border
in the world. The Iron Curtain opened. The city reunifying itself. The post-war
order in Europe is now collapsing. You're happy? Yes, I am happy. Marvelous. I
think it's marvelous. The end of the Wall marked the end of communism in East
Germany and set the stage for reunification. But after so long apart, bringing
the country together was going to be very complex and would require immense
political will. One issue which is still dividing the country. Which city should
be its capital? The contest is between Berlin, which was the capital until
Hitler's downfall, and Bonn, which has been the seat of parliament and
government since 1949. Both sides collected arguments. Many Germans thought that
the former power center of the Third Reich, Berlin, was not suitable as a
political center of the new democratic Germany. The residence of the Fuhrer and
Chancellor Adolf Hitler. The case for it is its history. The case against it is
also its history. So Bonn was standing for modesty and democratic reliability,
while Berlin stood for a view of the state that was obedient to the authorities.
Wolfgang Schäuble was an unlikely ally for the Berlin side. He was a veteran
West German political operator and minister. Most West Germans supported Bonn,
and they outnumbered voters in the East. But Schäuble saw moving the capital as
an important step in successfully reunifying the country. You know how it is, as
long as we're doing well, we don't want anything to change. And that was the
starting position for the debate. It was suspenseful till the end. On the 20th
of June 1991, a decision was due by parliamentary vote, with a final debate
first. At Bonn or Berlin for the Bundestag, German parliamentarians vote today
on their future capital. The Berlin's mayor, Eberhard Diebken, he speaks as if
Bonn's arguments will prevail. They want to consolidate the Bonn Republic. I
think that's against history. The members of parliament from the northern and
eastern Germany would be predominantly for Berlin, and those from southern and
western Germany would be predominantly for Bonn. Of course, they had pre-counted
how everyone planned to vote, so they were pretty sure they would have the
majority. The day became quite an event in Bonn. Crowds gathered at the market
place in front of the historic town. We had a big screen with a live broadcast
of the debate. We were relaxed. At the end of the day, it would be Bonn. Up to
this point, Wolfgang Schöble had not been expected to intervene in the debate at
all. But he surprised everyone by standing on the floor of the parliament and
making an impassioned plea on behalf of Berlin. A West German politician
publicly backing the East German city. This debate wasn't about Bonn or Berlin,
about West Germany or South Germany. It wasn't about regional interests. It
simply was about the future of Germany in a united Europe. Berlin is in the
middle of Europe, and that's why it is the only right place for the capital. The
reaction was immediate. His speech had struck a nerve. I immediately felt a
strong reaction from the MPs. At the end, the Berlin supporters got up from
their seats and gave me a standing ovation. Inside the Bundestag, it was clear
that many had been won over. The vote was now going to be very close indeed.
From Germany, where the parliament has just voted by 17 votes to move the seat
of government from Bonn to Berlin. Parliament President Rita Sussmoot announced
the result and the market grew quiet. For a lot of people in Bonn, the world
collapsed. What can we do now? But, according to Jung Nimch, the people of Bonn
quickly adapted to this new reality, which he ascribes to the character of the
Rhineland, the area around the city. In Rhineland, we often say it is like it
is. We drink our beer, a kulch, or two, or three, or five, maybe ten, and the
next day we have to think about what we can do. A different Bonn, a new Bonn.
The Bundestag decided that Bonn would get financial aid to compensate for the
loss of jobs and investments. But that wasn't all. The United Nations came to
Bonn, and now we are proud to be Germany's United Nations city. That fits with
our stories. The structural change has done Bonn well. The government has gone
and the United Nations have come. Meanwhile, hopes that putting the capital in
Berlin would kickstart a revival of the East, which had lagged behind
economically under communism, haven't been fully realized. Inequality between
East and West remains a persistent problem in German politics. But Berlin's
status as the capital is a constant reminder of the fact that Germans never want
their country to be divided again. That was the right decision. Whenever I'm in
Berlin giving a speech, I tell Berliners to be more aware of their
responsibility as a capital. The beauty of it all is that today this decision is
no longer questioned by anyone. Complaining is not our business. Everything
turned out OK for Bonn at the end. A few people said, oh, in former times, all
wars on a better way. But the world is changing and Bonn has to change too.
Proud to be a Bonn. Jürgen Nimmch ending that edition of Witness History. It was
presented by me, Ilona Tola. And it was a whistle down production for the BBC
World Service. You're listening to the BBC World Service, where our series, The
Invention of Russia, continues. To understand it now, we need to understand its
past. The principal way in which they controlled that enormous space was through
fear. In episode two, it was able to dispose of Poland. Then it went on to
defeat Napoleon. Russia had become a European superpower. The invention of
Russia. Wednesday at nine thirty and twenty GMT. In half an hour, we're in the
studio. I'm William Miller. I've been given exclusive behind the scenes access
to New York's most iconic restaurant. We're finding out how its visionary owner,
Keith McNally, has with spectacular effect brought a theatre director's eye to
dining out the newsroom.