TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-05H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 to dining out. The Newsroom is next. This is the BBC World Service, the world's
radio station. Coming up on the Newsroom from the BBC World Service. As Joe
Biden pledges unwavering support for Ukraine, Russia steps up its attacks in the
east. We're in the corridor of a busy hospital. The floor is covered in mud.
There's been so much traffic, so many boots coming from the battlefield. I'm
Peter Goffin and at 4 hours, GMT. I was getting ready to pray when I felt the
floor trembling. We're afraid of ending up under the rubble like other people.
At least three people are dead as another earthquake hits Syria and Turkey.
Also, protesters in Israel say democracy is under threat. And we'll hear about a
potential breakthrough for stroke patients. I actually was able to open my hand
for the first time in nine years. My family and I were in tears of joy and
happiness. All that and the benefits of a four-day work week. This is Danielle
Jauowiecka with the BBC News. Hello. President Volodymyr Zelensky has said a
world order based on rules and humanity depends on how events play out in
Ukraine. Speaking after President Biden made an unannounced visit to Kiev, he
said he was confident of Ukraine's victory over Russia. Specific steps for this
are known. Our defence needs for this are known. Our partners are also well
aware of what actions are required for this. Actions, first of all, of our
soldiers at the front. All it takes is resolve. Today I saw such resolve from
President Biden and the United States of America. Mr Biden said America would
back Ukraine in its fight for as long as it took. He is now back in Poland.
China's foreign minister has said Beijing is deeply worried by the escalation of
the war in Ukraine and the danger it could spiral out of control. Xin Gang said
certain countries should immediately stop fuelling the fire. China has not
condemned the Russian invasion and has reacted angrily to US warnings against
supplying weapons to Moscow. Rescue services in Turkey are once again searching
for people trapped under rubble after a new earthquake hit the south-east, the
same region devastated by a powerful quake earlier this month. Three people are
known to have died and 200 were injured. The BBC's Anna Foster is in the city of
Adana. This was felt not just across southern Turkey, it was felt down into
Lebanon as well and across Syria. It is something that people's reaction to is
really quite visceral now. After these first two earthquakes a fortnight ago,
when the ground starts to shake, and it does significantly, you can really feel
the earth moving. People get up and they move outside. I was in a relatively
modern hotel lobby, we watched the chandeliers swinging, but you see that sense
of fear in people's faces. They saw what happened here two weeks ago and they
move immediately outside very quickly. Two top Spanish transport officials have
resigned over a botched order for new commuter trains that proved to be too wide
to fit through non-standard tunnels in the mountainous northern regions of
Asturias and Cantabria. Anna Pizarro has more details. Two managers of the
railway companies in charge of the project have already been sacked since the
oversized train scandal broke earlier this month. The latest heads to roll are
the boss of Spain's state rail operator and the Secretary of State for the
sector. The Minister for Transport apologised to the regions involved and said
there would now be a delay of two or three years for the new rolling stock, 31
trains costing nearly $300 million. While the government argues diagnosing the
mistake in a design stage will avoid financial loss, costs may yet rise. World
News from the BBC. There's been an outcry in Colombia after a former member of
the National Truth Commission said he was going into hiding because of death
threats. Leina Palacios is an Afro-Colombian social activist who played a
leading role in the Commission's report on atrocities committed during
Colombia's internal conflict last year. He said he didn't know which armed group
was behind the threat to his life. The number of people killed by flash floods
and landslides in southeastern Brazil has risen to 40. Rescuers are searching
the mud and rubble for survivors after record rainfall devastated a stretch of
coast in Sao Paulo state. President Lula da Silva has visited the worst hit area
around the beach city of Sao Sebasti√£o. If each one of us works alone, we do
less work. That's why we need to stick together. That's why we need to share the
good things and the bad things, because together we'll be much stronger and
we'll recover quickly. Prosecutors have downgraded the involuntary manslaughter
charges against the Hollywood actor Alec Baldwin following a fatal shooting with
a live gun on a film set in 2021. It means Mr Baldwin and the film's armorer
will face a maximum 18-month prison sentence if convicted rather than a minimum
of five years. A United Nations torture monitoring agency has cancelled a visit
to Australian detention centres because two states have barred unhindered
inspections. New South Wales and Queensland have refused permission for the
panel to check some prisons and mental health patient facilities. The Australian
government said it was deeply disappointed at the cancellation. Rock keepers in
New York have captured an alligator that was spotted in a lake in Brooklyn as
children played nearby. The reptile, over a metre long, was described as
emaciated and very lethargic. It has been taken to the Bronx Zoo where it's
hoped it'll recover. Officials suspect the alligator had been kept as a pet and
then abandoned. BBC News. You're listening to the Newsroom from the BBC World
Service with me, Peter Goffin. On Monday morning, Joe Biden stepped off a train
in Kiev to deliver two promises to the Ukrainian President, Volodymyr Zelensky.
The first, that Washington would provide another half a billion dollars in aid.
And the second, that the US will stand by Ukraine for as long as it takes to
secure the country's freedom. This visit, which comes just days before the first
anniversary of the Russian invasion, has made headlines around the world. But
getting President Biden into Kiev was a top secret affair. Our North America
editor, Sarah Smith, told us how it all came about. There had been widespread
speculation that President Biden might be planning a trip to Ukraine this week.
He had been scheduled to fly from Washington to Poland. The advance itinerary
did have two suspiciously lengthy gaps in it. We wondered if that might be when
he would slip into Ukraine. But the White House told us there were no stops
planned outside Warsaw. The final decision to travel to Kiev was only taken on
Friday. President Biden got there by making a 10-hour train journey from Poland.
He could have visited other locations inside Ukraine that would have been easier
to get to, but he wanted to make the symbolic trip to Kiev itself, to
demonstrate his commitment to Ukrainian independence. Knowing that the sight of
him appearing beside President Zelensky in Kiev makes a louder statement than
anything he could say in a speech in Poland. Russia we're told was informed of
the visit a few hours before it took place, for de-confliction purposes
according to US officials. They wouldn't say how Russia responded to what will
have been seen as a provocative event. Air Force One took off at quarter past
four on Sunday morning. And that leaves reporters like me who thought they were
travelling with the president making a trip on a plane that will not now be
called Air Force One, because that call sign is only used when the president's
actually on board. Sarah Smith. Well, that first anniversary of the war is a
daunting milestone for Russia. The invasion has not gone the way Moscow
expected, and the Kremlin will want at least a symbolic victory to celebrate
when it hits that one-year mark on Friday. It could be the city of Bakhmut in
eastern Ukraine, which Russian forces have been trying to capture for the past
six months, and where they've been stepping up attacks over the last few days.
Our correspondent Orla Guerin is on the outskirts of the city. The battle for
Bakhmut is now at close quarters, inside the city and on the outskirts.
Ukrainian troops are still defending every inch. But the enemy is closing in.
It's hellish, according to President Zelensky, who says Bakhmut must be
defended, but not at any cost. The snow is coming down now. We're at a concealed
position on the outskirts of Bakhmut, just hearing some more shelling there.
We're with troops from the 28th Brigade. They're part of the defence of the
city, and Bakhmut is still in Ukrainian hands. The Russians have been stepping
up their attacks. They have gained some ground. The mortar team we are with are
fighting on, targeting enemy positions two kilometres away. I'm with Victor, one
of the troops here. He ran a shoe business before the war. He has a wife and two
children, one of them a baby, just 18 months old, and he hasn't seen them since
the war began. He's been fighting since the very start. And are you worried the
baby doesn't remember you? Yes, he doesn't remember me. When I went to the war,
he was so little. He didn't understand about nothing. Yes, when I speak on the
phone and video conversation, he doesn't know who I am. We want the war to be
finished yesterday. When will it be, we don't know. We're in the corridor of a
busy hospital. We can't say where. And military casualties are being brought in.
In the space of just a few minutes, we saw three ambulances arriving outside.
There were two heavily wounded soldiers, both stretcher cases, carried out with
drips in their arms. And there were two walking wounded. There's a constant
stream of medics coming in and out. The floor is covered in mud. There's been so
much traffic, so many boots coming from the battlefield. Could I ask you, first
of all, are you happy to tell me your name? My name is Miroslav. It's almost a
year now since the invasion happened and Ukraine came under attack. Did you
imagine it would last this long? Did you ever think the fighting would still be
like this a year on? I thought it would last a long time, he says, because the
country we are fighting wants to destroy us, using all its strength. And that
country doesn't have any way back. I've just come along the corridor here. There
are one, two, three, four wounded men on stretchers. They're covered in foil
blankets to keep them warm and to protect against shock. One still has his boots
on. They're caked in mud. Seeing the steady stream of wounded being brought in
here, you get a sense of the cost of this fight, of the grinding warfare that
Ukraine is locked in. Nurla Garen in Bakhmut. Just weeks ago, two massive
earthquakes killed more than 40,000 people in Turkey and Syria. And now another
quake has hit the same region. Lines of ambulances are heading to the affected
areas, and rescue workers are once again searching for people trapped under the
rubble. Here's what we heard from one woman in the Syrian city of Azzaz. I was
getting ready to pray when I felt the floor trembling. We came out running.
There are four floors above our apartment. We're afraid of ending up under the
rubble like other people. We're staying on the street now. We only take a rug
and blankets to keep the children warm. Our correspondent Laura Bicker is in the
city of Antakya in southern Turkey, close to the epicenter of the earthquakes.
Everyone here is taking a collective intake of breath after a few hours of fear,
panic, and a large number of aftershocks that felt like they just kept coming.
Now, we've heard from the Hatay mayor that a number of people have been trapped
inside the rubble. There are three rescues ongoing. Three people have sadly
died, and more than 200 people have been taken to hospital, and that's according
to the interior ministry here in Turkey. Over in Syria, we're hearing that over
100 people have been injured in the latest earthquake. What's happened is over
the last couple of weeks, many of these buildings that were already damaged are
being brought down by diggers. Many of those partially damaged buildings have
collapsed, and some structures that were completely standing have also broken
down. Even a bridge has also collapsed. So that gives you an indication of just
how strong these aftershocks were. Now, we have had a number of aftershocks over
the last couple of weeks since those two large quakes on February the 6th, but
not one that felt as strong as this one. A number of mayors from throughout the
province here in Hatay are calling for urgent help. They're asking for tents.
They say more and more people are now needing to be out of any of the damaged
buildings and into tents. But others really feel that this is a place they no
longer want to call home. Tens of thousands of people are thought to have died
here in Hatay province. And I think it's a reminder again tonight that this is
an earthquake zone and one they don't feel safe in. Laura Bicker in southern
Turkey. You're listening to the BBC World Service. A reminder of our top
headlines this hour. The Ukrainian president, Vladimir Zelensky, has reaffirmed
his belief that Ukraine will defeat the Russian invasion after President Biden
visited Kiev to show America's enduring support. A new earthquake has hit the
border region of Turkey and Syria, and two top transport officials in Spain have
resigned over a botched order for trains that were too big to fit through the
tunnels. Israel has been rocked by nearly two months of anti-government protests
against the new right-wing government's proposed judicial reforms. The new laws
would increase the government's influence in selecting judges and limit the
Supreme Court's powers. Protesters describe it as an attack on democracy. And
tens of thousands of demonstrators were gathered outside the parliament as
politicians decided to push ahead with the controversial overhaul in the first
of three votes. The prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, said it was a great
night. Our correspondent in Jerusalem, Tom Bateman, reports. This has been an
extremely feisty session of the Israeli parliament, the Knesset, including
protesters hammering on the windows in the viewing gallery and other opposition
MPs at some points not being able to get into the chamber. The reason there has
been so much debate and passionate argument and protest around all of this is
simply the number of Israelis that believe that the proposed changes by Israel's
new right-wing religious and nationalist government, they think that those
changes really cut to the core of Israel's identity as a democratic country.
They think that the changes will effectively abolish the checks and balances
that the legal system provides against a government running roughshod and doing
whatever it wants without any oversight from the courts. Mr Netanyahu has said
that these changes will happen. They have the majority to make them happen. What
we've had tonight is the first reading of all of that. Now, after this part of
the process, and maybe there are more negotiations between the governing
coalition and the opposition parties, I think there will also be an important
factor, which is international pressure. The Biden administration has already
made very clear it is deeply worried about all of these changes. So that's
adding another dimension as well. But as for the way things stand now, we've had
the Israeli prime minister, Mr Netanyahu, and his allies saying they're going to
push ahead with this. As for the opposition, well, the leader, Yair Lapid, has
said that what he's seen tonight is the abolition of Israeli democracy. Tom
Bateman in Jerusalem. Researchers in the US say they've partially restored
movement in the arms and hands of two people who've had strokes. One patient was
able to cut and eat a steak by herself for the first time in nearly a decade
after the treatment. But more research is still needed to develop this
technology, as we heard from our health and science correspondent, James
Gallaher. Strokes disrupt the blood supply in the brain and lead to cells dying.
People can still have the desire and intent to move, but the damage means the
instructions from the brain can become so weak that nothing happens. Heather
Rendelick from Pittsburgh had a stroke when she was still in her 20s. She
learned how to walk again, but for nine years she was unable to open or close
her left hand. In the experiment, she had electrodes implanted in her neck to
stimulate and excite the nerves. Now they could respond to even the weak
instructions from the brain that were still getting through. As soon as the
device was switched on, Heather noticed the difference. So the very first day I
came into the lab and they turned the stimulation on for the first time, I
actually was able to open my hand for the first time in nine years. And my
family and I were in tears of just overwhelming joy and happiness and it was an
amazing experience. Heather was one of two people to take part in the
experiments which have been published in Nature Medicine. Dr Marco Capagrosso
from the University of Pittsburgh says the results show there is the potential
to have a huge impact on people's lives. Our patients recover but they don't
become completely normal. So now they can actually use their arm, even if not
perfectly. That means that they can recover a lot of independence and a lot of
quality of life just because they can use their arm and hand now, even though
they probably cannot play the piano. The team believe the field could advance
quickly as they're using technologies that are already approved for managing
severe pain. But for now, it will take more clinical trials to work out who
benefits and how to move the equipment from the laboratory to the home. James
Gallagher on that promising medical breakthrough. Now here's Andy Barwell with
the latest news from the world of sport. And we start with news that the UEFA
Champions League Round of 16 continues today with two more first leg clashes.
The German side Eintracht Frankfurt play the runway Italian Serie A pace setters
Napoli. And there's also a repeat of what was last season's Champions League
final. This time the English Premier League side Liverpool have home advantage
in the first leg against the Spanish giants Real Madrid. Looking ahead to the
big game, the BBC's football correspondent John Murray. Liverpool's hope is that
they've rediscovered their form just in time for this first leg meeting with the
newly crowned FIFA Club World Champions. The recent 2-0 wins over Everton and
Newcastle, coupled with important players returning from injury, can only have
helped confidence and the Liverpool manager J√ºrgen Klopp hopes Darwin Nunez will
have recovered enough from injuring his shoulder on Saturday to play a part
tonight. Klopp said it was torture for him watching back last season's Champions
League final defeat to Carlo Ancelotti's team when Real Madrid became European
champions for a record 14th time. But he would likely settle for any sort of
lead to take to the Spanish capital in three weeks' time. The Liverpool FC owner
John Henry from the American-based Fenway Sports Group insists that the club is
not for sale, but they do still expect some outside investment at Anfield. Now
the cost of running a massive club, Manchester United, have raised adult ticket
prices by five per cent for next season at Old Trafford after keeping them
frozen for 11 campaigns. United say the increase is due to a higher cost of
staging matches, which has jumped by over 40 per cent over the last five years
and 11 per cent in the last 12 months. At the Women's T20 World Cup cricket,
India claimed a semi-final spot from Group 2 with a five-run win over Ireland in
a rain-affected game. England will secure top spot in that section so long as
they don't suffer a heavy defeat at the hands of Pakistan today. England would
then avoid playing the defending champions Australia in the last four. The host
South Africa will place New Zealand and seal their semi-final spot behind
Australia from Group 1 if South Africa defeat Bangladesh. The Australian
government say that they are aligned with 34 other nations, including the United
Kingdom and the United States, on the call for the International Olympic
Committee to ban Russian and Belarusian athletes from their competitions despite
not being marked as a signatory to Monday's statement. The IOC are exploring a
pathway for them to compete as neutrals at the Paris Games in 2024. And the
tennis tours are pressing the British game to admit Russian and Belarusian
players to Wimbledon this summer, with the WTA offering $500,000 worth of
incentives for the ban to be dropped. Thank you, Andy Barwell. Now, here in the
UK, dozens of businesses that adopted a four-day working week have reported that
six months on, their staff are healthier and more productive. The scheme has
been described as the largest ever trial of a shorter week, as Emma Simpson
reports. 61 companies, from a local fish and chip shop and a brewery to software
developers and recruitment firms, took part in this big experiment, shortening
workers' hours for no loss in pay. Each firm managed it in their own way.
Organisers say it's been a resounding success and that the vast majority of
companies were satisfied with their business performance. 23 revealed their
revenues had broadly stayed the same. The biggest benefits were the wellbeing of
workers. Data showed that more than a third of staff surveyed were less
stressed. Sick days were down by more than two-thirds, and workers were also
less tired and happier. This pilot is part of a bigger worldwide project.
Campaigners describe this as a breakthrough moment for the movement towards a
four-day week, which they suggest is desirable and achievable for many
businesses. Emma Simpson. Now, Danielle has some other stories from our news
desk. People in Taiwan will no longer be required to wear face masks in all
public settings, although some COVID restrictions will remain. They include
hospitals and on public transport. Local health officials said the requirement
to wear masks in restaurants and offices will be lifted immediately, and in
schools from the beginning of March. Scientists say they're one step closer to
creating a new generation of light-activated cancer treatments. British
researchers have developed antibody fragments that can fuse with a tumour to
fight it after they're activated by switching on LED lights. The team says the
treatment is highly targeted to stop healthy cells being damaged, and more
effective than current state-of-the-art cancer immunotherapies. And Barbara
Bosson, best known for her role as Faye Ferrillo on the TV series Hill Street
Blues, has died. She was 83. The Emmy-nominated actress also starred in Ritchie
Brockelman, Private Eye and Hooperman. The books of Roald Dahl have been a part
of children's lives for decades. But now, more than 30 years after the author's
death, his estate and publisher are removing words like fat and ugly from some
of his stories, they say, to make them more suitable for a new generation of
readers. That sparked a heated debate about censorship in literature, and the
relatively new job of sensitivity readers, who were paid by publishers to scour
book manuscripts for potentially offensive content. Irvin Welsh is the author of
the novel Trainspotting. He told the BBC's Evan Davis about his own experiences
with these sensitivity readers. In the last book I had out this summer, which is
The Long Knives, we had a trans sensitivity reader on that book. And also it was
made into a TV show, it's just kind of being edited now and we had a different
trans sensitivity reader on the TV show. So I've had kind of experience with
book and with television, but just very recently. And was that experience okay?
Tell us what was changed, if anything. Not a lot really. I mean, I think I found
that trans issues very emotive because it's new and it's constantly in flux and
we don't really have a kind of a cultural handle on it yet. And obviously you
kind of fear the worst when you say you have a sensitivity reader. I did have
three trans characters in the book. I was kind of concerned that you know, this
would be a censorship thing, but it wasn't anything to do with that at all. It
was basically, I found it a very positive process. It was very, very educative
for me. You don't want to be inadvertently cruel or to be punching down on some
minority group. You want to have that kind of freedom to create a range of
characters who have a range of behaviours. So, for example, in the book, I have
three very different archetypal characters, or they seem to be archetypal
characters, they're probably not, but they seem to have been characters that
have come into our culture. The notes that I had from the trans sensitivity
reader were absolutely first class. It didn't end up censoring it or something?
No, it didn't. You can't say that because you've changed the character to make
them more positive or... No, it definitely improved the book. One character that
the trans reader had more problems with than others and they say, you know, it's
like, but they actually saw why I had to have that character in there. The great
thing about books rather than television is that there are fewer red lines. One
of the characters that we were able to show in the novel, we couldn't really
show in TV. So, you know, there's a whole different editorial process. The trans
reader in TV, again, it was positive, but it's much more of a collective
responsibility. There's certain things that no channel can show basically. Does
it go too far though sometimes? I mean, removing the black colour of a costume,
for example. We're in this era where everything is socially engineered. Culture
is more contested than ever. It's a bit of a paradox, isn't it? Everything in
culture seems very contested. Well, because of the technology now, everybody
thinks that they can design. We can design life, we can design culture and it
doesn't always happen that way. I think the idea that you can redesign
everything, you can make everything sort of anodyne and safe and non-threatening
is spurious. Our whole imperial history is kind of, you know, racist and sexist.
It's to do with imperialism basically and the division of labour and capitalism.
But we have kings and queens and aristocrats and public school elites and
imperial statues of slave traders all over Britain. Why are we worried about
what somebody's written in a book? The author Irvin Welsh speaking to the BBC's
Evan Davis. And that's all from this edition of the Newsroom from the BBC World
Service with me, Peter Goffin. A reminder of our main news, President Zelensky
has reaffirmed his belief that Ukraine will defeat the Russian invasion. Thanks
for listening. Until next time, goodbye. This is the BBC World Service bringing
you the story which uncovered a multi-million dollar fishing scandal. After
independence in 1990, Namibia set out to reclaim the riches of its shores.
Instead, the Namibian fishing sector is embroiled in a scandal on an industrial
scale. A friend of mine called me and told me that you have to meet this guy.
I'm Johannes Dell and I've come to Namibia to find out how the great hopes
invested in its fishing industry have been dashed. It's a story too about how
journalists here and in faraway Iceland are working together, sometimes at
personal risk. We were taking on the most powerful political group in the
country. While this was happening I was getting texts, now it's time for you to
get what you deserve and you don't know what's coming for you. Fish rot, clear
waters, murky dealings. Today at 9.30 and 20 GMT. Coming up after the news, for
In the Studio on the BBC World Service, I've been given unique access to go
behind the scenes at New York's most iconic restaurant, Balthazar. With a little
help from actor Ralph Fiennes, I'll be finding out how restaurateur Keith
McNally has turned eating out into theatre. Like plays and films, restaurants
work best when they create their own universe. So join me, William Miller, for
In the Studio, Keith McNally, restaurateur. After the news. BBC News with
Danielle Jauowiecka. President Zelensky has reaffirmed his belief that Ukraine
will defeat the Russian invasion after President Biden visited Kiev to show
America's enduring support. He said the outcome of the war would determine the
fate of the rules-based international order. China's foreign minister has said
Beijing is deeply worried about the escalation of the war and the danger it
could spiral out of control. Chin Gang said certain countries should immediately
stop fuelling the fire. A new earthquake has caused panic and several deaths in
the quake-stricken border region of Turkey and Syria. Rescuers have once again
been searching for people trapped under rubble. Structures already weakened have
collapsed, including a bridge. The number of people killed by flash floods and
landslides in southeastern Brazil has risen to 40. Record rainfall devastated a
stretch of the coast in Sao Paulo state. President Lula da Silva has warned
against rebuilding in vulnerable areas. There's been an outcry in Colombia after
a former member of the National Truth Commission went into hiding because of
death threats. Lena Palacios played a leading role in a report on atrocities
committed during the long internal conflict. Two top Spanish transport officials
have resigned over a botched order for new commuter trains. They were too wide
to fit through tunnels in the mountains of Asturias and Cantabria. US
prosecutors have downgraded the involuntary manslaughter charges against the
Hollywood actor Alec Baldwin over a fatal shooting on a film set in 2021. It
means Baldwin and the film's armourer will face a maximum sentence of 18 months
if convicted. And an emaciated alligator is recovering at a zoo in New York
after being discovered in a lake in a park as children played nearby. That's the
latest BBC News. I'm sitting in a celebrity-packed restaurant in New York, which
you might say is not an obvious setting for an in-the-studio on the BBC World
Service. But the subject of our programme is a visionary restaurateur who turned
out to be more theatre impresario than mass caterer. You might have heard his
name as the man who banished James Corden from this very restaurant, Balthazar.
He is in fact a friend of mine, a 71-year-old Londoner called Keith McNally.
Arriving in New York in the mid-70s, he soon became one of the most celebrated
restaurateurs of our time. In 2004, the New York Times dubbed him the
restaurateur who invented downtown. But who is this man? And how has he created
such iconic successes in a city as cutthroat as New York? I'm William Miller, a
writer and producer, and in this edition of In the Studio, I'm going behind the
scenes to find out how Balthazar's creator, Keith McNally, has turned eating out
into something more akin to theatre, and probably one of the greatest stage
productions you'll ever find off Broadway. He's Cecil B. DeMille. He's a movie
producer that's actually doing a restaurant. As Balthazar celebrates 25 years,
and Keith prepares to roll out his winning formula with new restaurants opening
in Washington, DC and Miami, I'm exploring his process. We're working with
people who are trained toward perfection, and to try to teach them imperfection
is really difficult. And with the help of his team, I'm going in search of the
key to his success. You walk in and that's it. You're not even in America.
You're in your own little spot, and you can just sit and daydream away. I first
met Keith when I was six years old, growing up in North London. He was 19 and
looked like the young Al Pacino. He's been a close family friend for over 50
years. In the early 1980s, at the age of 18, I ran away to New York and got a
job working for him in the first of his many restaurants, the Odeon. And since
then, I've watched him cast his spell over most of downtown Manhattan. I'm very
worried that I won't come up with a good set. I think that anxiety makes me work
harder, certainly longer hours, whether that's better or not, I don't know. But
I sort of work around the clock in order to avoid disappointing people, because
I think that's a big problem of mine. That was an interview Keith did in 2013.
But then, just before Christmas 2016, he suffered a catastrophic stroke. It left
him paralysed down his right side and his speech badly affected. In his
Manhattan home today, Keith told me how he's turned to writing to reclaim his
voice, first on social media and now with a memoir, which comes out later this
year. Because my voice is no longer the same, clearly. And my Instagram post
became my voice. But now you've decided to write a memoir. Have you enjoyed that
process? Yeah, a lot. This has helped me a lot. When I'm writing, it's about the
only time I actually feel normal. So, as well as my conversations with Keith, he
has given us exclusive extracts from his memoir. Keith in his own words, read
for us here by a Balthasar regular, actor Ralph Fiennes. In one fell swoop I was
deprived of speech and my entire right side became paralysed. At night, with
words inaccessible to me, I'd listen in awe to the men in my hospital ward
talking. Speech now seemed like a divine accomplishment. Even the most mundane
words now had an element of poetry to them. Half paralysed and unable to speak,
I felt buried alive. More than anything, I wished my stroke had killed me. My
new life seemed ungraspable. It existed but was outside of me. But that particle
of human matter that was irreducibly me hadn't changed. I clung to this belief
with my fingernails. Just one block east of Broadway and the bustle of Soho is
80 Spring Street and Balthasar. As you walk through a pair of big swing doors,
you enter a vestibule. Here, you stop and like an actor standing in the wings
waiting to go on stage, you draw breath before setting foot in an altogether
different world. Erin Wendt, Director of Operations, is going to give us a tour.
Well, now you've entered Balthasar. Welcome to Paris. So as you enter, you were
embraced by this amber glow and now you're probably the most beautiful you will
ever be in your life and now you're going to sit down and eat. As you take a
right, you'll find yourself coming into the bar. Now the bar is massive. The
bar, imagine an entire wall of liquor, glassware and on each end is a gorgeous
sculpture of two beautiful, stunning women that look like, almost like mermaids
coming out of the sea. It's like no place you've ever been, unless you've been
to Paris. So how does he do it? One of the things that sets Keith McNally apart
as a restaurateur is he didn't arrive via the kitchen, but rather the stage.
Here is Ralph Fiennes again, reading from Keith's memoir. I was born into a
working class family in the East End of London in 1951. War permeated
everything. Former soldiers with pegged legs hobbled through unpaved streets and
bombsites potmarked the neighbourhood. I left school at 16 at just 1O level and
took a job as a bellhop at London's Hilton Hotel. In my third month at the
hotel, I was approached by an American producer to try out for a role in a film
he was making, which I did and was then offered the role. I left the hotel and
pursued a career as a boy actor. In 1968, I spent a year in playwright Alan
Bennett's Forty Years On. This would shape the rest of my life. During the run,
I became friends with Alan and helped him a little with the renovation of his
house. In the late 60s, the street he lived in was a haven for London's
intelligentsia and Alan's friend, the famous theatre director and intellectual
Jonathan Miller, lived opposite. That's my father, Jonathan Miller, and there
was nothing he liked more than an attentive audience and to teach. Keith was
someone who was keen to learn and soaked it up. Keith often claimed that my
father had helped build the foundations of his own deep love of film, theatre,
literature and music, which would all become key to Keith's process. Visiting
Jonathan and Alan's houses as a teenager, I was struck by how different they
were from the house I lived in. No floors laid with cheap tiles, no unheated
bedrooms, no outdoor coal shed. After my first visit to Jonathan Miller's house
and listening to Jonathan's sparkling conversation, I returned to my working-
class home full of bitterness about my coarse upbringing and full of resentment
towards my uncultured parents. The shame of growing up uneducated. Jonathan was
the most articulate man I'd ever met. He had such an original eye that he was
able to extract the extraordinary from the commonplace. On a trip to Florence to
look at Renaissance art, he was more interested in junk shops than in the Uffizi
gallery. In one shop he bought a rusting padlock for less than a dollar. It was
this attentiveness to the seemingly negligible that made Miller a remarkable
theatre director. The more you concentrate on the insignificant, he told me on
the day I met him, the more you end up with the important. At the time I agreed.
But days after my stroke, I wasn't so sure. Laying half-paralysed in a hospital
bed, unable to form a coherent sentence, I swallowed in feelings of
insignificance. Where was my importance now? My father adored you. Did he
influence you in any way about theatre and film? Yes, of course. I used to see
all the plays he was directing. I didn't understand Shakespeare much. But you
love Shakespeare. Yes, because of Jonathan. At this point, no one could have
anticipated what the future might hold for Keith, other than to cross the
Atlantic for America. So I remember very distinctly, you used to talk a lot
about going to America, that you were just going to go to America. But at the
time, you wanted to go to America and make films. You worked at the Rocky Horror
Show doing the lighting, and you had this little suitcase and you obviously
being paid in cash because you were putting cash into this suitcase. And you
told me, when this suitcase is full, I'm leaving. And I'd see the money building
up in the suitcase. And it was my worst nightmare because I knew when that
suitcase was full, you were going to go. In 1975, Keith did go and left for
America. He'd planned to travel to LA with a stop-off in New York, but he fell
in love with the city and never left. His first job was clearing tables and
shucking oysters, but before long he had found his metier and by 1978 was made
the general manager of One Fifth, a hip restaurant near Washington Square. A
year later, he had an idea to open a sandwich shop and went looking for a
suitable premises. He found a place that wasn't great for sandwiches, but was
perfect for his first restaurant. This would become The Odeon, made famous in
part by Jay McInerney's novel Bright Lights, Big City. But his trademark
immersive aesthetic really took shape almost 16 years later. The first
embodiment of this was a legendary underground Russian-themed vodka bar called
Pravda. Here, you felt like you were a spy in a Jean Le Carre film set in
Moscow. Keith was creating dining spaces with a director's eye. I mean, there
were no windows. You went down a staircase into a basement and you entered this
completely different world. I felt that was the first time you'd really created
a sort of theatre experience and you entered a world where you became something
else. And it's here we find our first clue to Keith McNally's process. I got the
idea from the play Too Clever by Half and the stage set was marvellous. It's the
big idea and it's not about food. It's about design or an aesthetic. Too Clever
by Half is by the Russian playwright Alexander Otrosky and the set had elements
of Russian constructivism and it was this that sowed a seed in Keith's mind that
would become his underground vodka bar. With Balthasar, it was a different story
that would start with an old photo. Here is Ray Fiennes again, reading from
Keith's memoir. I had come up with the notion for Balthasar years earlier while
living in Paris. Like many good ideas, this one came about accidentally. I was
searching for vintage curtains in Clignancourt's flea market when I came across
a photograph of a turn-of-the-century bar. Behind the bar's zinc counter was an
army of liquor bottles stacked 20 feet high. Flanking the bottles on either side
were two towering statues of semi-naked women carved in a classical Greek style.
I was so mesmerised by the look of this magnificent bar that I forgot about the
vintage curtains and bought the sepia-tinged photo instead. I kept the photo in
my back pocket thinking that if ever I found a space with a sky-high ceiling I'd
build a bar just like this. Keith's co-designer, Ian McFeely. It was all folded
up and he would pull it out every single day and show it to me. And what did you
think? Let's do it. The next step in this process was to find the perfect
location. A space to bring this bar to life. He went looking where others fear
to tread, remembers his architect Richard Lewis. He's been a genius at locating
real estate and old stores in neighbourhoods that haven't been developed and
people don't go there yet. So he kind of makes the neighbourhood with his
restaurants. And Balthazar was a leather warehouse in Soho at a time when all of
the, that whole neighbourhood was warehouses and commercial buildings and lofts.
It was like a rabbit warren. You know, you go into it and you couldn't see
across the room. That's one of the great things about Keith. Like he sees stuff.
He sees something and he knows it's going to work. Like I don't think I could
have seen that. You go in, it's a leather shop, you can't see ten feet ahead of
you. It's just full of stuff. But Keith could see the potential in this corner
location. And with Ian and Richard, he began reimagining the old tannery. They
raised the floor and knocked down the walls to reveal a space that was big
enough for a car showroom. Then he did something radical. For most
restaurateurs, windows are sacrosanct. But when building Balthazar, the first
decision I made was to block in two enormous windows in the dining room and
replace them with mirrors. Like plays and films, restaurants work best when they
create their own universe. A whole wall of windows was gone, replaced with giant
mirrors. All eyes were focused on the action inside the restaurant. It was a
stroke of brilliance. Co-designer Ian McFeely. The important thing is creating
an environment that as soon as you walk through the door, you're transported.
You're out of New York for two hours or three hours and you're somewhere else.
And you just, you leave everything. And I think most restaurateurs would value
as much window space as possible. But what you're trying to do is contain that
energy and too much window space, that energy slips away. I'm William Miller and
you're listening to In The Studio on the BBC World Service. I'm opening up the
creative world of my friend, restaurateur Keith McNally and his flagship New
York restaurant, Balthazar. The stage is ready and now the Balthazar space will
be designed with the kind of attention to detail a set designer brings to a film
set. Perhaps part of the true magic of Balthazar is in these very details. The
tiny things people might not notice, but collectively give you a sense that it's
been around forever. The nicotine stain of the paintwork, the colour coming from
the lights or the motifs in the mosaic tiles on the floor. It takes me back to
what my father often told Keith all those years ago of the importance of the
seemingly insignificant. The more you concentrate on the negligible, he would
tell him, the more you end up with the grand. Architect Richard Lewis.
Everything is designed and thought about and then it keeps going deeper and
deeper into tables, the chairs, you know, down to the plates and the napkins and
the everything. I mean there's no detail that he does not consider in any of his
restaurants and he never will compromise anything. Even the shape of the table
legs. Anyhow, on farm we're going to... Tables have been made for the new
restaurant in Miami. Keith likes the tops, but not the legs. So the carpenter is
making some new ones and Ian has spotted a design that might work based on a
table in Keith's own apartment. He's going to build some table bases for us down
in Miami. I just took photos of those stern legs there. Lovely. I love that.
Okay. The only difference will be at the bottom. Stephen Starr is Keith's
business partner. Keith's an artist and I have a reverence for art and I have a
great reverence for design. So they could be difficult sometimes to work with
artists or designers, but you have to let that go because the end result of some
of their craziness is beauty and perfection. His sensibility about design, I've
never done this with anybody where I just say, okay, whatever you want. He
designed a banquette. He didn't like it. He asked me, he was sheepishly, he was,
I think we need to take him out. I said, okay. It cost $25,000, but we did it.
And what he put in its place was much better. You can't get things right 100%
until you actually do it sometimes. Before I begin building a restaurant, I have
a very specific idea of its design, but my watertight floor plan immediately
starts leaking. Once I start building, unable to visualize an idea until it
becomes tangible. I often build things two or three times over until I feel it's
right. Robert Motherwell says he paints by correction. I do everything by
correction, especially restaurant design. That's why my restaurants always go
over budget. I would never invest in myself. Architect Richard Lewis again. It
is like a theater set. I mean, I don't think he's a real chef. Not at all. No,
not at all. So he hires great chefs, but the food is another aspect of what he's
doing that has to fit with the vision of the architecture and the whole concept
of the space, what I call the big idea. My argument is that I have been to Paris
and have searched high and low for the quintessential French bistro that I have
in my head. And the only time I've ever found it is on 80 Spring Street. Right.
He did a very good job. He did a very good job. Steak frites, the seafood
platters, the onion soup, the steak tartare, the amazing French fries. Those
never change. Keith food consultant Elaine Sterling. I wouldn't say he's as
exacting about the food as he is about all of the little details and looks of
things like how does a glass feel in your hand? What is it going to feel like
when you drink out of it? What does this plate look like? He's done a lot of the
work for you in a way by setting this beautiful stage. So the food can be quite
simple because everything around it that he's created is so exacting. I'm a
mediocre cook and a hopeless carpenter. And yet when I build a restaurant, I
meant to give direction to people whose jobs I could never perform in a million
years. Theatre critic Kenneth Tynan once said, a critic is a man who knows the
way but cannot drive a car. Unfortunately, that's how I feel. I feel so inferior
to my cooks that I do everything imaginable to avoid going into the kitchen.
Since Balthazar opened in 1997, I'm ashamed to say I've entered its kitchen
fewer than 20 times during service. But every time I do, I come out three inches
shorter. Keith's business partner, Stephen Starr. I went to school for film and
I really wanted to make movies. I think Keith wanted to make movies or be in
theatre. He was in theatre. So we have that background. We both are maybe
frustrated filmmakers. And I just think he's just an Academy Award winning
producer. At Balthazar, Keith has created a stage that's not only big enough for
the artists who eat there, but also the talented staff who wait on them. General
manager Erin Wentz started waitressing at Balthazar 25 years ago. I was in New
York, like everyone else, you know, looking to be an actor. And so I should have
been used to being on stage, but it was suddenly being thrust into the New York
scene. And I was from a small town in Louisiana. You see, I find it really
interesting. Keith came here 50 plus years ago, almost exactly as you did,
thinking New York was a place he was going to make it on the stage or film, but
actually in the long run, he thought he was going to end up in LA and he was
going to become a filmmaker. But somehow the restaurant business drew him in and
he found his forte and in a sense becomes this theater impresario in a
restaurant business. I think there's a sensibility in the way he views the
restaurants. He does, I think, think of them as theater. The fact that he has
put mirrors everywhere, everyone can see you. I think that that's done on
purpose. He sticks by his visions and you're a part of that. It's an escape from
the outside world. And for the time you're there, you can lose yourself and be
someone else. What Keith has created makes regular customers feel just a little
bit famous and the famous feel perfectly at home. Maitre D, Zouer Louhaiehi. I
realized what kind of crowd Keith can attract. Steve Martin is sitting in a
booth. Maybe Meryl Streep, if I remember well. There was a period when Trump
started coming. Oliver Stone, Robert De Niro sitting. I asked British theater
director Nicholas Heitner for his thoughts on the theater that is Balthazar.
Well, you don't go there for a quiet meal with your beloved to sort out a
problem you might be having. No, I think you do get there for a bit of a show.
It's like someone has imagined what the perfect bistro looks like and enlarged
it, exaggerated it for a show that isn't necessarily a direct reflection of
reality, but of the ideal imagined world for eating in. Balthazar is a sanctuary
and provides much needed continuity in a fast changing world. Balthazar regular,
writer Adam Levy. Balthazar, we go there for the sense of this is a stream scape
that never evaporates. This is an authentic, inauthentic place. And in New York,
where everything's changing all the time, that's amazing. That latte is going to
be the same latte I had 26 years ago. So you're kind of walking immediately into
a magical invented space. New Yorkers knew this is an artificial construct, but
it was like the essence of Paris that you can never get anywhere else, certainly
not in New York. So you step through the door and you were in this beautiful
evocation of a place that doesn't exist. And therefore it existed more than
anything else. What is clear is that as a storyteller, he's a natural. And now
he's turned his attention to writing a much anticipated memoir. Are you excited
about it coming out? The book? Yeah. Yes and no. I'm afraid I might get really
down once it's done. But because I've devoted so much time to this book thing,
I'm afraid I might fall into some deep depression. And I'm wary of that. So I
want to make sure before I finish that I start something else. And one thing I
must say, I must say, I want to say, is I think because I have three near death
experiences lately, the things that pulled me out wasn't so much people as work.
I think work is really underrated. And I think that's the best therapy anyone
can have. Go back to work quickly. In our search for Keith's formula, what have
we learnt? That design, not food, is his inspiration. He has a relentless
pursuit of detail. And his background as an actor and director means customers
feel like film stars while eating steak frites. Lots of other restaurateurs have
tried to copy the Balthazar look and have failed because the magic ingredient
remains elusive. Perhaps Keith's co-designer Ian McFeely has the answer. We
don't like perfection. You know, and almost everybody, writers, painters,
everyone's bar is perfection. And perfection is really easy, you know, because
it's very objective. Imperfection is much harder, you know, because it's
subjective. And we're working with people who are trained toward perfection and
to try to teach them imperfection is really difficult and they go overboard. And
it's often contrived what they come up with. Keith would never want to take all
the credit for the success that his Balthasars are, because like any great
theatre production, the final show depends on the whole cast and crew. But
behind all of this is the director, a British man from the East End of London
who went to New York and created the fantasy French bistro that exists in our
imagination. It's always fantastic when people who are French walk in and
they're literally just, they want to sit, they want to eat, they want to stay
there for hours. And, you know, it's kind of like, didn't you just leave Paris?
And like, oh, but we had to come here. It's better than Paris. And who better to
tell you that than someone from Paris? In the studio, Keith McNally,
Restraiteur, was presented by me, William Miller, with readings by Ray Fines. It
was produced by Yves Streeter and was a Raconteur production for the BBC World
Service. This is the BBC World Service with No Place Like Nam. On the 29th of
March, 1973, all American forces will be withdrawn from South Vietnam. Fifty
years later, a small group of US veterans have returned to live there
permanently. We'll be finding out why. No Place Like Nam, Saturday at 12 GMT. At
BBCWorldService.com, heart and soul. Mary was four when, like thousands of other
Native American children, she was taken from her family and forced into a
Christian boarding school. Join me, Liana Hosea, as I meet the survivors who've
reclaimed their indigenous spirituality to fight for justice and peaceÔøΩ