TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-02H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 It's time for the Science Hour now here on the BBC World Service and in half an
hour and exercise fitness and body mass under the microscope on crowdsides later
in the hour. Before that, Cyclone Freddie, which crossed the whole of the Indian
Ocean, made devastating landfall in Madagascar and then again at Mozambique,
could be a sign of the future. This grave concern in the southern African
region, we are seeing an increase in the number of category 4 and 5 areca. And
when tropical cyclones make landfall today in Mozambique, they are causing more
rainfall than in the past. The lessons of Freddie on Science in Action coming
up. Hello, this is Julie Candler with the BBC News. Votes are being counted in
Nigeria's most competitive presidential election in decades. The process was
largely peaceful but there were severe delays with some polling stations opening
hours later than scheduled. There were also reports of violence. Our
correspondent there, Mairni Jones, witnessed some of the disruption. In a
polling station here, voters are frustrated. No electoral officials have shown
up and they can't cast their ballots. It's not clear whether this was due to
poll management or a deliberate attempt to suppress the vote. The level of
engagement in this election has been unusually high, particularly from young
people. They're desperate to choose a government that will address the country's
ailing economy and rising insecurity. Nigeria is Africa's most populous country.
Whoever runs the country for the next four years will determine whether its
young people will thrive within its borders. Big crowds have been taking part in
protests in towns and cities across Israel for the eighth consecutive week
against the government's planned judicial reforms. In Tel Aviv, a major road
junction was blocked by tens of thousands of demonstrators who waved Israeli
flags. The national security minister, Itamar Ben Gevir, described the
protesters as anarchists. The opposition Labour Party said the protests would
not end until the government stopped threatening democracy. The European Union
has announced additional sanctions against the Russian-based Wagner Group for
what it says are human rights abuses in several African countries. Wagner had
already been sanctioned by the EU in 2021. Is it a letter in A-Smith? The
mercenaries play a key role in front-line fighting in Ukraine. But these
additional measures under the European Union's global human rights sanctions
regime apply to the Central African Republic, Sudan and Mali. Eight individuals
and seven entities tied to the Wagner Group are being listed. They will be
subject to an asset freeze and a travel ban. EU citizens and companies will be
forbidden from making funds available to them. Those listed are accused of
serious abuses, including extrajudicial killings. The UK and the European Union
are said to be on the brink of finalising a new deal on post-Brexit trading
rules for Northern Ireland. The Irish Prime Minister, Leo Varadka, said talks
were inching towards a conclusion. His Ione Welles. The essence of a new deal
between the UK and the EU over trading arrangements for Northern Ireland is
basically there. Discussions between both sides are now focusing on how it is
unveiled and presented. The government is briefing politicians and business
stakeholders about it. Critics are concerned that politicians in Northern
Ireland may still not get full control over future EU laws that could apply
there. The government knows this may be a case of giving everyone some things
they need if you can't give anyone everything they want. World news from the
BBC. Russia has accused Western countries of destabilising the G20 finance
ministers meeting in India by trying to include references to Ukraine in the
joint closing statement. When the countries failed to agree on a statement, the
host India issued its own summary, saying most members strongly condemned the
war. The French President Emmanuel Macron has said that a long-delayed trade
deal between the EU and a group of four South American countries can't go ahead
unless they follow European environmental policies. Mr Macron was speaking of
the annual agriculture show in Paris. The four Mercosur countries, Brazil,
Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay, are all major agricultural producers. French
farmers fear competition from Mercosur if they're not subject to the same
environmental standards. Judges at one of Europe's leading film festivals, the
Berlinale, have taken the unusual step of awarding the top prize to a
documentary. The winner was on the adamant, a French film about a floating day
care centre for people suffering from mental illness. Its director, Nicolas
Filibert, said he was delighted a documentary had won the festival's famous
Golden Bear. That documentary is awarded and celebrated. That documentary can be
considered to be cinema. In its own right, it touches me deeply. For 40 years, I
have always fought for it to be seen as such. In another surprise, the Berlin
Festival's award for Best Leading Actor went to its youngest ever winner, eight-
year-old Sophia Ortero. She plays a transgender child in the film 20,000 Species
of Bees. The Swedish Olympic champion has broken the world record for the pole
vault for the sixth time. Armand du Planty cleared 6.22 metres at the World
Athletics Indoor tournament in France. It was one centimetre higher than the
previous world record. BBC News. Welcome to Science in Action from the BBC World
Service. With me, Roland Pease. And later, we're going to see a smear of doomed
material at the centre of our galaxy. I've heard it looks like a cigar, someone
to me looks like the prism from 2001 Space Odyssey. Everyone says something
different in it, but this is kind of orbiting around the black hole. But we
don't expect it actually to be able to make more than one orbit because we
believe it's going to be destroyed. And we'll be ballooning on Venus. We'll
start, though, in the turbulent atmosphere of the Indian Ocean where Cyclone
Freddie just devastated Madagascar. There's been heavy damage to buildings along
with power cuts and flooding in eastern Madagascar as Cyclone Freddie struck the
region. Four people are reported to have been killed. And as we record the
programme, it's heading for South Africa and Mozambique. Freddie's been
developing it across 6,500 kilometres of Indian Ocean for weeks now, taking its
time. But it's here now, bringing winds of more than 150 kilometres per hour. As
it travels across the Madagascar landmass, it will weaken, but not for long. It
will strengthen again across the waters to Mozambique by Friday. It feels like
we're talking more often about cyclones in this part of the world. Last year,
storm Anna was quickly followed by Batsarai with devastating effects. And in
2019, Cyclone Id√© was quickly followed by Kenneth. Francois Engelbrecht of Waits
University has been looking at the trends and at Freddie's remarkable history
over the past two weeks. Yeah, it's in fact only one of four tropical cyclones
that have traversed the entire Indian Ocean. So this storm formed to the
northwest of Australia towards Indonesia and then found its way across the
entire Indian Ocean basin. It reached the status of a so-called category four
hurricane. And as it then moved into the southwest Indian Ocean, it was at some
point a category five hurricane. So the fact that it was travelling across the
whole of the Indian Ocean and that it kept on intensifying, basically it's
feeding off energy in the water, is it, all that time? Yes, that's the case. So
these tropical cyclones in fact can only sustain themselves if they can absorb
vast quantities of heat and moisture from tropical oceans. I mean, it's one
thing which I think always needs to be said, that when it reached Madagascar,
the winds had weakened slightly, but it's actually not the winds, I think, that
matter so much as the amount of moisture that's been captured and comes out as
rainfall. Yeah, I would say it's both. By the time that the storm moved over the
southeastern coast of Madagascar, and that was Tuesday night, it was still
classified as a category three hurricane. Now, such a storm can still generate
winds in the order of 200 kilometres an hour. So that can still be absolutely
life-threatening, especially of course if you live in informal housing. If you
live in informal housing, as millions of people do in Madagascar and in
Mozambique, where this storm is heading towards, winds blowing at sustained
speeds of 200 kilometres an hour are literally life-threatening. And then of
course that specific part of Madagascar where landfill was made contains areas
of really steep topography, so there's always the risk of much lights. And then
of course the heavy force of rain. As many listeners will know, these types of
storms can easily generate hundreds of millimetres of rain within a 24-hour
period. So there is always a pronounced flood risk when a tropical cyclone of
this intensity makes landfall. I mean, I've been looking at the news, there's
not a huge amount of detail coming out from Madagascar yet, but I presume that's
partly because once one of these things sets in, it takes time. You know, the
roads are washed away, you can't necessarily get there very quickly to find
what's happened. I run it, my experience is exactly the same. I've also been
scanning the internet for information and most of it is about half a day old at
least. The current information I've been able to find was that at least 16,000
people were displaced by the storm. And so far there are reports of four deaths
in Madagascar. The storm has now fortunately for the people of Madagascar found
its way into the Amazon big channel to the west of Madagascar. So I think we can
say now that the worst is over. Unfortunately, I think news of further damage
and more deaths are likely going to reach us in the next day or so. And
meantime, it's heading towards you. Yeah. So in the meantime, the storm is now
regenerating and re-intensifying over the war Mozambique channel. And by the
time that it is expected to make landfall in Mozambique, and that is expected by
midday on Friday, it will likely be a category one or two hurricane again. So
so-called significant tropical cycler. And the latest predictions are that
landfall will take place just to the north of Vilanculos, itself of Bayra,
Vilanculos. So some of the most devastating storms, for example, the worst storm
we've ever had in terms of loss of life in Africa, south of the equator, that
was tropical cyclone Idai, that storm made landfall further to the north almost
exactly at Bayra. But this storm is making landfall a bit further to the south.
So it's more southeastern Mozambique, parts of northeastern South Africa and
parts of southeastern Zimbabwe. But as it dies over those territories, it will
dump all its rain and so on. I mean, even though it sounds like it might not be
as bad as Idai, you're pretty worried or? I am extremely worried because the
storm is predicted to become a really slow moving. So it's very likely not going
to be as intense as tropical cyclone Idai was. But the storm is going to linger
over southeastern Mozambique and in southeastern Zimbabwe for a period of about
48 hours. And during that period, it's expected to dump hundreds of millimeters
of rain. So rivers such as the Lampopo River on the border of South African
Zimbabwe that then finds its way into Mozambique and the Imkumati rivers. These
rivers are most likely going to be in flood. Now you just talked about cyclone
Idai, which was in 2019. There were a couple of big ones last year. Is this part
of a trend? Are things getting worse or is it just that we're paying attention?
The evidence is telling us that in the south West Indian Ocean, we are seeing an
increase in the number of category four and five hurricane. It's very much about
the fact that the south West Indian Ocean is also warming with more fuel to
become more intense systems than in the past. The other important aspect and
also in this case, the East published research for Mozambique showing that when
tropical cyclones make landfall today in Mozambique, they are causing more
rainfall than in the past, maybe 10 to 20% more rainfall than in the past.
That's because of this additional water vapor, this extra water vapor now
available in the storms that eventually become rainfall. So yes, I think there's
grave concern in the southern African region that we may in fact for the very
first time, somewhere in the near future, maybe the next five to 10 years
already experienced a category five hurricane reaching Madagascar or reaching
Mozambique. The other immense concern is that these storms may start to find
their way further to the south than in the past as far south as say Maputu, the
capital of Mozambique. So I would say that Maputu like Richards Bay further to
the south in South Africa are cities that are completely unprepared for the
landfall of such an intense tropical cycle. And in a warmer world, one should
seriously consider such a possibility, a possibility that we certainly need to
prepare for in southern Africa. Francois Engelbrecht, climate scientist at Witz
University, please stay safe. There's a fierce storm brewing at the safe
distance of the galactic center, the heart of the Milky Way, 26,000 light years
away, according to a study just out in the Astrophysical Journal. The galactic
center is where there's a supermassive black hole weighing as much as 4 million
suns. Last year we talked about the ring of light wrapped around the surface of
this black hole and imaged by the Earth spanning event horizon telescope. And in
2020, Andr√© Gues became the fourth woman only to win the Nobel Prize in Physics
for her work tracking stars whizzing in tight orbits close to this almighty
gravitational pull. But her team has been puzzling about something rather more
nebulous there, a weird elongated smear of light in what looks like a galactic
death dive. Team member Anna Churlow says they think they have an answer. So
this object is on a similar scale as the stars, but it's quite strikingly
different because what we see is mostly gas and dust. So this looks like
basically a cloud of dust and gas. And what is interesting is that since this is
material that is much lighter than a star, it gets stretched by the influence of
the supermassive black hole, by the tidal forces of the supermassive black hole.
So the leading edge of this feature is pulled in more strongly than the tails of
this thing gets stretched and ultimately will be pulled apart by these forces. I
mean, it looks a bit like a sausage to me, a very long sausage, but I think also
this is very spaghetti fired. I don't know if that's the right word. Yeah,
you're making me hungry. I've heard it looks like a cigar, someone to me looks
like the prism from 2001 Space Odyssey. Everyone says something different in it.
But yes, it looks very long. That's the idea, right? When you see a star, you
see a point like source, but this is much more stretched. I mean, from tip to
toe of this sausage, I don't know if is it comparable to I don't know the
distance between the Earth and the Sun or Pluto and the Sun or is it much bigger
or much smaller? So it's 3000 times the distance between the Earth and the Sun.
Wow. So this is really long thing. It's absolutely stretched out an enormous
distance. Yeah, it's very big. So it used to be about a half of it around 15, 20
years ago. So it got much, much longer in this layer time. And of course, if you
look at this region, there are gas structures that are even bigger than that.
There's big nebulas, you have big matter vessel work, they can be really, really
big. So this one is relatively big. It's much bigger than a star for sure. But
what is interesting is that since it's so close, we can trace in detail what is
the effect of the black hole on this gas, whereas for gases slightly at our
distances, you don't see that that much. I mean, this is on an orbit around the
black hole, is it? But it sounds like the front end is being pulled faster than
the stuff at the back. Yes. So there are two things when you measure the orbit
of an object like this, it's much more tricky, because you don't know exactly
what you're tracing and what time. But yes, we believe that this is kind of
orbiting around the black hole, but we don't expect it actually to be able to
make more than one orbit because we believe it's going to be destroyed once you
get close enough to the black hole. So it's not going to make a second orbit.
Whereas stars, of course, do. I was going to ask you that because we've talked
about these stars which go very fast around that black hole. Are they much
closer than this cloud or is this much closer than then? Well, you have both.
You have stars that are orbiting in a much tighter orbit, but stars that are
also at a similar scale. So in the past, people have talked a lot about the S
stars. So those stars that are found orbiting close to the black hole and the
scale at which the orbit is similar to the scale at which we see this object. So
it is indeed a similar scale, but it's just the behavior of stars and this
object are very different. We calculated this as the equivalent of the masses of
a few Jupiter. So it's planet size, let's say, mass wise, whereas stars are
hundreds or thousands or even more times this mass. So it's a very different
mass. And since this is not massive, it gets the influence of the black hole in
a very different way. Its structure itself is changed by the black hole. So if
it's much lighter than one of those stars, it's presumably not a shredded star
in its own right. Or if it is, it's left something else behind somewhere. Yes,
exactly. You got it exactly right. That's what we think. So because one of the
questions we had is, where does this come from? Okay, we believe it's made of
dust and gas, but where does it come from? So one idea is there are so many
stars in this region that interact with each other. And sometimes they can
merge. And when you merge two stars, you get a very messy process that can shed
gas and dust. And maybe you can eject a portion of this gas that can look like
X7, the object we see. And do you have any idea how long ago this might have
been? I mean, could it have been during the time when we had powerful telescopes
and you could go back and see the flash of this happening, do you think? That's
a very good question. So we have observations of this that go all the way to
2002, nothing before that. We might be able to see some of this mentioned with
other observations in different telescopes. But we believe it's probably been
created a few decades ago. I mean, this type of object is not supposed to
survive very long. That's pretty brand new in terms of galactic history. Oh,
yes, definitely. And in that sense, we are kind of lucky to be able to observe
it at this time. So we can imagine that maybe this type of process happens,
maybe frequently, since you have so many things that can smash and merge into
each other. But we are not sure. So this probably has been created a few decades
ago, maybe 50 years ago, maybe 100, it's not thousands of years ago, I don't
think so. And you keep on saying that it's not going to last for a long. I mean,
presumably it's going to it's going to be swallowed, is it by the black hole?
But do you have an idea how soon? So we predicted that it's going to make its
closest encounter with the black hole around 2036. This is not a very precise
measurement. So it's roughly 15 years could be 10 could be 20, 30. So what we
know is that this object is actually not coming super close to the black hole.
So we don't know exactly how quickly then that material will be swallowed by the
black hole itself. But what we are going to see for sure is that as it's
approaching the black hole is going to be pulled apart. And so instead of seeing
just one long sausage, we're going to see been sliced in different pieces. And
then these are probably going to be coming fainter and fainter. So maybe you're
not going to see it all the way to its death into the black hole. But we are
surely going to see how the black hole is pulling is going to pull it apart.
You're going to stick around and watch this, aren't you? Oh, yes, of course.
Astronomer Anna Chirlo from the University of California in Los Angeles 2036.
Mark it in your calendar, though I expect we'll get an update before then. And
let's stay in outer space but come closer by with a proposal I saw to send a
flotilla of balloons to Venus. Spy balloons in a way, but not like the ones
we've seen in the news recently. It's not cameras they'll be carrying. Venus's
atmosphere is too cloudy to see through. But with microphones, they can listen
to earthquake or should I say Venus quake rumbles far below. Proposer Siddharth
Krishnamurthy told me putting conventional seismometers on the surface is out of
the question. It turns out on Venus, the surface temperature and pressure is so
high that it's actually very difficult to perform seismology as we know it on
Venus, you know, the conditions are so difficult that the lifetime survival
record for the surface of Venus is 127 minutes. But the atmosphere of Venus is
actually very, very thick, as thick as about a kilometer under the Earth's
oceans. And that allows for a very efficient transfer of energy. So when the
ground shakes, it transfers a bunch of energy into the atmosphere, which then
propagates for very large distances. And you can hear, quote unquote, these
waves from balloons that are in Venus's atmosphere about 50 to 60 kilometers up.
And the big advantage of doing that is that the temperature and pressure at
those altitudes is much more clement. So it's zero degrees Celsius about one
atmosphere pressure. So cold day on Earth. And so you don't have this lifetime
and survival problem if you do that. I mean, how much movement or how much
change in pressure do you think you'd get? You know, it just sounds bizarre to
me. It sounded bizarre to me before I started working on this myself. It is very
small. You're not incorrect about that. But the instruments we have are also
very sensitive. And on Earth, we have measured infrasound from earthquakes that
is about a hundredth of a Pascal. And just for context, sea level pressure on
Earth is about a hundred thousand Pascal. So it's several orders of magnitude
weaker than the atmosphere we experience on a day to day level. So you're very
right. The signal is actually very weak. And you've actually answered one of the
questions I had. How do you know this works? And the answer is you have tried
this or people have tried this on Earth. We have tried this and the field is so
new and so small. There's only a bunch of us working on it. So the first group
to show this was the group I work with here at JPL, who showed the first
detection of an earthquake from a balloon. And now that was a magnitude 4.2 in
Southern California. And the balloon was about five kilometers above the ground
and about 80 kilometers away from the earthquake. But more recently, our friends
from France, they were actually able to see a much larger earthquake, a
magnitude 7.5 from 3000 kilometers away. Do we know there are Venus quakes or do
we have reasons to believe there are Venus quakes? So we have reasons to believe
there are Venus quakes. We've never been able to pick up a quake directly
because it's just so difficult to measure them. But if you look at radar maps of
Venus, you find that the surface is littered with these volcanic landforms. And
so for one where there are volcanoes, there is typically seismicity as well. But
then also there are structures on the surface where you have clear signs that
little blocks have been tectonically deformed. And so you feel like maybe
there's deformation going on even now and where there's deformation, there are
typically quakes. And the title of your paper talks about a flotilla of these
airborne seismometers. So the idea is that what you'd have a launch would sort
of scatter these around the top of the atmosphere. That would be great. So
anything a single balloon can do, a network of balloons can do better. And the
big advantage with balloons is you can actually scatter a bunch of them from the
same entry vehicle. So the horizontal wind changes fairly rapidly with altitude.
And so you can imagine an entry vehicle coming in and inflating balloons as it
descends and it drops a balloon off every couple of kilometers. In a few days,
these balloons would be separated by a few thousand kilometers because the wind
at each of these levels is so different. And so what you end up having is
essentially a network of these seismicity detecting balloons. And that would be
ideal. Now, whether or not that happens is out of my hands, but scientifically
speaking, that would be very valuable. So talking to your bosses at least. I'm
talking to anyone who will listen. And assuming you can detect them, what is
there about Venus we want to know? Venus is a very interesting planet, partially
because it's so similar to Earth in terms of everything that matters. You know,
it is very similar in mass. It's very similar in size. It's not that much closer
to the sun than the Earth. So the imagination of people before it was first
visited in the 1960s by spacecraft led them to think that they'd find a tropical
paradise underneath those clouds because they could never see past the clouds
and the imagination was all you had. And then the first spacecraft visited it
and found the temperature was 460 degrees Celsius and absolutely nothing could
live on its surface. So one of the big questions about Venus is how is it so
physically similar to Earth, where it sort of got to be so different? And there
are two possible answers. One is that it started out that way. There was always
doomed to be the hellscape that it is now. But the other option is that it
started out very similar to Earth and very clement, but something happened that
centered down a different path and it is what it is now. So some people have
started using this phrase that Venus is a past and future Earth. And you know,
this is one of those very fundamental questions. How did the solar system evolve
and why did Venus, Earth and Mars end up so different? And it also tells us
about other planets that we're detecting around other stars and whether they
might have life on them and how they're evolving. This is a very important
question to answer with our own solar system and where we have the most
resources to observe as much as we can. Siddharth Krishnamurthy from NASA's Jet
Propulsion Lab. His proposal is detailed in geophysical research letters. And
that's where this letter from Science in Action ends. We've links to the
scientists and more info on our webpage at bbcworldservice.com. I'm Roland
Pease. The producer is Sophie Ormiston. Please join us again when communications
resume next week. But after the break, Anand Jagratiya exercises ideas about
weight loss. This is the BBC World Service meeting the Vietnam War veterans who
left America and retired to the country they fought in. 50 years ago on the 29th
of March, all American forces will be withdrawn from South Vietnam. Today, a
small group of US veterans now in their 70s have returned to live there
permanently. I was expecting people to hate me when I came back. People welcomed
me like I had just left the day before. I am now from and I'll be finding out
why they choose to retire in Vietnam. You're ashamed of what you've seen and
what you did. I say this is the only thing that makes sense, me living in
Vietnam. I came back to find the war. I kind of explain it as when you're a
little kid, you've got a monster under the bed. I had to look under the bed and
the monster wasn't there. No place like Nam at bbcworldservice.com slash
documentaries. The Science Hour continues in a moment here on the BBC World
Service with Anand Jagratiya exploring the best ways to burn those carbs. You
keep the RPM above for 35, 41, 46. You're making it harder. I can see it going
up. So it popped up 75 watts. So you're trying to get my heart rate up. Trying
to get your heart rate up. Exercise, fitness and body mass under the microscope
on Crowdsance in a moment. BBC News with David Harper. Votes are being counted
in Nigeria's most competitive presidential election in decades. The process was
largely peaceful, but there were some reports of violence, including gunshots
near a polling station in Lagos. The contest is a tight race between three front
runners. Large crowds have been taking part in protests in towns and cities
across Israel for the eighth consecutive week against the government's planned
judicial reforms. In Tel Aviv, a major road junction was blocked by tens of
thousands of demonstrators waving Israeli flags. Russian media say a senior
general has visited troops near Bakhmut, which has been the focus of months of
intense onslaught by the Russian military and Wagner mercenaries. General
Alexander Tsiolsky's trip to the eastern city comes amid reports of Russian
advances in the area. The European Union is bringing more sanctions against the
Russian mercenary group Wagner for human rights abuses in three African
countries. Moscow has accused the United States and other Western nations of
destabilizing the G20 finance ministers meeting in India. No closing statement
was agreed, as Russia and China refuse to accept a passage condemning Russian
aggression in Ukraine. The French president Emmanuel Macron has said that a
long-delayed trade deal between the EU and a group of four South American
countries can't go ahead unless they follow European environmental policies.
French farmers fear competition from the Mercosur countries if they are not
subject to the same environmental standards. The UK and the European Union
appear to be close to finalizing a new deal on post-Brexit trading rules for
Northern Ireland. Under the current protocol, Northern Ireland follows some EU
laws and goods arriving from the British mainland are subject to checks. A
Swedish Olympic champion has broken his own world record for the pole vault for
the sixth time. Armand Duplantis cleared 6.22 metres at the World Athletics
indoor tournament in central France, one centimetre higher than his previous
world record, set last year. BBC News. Anna, do you got a pot of pure butter
ghee in front of you? Why? We are doing some arts and crafts today on Crowdside.
We are going to use this to make a candle. Let's just open this up. You can see
lovely golden stuff in there. So ghee is pure fat and it comes from butter. You
make it by warming up butter until it melts and then you skim off all of the
milk solids and the water evaporates and what you are left with is this stuff.
So we have got a bit of cotton wool here. We are going to sort of make a wick
out of it. So squash the end down. We have heated up the ghee so it is liquid. I
am just going to put it in there. Hey, told you it would work. Yeah. Let there
be light. I am Annan Jagatia. And I am producer Marika Peters. And the reason
why we have done this is because actually this week's question is all about the
process that is going on in this candle which is burning fat. Okay, cool. Let's
go to the listener who sent it to us. Hello Crowdside. I am really clever from
San Luis Obispo, California and I would like to know what happens to fat when we
exercise. I was just in the cardio room one day watching all these people
working so hard. What I am assuming is to burn fat and I just wondered are we
inhaling each other's fat? Like where does it go? What happens to the fat that
is in those cells as we, and I am air quoting here burn it off. There is a
metabolic process by which it leaves our body. That is what I am really curious
about. It is a great question, Lili. Why have you been thinking about this? Are
you someone that does a lot of exercise? Yeah, I have been exercising pretty
much five hours a day since I was 30. And I just love it. I love the process of
it. And I just find the more energy that is expended, the more energy I have.
Although Lili is wondering about burning fat, which is a phrase that a lot of us
use all the time. But even for those of us who do a lot less exercise than that,
all of us have fat inside our bodies, all of us use it for energy. What Lili
wants to know is what actually happens in that process. Where does the fat go?
Where does it end up? It is really interesting. I am pretty intrigued too. But
it is not just an armchair discussion. Because according to the World Health
Organization, deaths that are linked to obesity and to being overweight now
outnumber globally deaths from under-eating and not getting enough food from
under-nutrition. So the science of how we use fat, how we store it, and how we
burn it and lose weight is really important for global public health. But before
we get to all of that stuff, I think we need to go back to basics and ask what
actually is fat? The technical term is adipose tissue. And actually, it is an
active organ and it is essential for health. That is Ursula White from the
Pennington Biomedical Research Centre in the US, where she studies human adipose
tissue, which is body fat to you and me. We have different types of fat in the
body and we know that fat tissue is located in different areas of the body. The
characteristic for which it is most known is being an inner energy storage
depot. But in addition, it is secreting different factors, different amounts of
these factors. There are actually some molecules or hormones that are released
from fat tissue that are not released from anywhere else in the body. This is
something that many people do not know. The fact that something that is secreted
from the fat tissue can talk to the brain, can talk to the heart, can talk to
the skeletal muscle and be very influential in regulating the body. So if like
me, you thought of fat a bit like oil or lard sitting underneath your skin or
running through your veins, then you might not have been giving fat the credit
it's due. Fat stores energy, but it also does much, much more. Depending on
where fat is in your body, it can also have some pretty important health
benefits. When the adipose or fat tissue is situated in the abdominal region,
these individuals were more at risk for cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes,
et cetera. The adipose tissue situated in the lower body, and when I say lower
body, I'm speaking of the thigh region in the gluteal region or the buttocks, it
can in fact be protective from some of these diseases. So quick recap. We've got
fat as in the molecules stored in fat cells, adipocytes, and these make up fat
tissue, which is the soft spongy layer we would recognize as body fat. When we
put on weight or lose it, it's this organ that's getting bigger or smaller
because the fat cells are changing in two distinct ways. There was a study that
was completed a few years ago specifically looking at how the fat tissue expands
during time of weight gain. And what this study showed was that it meant the
primary mechanism of expansion was an increase in fat cell size, whereas in
women, it was the opposite. The primary mechanism of expansion was an increase
in fat cell number. But when people lose weight, if they end up burning more
calories than they're taking in for a long period of time and they become
smaller, either you might be losing fat cells or they might be getting smaller
because they've got less fat in them. Absolutely. And that's a source of a lot
of studies right now. We know there's a decrease in the size of the fat cell
because we know that the fat or lipid inside the fat cell is decreasing, but it
remains to be seen whether the whole fat cell is actually removed. It's not yet
clear whether you can completely get rid of fat cells, which are the containers
for fat, although we do know that the fat within them can disappear. But how?
Where does it go when we burn it off? Well, it all comes down to our metabolism.
Metabolism is all about how much energy you need to generate to function, and it
depends on what type of function you want to do. Dr. Laura Watson studies
metabolism. The grand total of all the vital life-sustaining chemical reactions
in the body that underpins everything we do, from walking and talking to just
lounging around. Doing any of this stuff, even apparently doing nothing at all,
requires energy because our cells need a constant supply just to stay alive. And
at the NIHR Cambridge Clinical Research Facility, Laura studies how much energy
people use and the way that they use it, which is known as energy expenditure.
Age, gender, fat mass, muscle mass, organ mass, what you ate the night before,
all of that influences what your energy expenditure does. And activity,
obviously, is a big one. Can Laura help us get an answer to Lele's question
about where fat goes when we exercise? Well, it turns out that depending on how
intensely you're working out, or how long you've been going for, your body might
not be using much fat at all, so it isn't going anywhere. Instead, you may be
relying on your other big store of energy, carbohydrates. Even from lying down
to then sitting up, that instant energy you're going to use carbohydrate because
it's a very quick, readily available fuel. We use carbohydrate, which our cells
store in a form called glycogen, when we need energy quickly. Think of it like
setting fire to some newspaper. It lights immediately, but it doesn't last very
long. Fat, on the other hand, is a bit more like coal. It takes longer to catch,
but it's more energy dense, so you get more out of it. If you were running a
marathon, for example, where you're very much used up your glycogen stores,
you've hit the wall, you're going to be using your fat stores because that's
what's left or that's what's available. During moderate intensity exercise,
something like jogging, your body initially relies on its carbohydrate stores,
and as these slowly run out, it turns to using fats. Hitting the wall is what
happens when your glycogen reserves are completely depleted, and as any long
distance runner will tell you, it ain't pleasant. During really high intensity
exercise, like sprinting, there just isn't time for your body to burn fat to get
energy, so it resorts to using carbs almost exclusively. However, you can't keep
this up forever, which is why we very quickly get tired out. In Laura's lab,
she's got kit that can measure how much of each fuel I'm using, and for that, I
need to get on my bike. For, let's say, 20 minutes at a wattage that will get
you roughly to 50% of your age max heart rate. Laura straps a mask to my face.
Let me pop this on you. Does that feel snug? And I sit on the exercise bike to
pedal for the next 20 minutes. So keep the RPM above for 35, 41, 46. Oh, you're
making it harder. Yeah. I can see it going up. So it popped up to 75 watts. So
you're trying to get my heart rate up. Trying to get your heart rate up, yeah.
Let me explain how this experiment is going to work. As you can hear, I'm
breathing in and out a bit like Darth Vader because of the mask, and that is
because most of the time, apart from during very intense exercise, we need
oxygen to unlock the energy in fats or carbs. The fuel molecule, whichever one
it is, is broken down, and this produces carbon dioxide and water as waste
products. Now, here's the clever bit. The ratio of oxygen in to CO2 out is
different for fats versus carbs, and that's because each one contains different
numbers of carbon atoms, and these react with oxygen in different proportions.
The upshot is basically that by measuring the amount of CO2 in my breath, Laura
can get an estimate of which fuel my body is relying on. So you've got oxygen is
in red on this graph, and carbon dioxide is in blue, and you've got that nice
gap between the two at the minute. When these two cross over is when you've
reached a ratio of one, and then you are producing more carbon dioxide than you
are consuming oxygen. So after the 20 minutes, when you'd be able to get a rough
number of how many kilojoules are in a So it will be in what? Is that like a
Mars bar? Well, I can convert them into calories, which might be easier. It
definitely won't be a Mars bar. Laura goes away and does some quick
calculations. Your resting energy expenditure is about 1500 calories a day, so
that's what you need just to be awake. Then she works out how much I spent
during my time on the bike. You have expended 16 calories of fat. After 20
minutes of hard graft, I have to say I am a bit disappointed with the results.
Wow. But actually 98.5 calories in carbohydrate. Was that what you were
expecting? We wanted you to be in that kind of aerobic fat threshold. But what
this shows is that you're using a combination of both. And actually, you're
using more of your glycogen stores, which is already available. You've had
breakfast. So that's what your body has decided to use in that 15 minutes of
cycling at about 60% of your max heart rate. How many biscuits is that? I'd say
100 calories could be a banana. So your carbohydrate, you've maybe oxidised a
banana if you're going to put it in that terms. And 16 calories of fat, a bite
of a biscuit, if you're lucky. Right, OK. Sorry. So even though I burned a
pretty tiny amount of fat, it's actually proof that I was cycling pretty hard.
Because at rest, we get about 40% of our energy from carbs and the other 60%
comes from fat. As we work harder and harder and we need more and more energy,
we start to get more and more of it from carbs. But Lely wanted to know what
actually happens to our fat during exercise. Where does it go? And are we really
burning it like the ghee in the candle from earlier? You're moving energy from
your fat cells, your adipose tissue, say into your muscle where that's where
your kneading ends. I think think of it as more of breaking these molecules down
rather than burning them. So when we're talking about exercising, we're talking
about breaking down that energy into something that we can use. And at the very
end point, you then breathe out excess carbon dioxide. That's how you kind of
get rid of it. You do expire more carbon dioxide when you exercise and when you
oxidise fuels. But I wouldn't say that that's how you get rid of fat from your
body is by expiring CO2. It's very much broken down and it's utilised. You're
listening to Crowd Science from the BBC World Service and it looks like we're
getting an answer to Lely's question about where our fat goes when we exercise.
We've just heard that we're actually using up fat all the time, not just when we
exert ourselves and in fact some kinds of exercise hardly rely on fat at all.
And as Laura says, we're not burning this fat like in a candle. Instead, we
break down the fat molecules inside ourselves into smaller molecules and this
releases energy but not in the form of heat. Rather, our cells harness it to
drive various metabolic processes like muscle contraction for example. Once
we've squeezed all the energy that we can out of a fat molecule, you're left
with CO2 and water and some of that is exhaled. Which means that Lely, while
you're not breathing in other people's fat in the gym, yes, you are breathing in
other people's atoms. And in fact, at least some of my atoms were once in you
and vice versa. Which is pretty mind-blowing. We've actually made a Crowd
Science all about it called Were My Atoms Once Your Atoms and you can find that
in BBC Sounds in our archive. So that's the life cycle of fat. But Lely is also
interested in how this sequence of storing and burning fat changes over the life
cycle of a human being. And how she can stay in shape well into old age. My
experience as well as my observation is as people get older and let's focus in
on post-menopausal women, I noticed a huge body shift, a thickening of the mid-
centre and just this general slowing down and so I don't want to have that
happen to me so I work very diligently, very hard at keeping a really low BMI
and keeping my energy up. Lely is right, people do often seem to get larger as
they get older. But why? The usual answer is, ah well, my metabolism is slowing
down. But is that true? Luckily for us, someone's done the research and
discovered an answer you might find surprising. Kids burn a lot more calories
than we'd expect for their body size alone and we think that's because of all
the work that their body's doing to develop their organs and their immune system
and all this other developmental work they have to do. And then of course in
older age as we get past 60 our metabolism starts to slow down. This is Herman
Ponser. I'm a professor of evolutionary anthropology and global health at Duke
University. And Herman's found that apart from these big changes he's just
described, actually for most of our adult lives our metabolism stays pretty
stable. The stresses that sort of build as we get older, you know, you get a job
and you've got kids and you've got all these things on your plate, that can make
you feel different as well. I think we tend to blame all those changes, we call
it metabolism. When we look at actual measurements of calories burned per day,
it isn't really metabolism, it's all these other things. And so it's most likely
those other changes that are pushing us to eat a bit more, for example, put on
weight or otherwise feel differently than what we did when we were younger. So
what can people do to battle the bulge? Lele spends hours at the gym. That must
be helping, right? Well, Herman has looked into this question too. And again,
the results were totally unexpected. I had a chance to work with a community
called the Hadza. They live in northern Tanzania and they have a very physically
active hunter-gatherer lifestyle. They walk kilometres and kilometres every day
to get wild game or plant foods from their landscape. So that was a good
opportunity for us to ask how many calories does your body need to burn every
day to support that lifestyle. And we expected it would be a lot, right? Because
again, they're so physically active and we're generally told that the more
active you are, the more calories you burn every day. But instead, to our
surprise, what we found was they burn the same number of calories every day as
men and women in the US, in Europe and other industrialized countries. In other
words, even though they get more physical activity in a day than most Americans
get in a week, there was no difference in how their bodies were burning
calories. So we know that they walk a lot, so they must be burning a lot of
energy on walking. They're not more efficient as walking or something like that.
Instead, their bodies are adjusting elsewhere during the course of the day. So
they're saving energy in other non-activity tasks that allows them to keep their
total calories burned the same as you and me, even though they're much more
physically active. These findings are just so counterintuitive. How can somebody
who runs four times a week burn the same number of calories overall as someone
who has a more leisurely lifestyle? I think it's fair to say that researchers in
this field don't yet have a full explanation for what's going on here. But
Herman thinks that there are some clues, and they're to do with how the body
adjusts the energy that it spends on other processes. We have some evidence that
it's saving energy on things like immune function. So for example, if you are
really physically active, if you exercise regularly, you will have lower levels
of inflammation. Inflammation is just your immune system kind of working
overtime more than it needs to. And inflammation is also bad for you. So when
you exercise, your body reduces the amount of inflammation it produces. People
who exercise also have a smaller response to stress. They produce less
adrenaline and cortisol over the course of a day than people who aren't
exercising. Studies in this area are ongoing, but so far no one has come up with
any conclusive answers. Still, even though it is the opposite of what we might
have expected, think about it another way and it does make sense. So many things
about the human body are about maintaining a balance, from body temperature to
hormone levels. So why wouldn't it also find a way to compensate and keep our
metabolism constant over time? Herman's studies look at data across populations,
and it seems like when you take body weight into account, people's metabolisms
are pretty similar. Even so, there is some variation, and we all know those
lucky people who seem to eat whatever they want and stay slim. People who just
say they have a really high metabolism. I asked Herman what his data says about
this. As far as we can tell, that feeling of whether or not your metabolism is
fast or slow is more about your relationship with food and how food makes your
brain reward system light up and how it makes you feel and whether or not you
find it difficult to eat the right amount or perhaps you find it easier to
overeat. That seems to be what people are really referring to when they talk
about their metabolism and how fast or slow it is, because unless you've had it
measured, you don't really know if you have a fast or slow metabolism. So
according to Herman, people who do naturally burn more energy aren't more or
less likely to gain weight than the rest of us. And all of this has big
consequences for how we think about exercise, diet and weight loss. If you want
to get a handle on obesity, you need to focus on diet. The foods we eat are the
biggest lever we have to try to change and regulate our weight. Obesity is
mostly a diet problem, not so much an exercise problem. Now, the other thing we
can say is exercise is really good for us. It's not a great way to lose weight,
but it's important for other aspects of your health. If exercise doesn't change
your metabolism and you don't really fancy going on a diet, you might be
wondering what else you can do to keep your fat stores at a healthy level. Well,
believe it or not, the answer may lie in having more fat, but it's a different
kind of fat to the type that we've looked at so far. And it's pretty special. We
have white fat, which most people think of when they think of fat, and we've
developed or evolved this tissue as a way to store excess calories. In addition
to white fat, which stores energy, mammals also have another kind of fat called
brown fat. And interestingly, rather than storing energy, this kind of fat can
dissipate energy or convert energy into heat. And we now know that brown fat not
only generates heat, but it also can help protect against weight gain and many
of the complications associated with obesity. This is Paul Cohen. I'm an
associate professor at the Rockefeller University in New York City. He studies
the other kind of fat, brown fat. Now these cells work in a totally different
way to white adipocytes. They do produce heat. So in a way, they're a bit more
like the candle of ghee we burned at the start of the show. When we're born, we
have a lot of brown fat, those cuddly rolls on the back and the neck of babies,
which makes them so cute. It helps to keep them warm when they're tiny and
hairless. But until recently, scientists thought that adults had hardly any
brown fat at all. It turns out that actually we do, although only in very tiny
amounts. The exact amount of brown fat that humans have is not actually known,
but it can be measured in gram quantities. Whereas white fat can make up easily
more than a third or greater of a person's total body weight. My group looked at
a cohort of over 50,000 individuals who had had the kind of scan that can detect
brown fat in humans. And by looking at a patient's brown fat status and then
linking that to all of the information in their electronic health records, we
were able to determine that brown fat is associated with reduced likelihood of a
whole variety of chronic diseases, including type 2 diabetes, hypertension,
lipid disorders and coronary artery disease. So somewhat ironically, having more
brown fat could also be protective against obesity. Paul says that we don't
really understand how brown fat actually has these effects, but there is some
evidence that increasing the amount of brown fat that we have as adults or
increasing its activity could influence our metabolism. So how could we do this?
One way of making more brown fat would be to identify and study the precursor
cells that give rise to brown fat cells and see if we can either increase the
number of these precursor cells or do something to make more of these precursor
cells become brown fat cells. Another possibility though would be to work with
the existing brown fat we have and try to develop interventions or pharmacologic
approaches that increase the activity of brown fat. We already know that one
very effective way of increasing the activity of brown fat is cold exposure.
However, most people of course don't really like being cold, so I don't know if
that's going to be a durable solution. But if we understand more about the
biology, then there's the potential that we could recapitulate some of the same
effects of cold exposure with drugs or other interventions without actually
making people expose themselves to the cold. I'm obviously biased, but I think
there's an enormous amount to be learned by studying how fat works, both white
and brown fat. And I think at the end it's really a window into human metabolism
with really strong and evident links to a whole variety of serious diseases. For
something that gets such a bad rap when we normally talk about it, fat actually
does a lot more than most of us ever realised. It protects us from disease,
tells our brains when we're hungry, generates heat and of course stores energy.
And yet in lots of ways fat is still mysterious and researchers are still
figuring out how it does all the things it does. While we know that carrying too
much fat is bad for our health, it also looks like our ideas about how to lose
weight have been totally misplaced for decades. Who could have thought that
something as seemingly mundane as fat could be so full of surprises? We've
reached the end of this edition of Crowd Science from the BBC World Service.
Today's question came from me, Lulu Clever in California. The show is presented
by Anand Jagatia and produced by Marika Peters. If you'd like the team to
investigate an idea, email them at crowdscience at bbc.co.uk. Thank you for
listening. This is the BBC World Service exploring the seriously fun work of the
Flying Seagull Project. My name is Captain Marsh. Ash has been on a mission to
bring fun and frivolity to children around the world. Children in refugee camps,
in orphanages and care homes. Give them something to wake up excited about, give
them something to go to bed giggling about. Otherwise what is the point? Flying
Seagulls, child's play, Tuesday at 9.30 and 20 GMT. In 30 minutes, health check
with Smita Mandasit. We hear why more and more children are becoming short-
sighted around the world and ask whether daily eye drops could help. And we
visit a human milk bank to find out about the donated human milk that's being
given to babies born too soon.