TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-06-14H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and on BBC Sounds. This is BBC Radio 4. Hello and welcome to The World at One
with me, Sarah Montagu. The government says it will open more legal routes for
asylum seekers when it's stopped small boats crossing the Channel. We hear from
someone who's made the journey. People were crying on board, there were adult
men who were crying, shouting the name of their father or their kids. They were
apologising, they were asking God to forgive them. It was a horrible experience.
But he tells me the new laws wouldn't have stopped him from making that
crossing. The UK government won't commit at any cost to rejoining the European
Horizon Science Programme. The new Science and Technology Secretary, Michelle
Doneland, tells us the terms would have to be right. It would have to be on
acceptable and favourable terms. We've obviously lost two years of this
assessment of Horizon and also it would have to be valued for money for the
taxpayer and we couldn't afford to wait another two years of negotiating this.
Britain's most notorious prisoner, Charles Bronson, is having a public parole
board hearing. He sent this message to Sky News. I'm going to expose the system
for what it's done to me. I bet you can't believe I'm still in Kenya. Now 70,
will he be allowed to walk free? The BBC News is read by Tom Sanders. The former
Metropolitan Police Officer, Wayne Cousins, has been jailed for a further 19
months for indecent exposure. One offence took place just days before he
kidnapped and murdered Sarah Everard. He's already serving a whole life sentence
for killing the 33-year-old in March 2021. Our correspondent, Helena Wilkinson,
sent this report from the Old Bailey. The 50-year-old indecently exposed himself
on three occasions. Once to a cyclist in Woodland in Kent in November 2020. In a
victim personal statement, she told the court the horror of what happened would
remain with her for the rest of her life. Cousins also admitted indecently
exposing himself twice at a drive-thru McDonald's in Swanley. The number plate
was reported to the police the second time it happened. Days later, Cousins
murdered Sarah Everard. Mrs Justice May said the fact that no police came to
find Cousins after the incidents could only have served to confirm and
strengthen in the defendant's mind a dangerous belief in his invincibility. If
the car he was driving had been checked, police would have found out it was
registered to Wayne Cousins, who was a serving police officer. The Director
General of the Confederation of British Industry, Tony Danker, has stepped aside
while an investigation into his workplace conduct takes place. The CBI says it's
been made aware of new reports about his behaviour after complaints were made
earlier this year. Our business correspondent, Esif Kar, has more. The CBI is
one of the UK's largest business groups, representing around 190,000 firms. The
man at the head of the organisation, Tony Danker, regularly acts as the voice of
business at the highest levels of government. It's emerged that last Thursday,
the CBI was made aware of new reports about Mr Danker's workplace conduct. It
has asked him to step aside while an independent investigation is carried out.
The CBI has also revealed that a previous allegation concerning Mr Danker was
made by a female employee in January. It says it was thoroughly investigated and
didn't warrant a disciplinary process. Mr Danker has posted a statement on
Twitter saying that he's mortified to hear that he's caused offence or anxiety
to any colleague, adding that it was completely unintentional and he apologised
profusely. Politicians, refugee charities and border force officials have
criticised the government's proposal to ban anyone arriving in a small boat from
claiming asylum in the UK. A new bill will be introduced to Parliament tomorrow.
Here's our chief political correspondent, Nick Urdley. Rishi Sunak has made
stopping small boat crossings a key test for his government. Tory MPs believe it
matters to their constituents and they're desperate for the Prime Minister to
succeed, where previous Conservative governments have failed, bringing down the
number of people crossing the Channel in small boats. To try to deter would-be
asylum seekers, the government wants to ban anyone arriving through an illegal
route from making an asylum claim. It also proposes to ban them from ever
returning to the UK or making any future citizenship application. Refugee
charities said the proposals would mean asylum seekers are treated like
criminals. Labour said they wouldn't work and were largely gimmicks. Rail
companies have written to the RMT union warning that national-level talks could
stop unless the latest offer to end strikes isn't put to members to vote on. The
RMT's National Executive Committee rejected what the companies called their best
and final offer last month. The union's members are due to walk out next
Thursday as part of the long-running dispute over pay and conditions. The
doctors' union, the BMA, has announced plans to ask consultants in England
whether to strike in their dispute over pay and pensions. The first ballot is
due to take place next month, which could pave the way for industrial action by
the senior doctors. Junior doctors in England are set to walk out for 72 hours
next Monday. Police searching for five people in South Wales have found three
dead and two seriously injured, almost two days after they went missing. Their
car was discovered in woodland near a busy roundabout on a main route into
Cardiff. From the scene, Hal Griffith reports. A large police cordon surrounds
the wooded area in St Melon's where the car was discovered by a member of the
public early this morning. It was nearly 48 hours after the three women and two
men were last seen on the outskirts of Cardiff. It's known that they'd driven
more than 70 miles around South Wales before reaching the city. Over the
weekend, their families had appealed on social media for help in finding them,
but it wasn't until yesterday that the search was launched. The case has been
referred to the Independent Office for Police Conduct in line with normal
procedure. A public parole hearing has been told that one of Britain's most
violent offenders, Charles Bronson, wouldn't be able to cope if he was freed
from jail. Bronson, who now uses the name Charles Salvador, is 70 and has spent
most of the past 50 years in prison. He told the panel he was sick of being in
jail and he'd had more porridge than Goldilocks and the Three Bears. Scientists
say they're concerned that new rules in China on gene editing won't stop
malpractice. The alteration of DNA in embryos has not been internationally
approved as safe. The issue is being discussed at a conference in London
organised by the Royal Society. Our science correspondent, Pallab Ghosh,
reports. There was an outcry at claims five years ago by a Chinese scientist
that he'd created children that had been genetically altered to be resistant to
HIV. He was imprisoned for three years, but a year after his release, he
attempted to begin clinical research on another inherited disorder. Chinese
authorities have recently introduced stricter rules for the use of the
technology, setting out requirements for ethical approval, supervision and
inspections. But there's concern by scientists in the field that the rules don't
apply to the private sector. Pallab Ghosh reporting. Tom, thanks very much.
Border force have been busy this morning, bringing groups of migrants to shore
at Dover. The lifeboat brought in 44 people before the force was out on another
rescue. The Prime Minister has insisted that he can stop these boats. It's
understood that he'll be speaking to France's President Macron today and we'll
see the detail of how he proposes to stop the crossings when the government
publishes its latest illegal migration bill tomorrow. The government says that
under the new legislation, anyone crossing the channel in small boats would be
removed from the UK, banned from re-entering in future and would be unable to
apply for British citizenship. Refugee groups, though, say the plans are
unworkable. There has long been criticism of the government that they've not
provided alternative routes for asylum seekers. But shortly before we came on
air, the Prime Minister's spokesman said, once we have control of our borders,
we will be able to open more routes, which is the fair and safe way to bring
people across. Farzad arrived in the UK after crossing the channel in a small
boat at the end of 2019. He'd previously fled from Iran because of fears for his
safety and he was granted asylum here a year ago. He told me about his journey.
It was horrifying. It was very difficult for me and all the other people on the
boat. None of them had experienced any sea activities. I didn't even have any
sea journey before in my life, so I wasn't really ready for that. How did you
think that you'd be brought to the UK? I've heard of they are taking you with
trucks. Right. So you thought you'd be in the back of a truck rather than on a
boat. Farzad, can you tell us what that journey was like? Because obviously you
came originally from Turkey, but you came overland and then across the channel.
Can you talk us through what it was like? It was like a 40-day trip. It's
different trucks and vans and other kinds of transportation. So there were a
group of other people who were with us. It was, there were families as well.
There were disabled people in that journey with us. So it was a very traumatic
experience. And then you came to a place that we actually didn't know later on.
It had been from, they put us in this boat and sent us over here to the UK. I
remember that night. It was a horrible night. People were crying on board. There
were adult men who were crying, shouting the name of their father or their kids.
They were apologizing. They were asking God to forgive them. So it was a
horrible experience. There were a few of them went to kind of coma when we get
to the UK. And they didn't wake up for 20, after 24 hours, we couldn't talk to
them. So it was a bad experience. Were you picked up by the border force as you
were coming over by another boat or did you make it to the coast? Yes, it was an
English UK rescue boat. How much did you pay for the whole journey? I didn't pay
personally. So I asked my relatives to have a conversation with them. So I
still, maybe five thousand, ten thousand. And Farzad, that was the end of 2019
that you made the crossing. You have presumably since been granted asylum. Yeah,
it took me a year. I was an asylum seeker for a year and then I granted a
refugee status in 2022, at the start of 2025. If it had been the situation that
by making that crossing, you would not have been allowed to claim asylum, would
that have stopped you? No, to be honest, I was not thinking of what would happen
when I made this journey. I was not thinking of what would happen in the
destiny. The thing for me was just going to somewhere secure that I can restart
my life. So I was not thinking of, I was trying to save my life and coming to
somewhere that I can do that. And I was not thinking what are the laws and rules
and regulations in the destination. So I don't think I would choose any
differently. Now Farzad, if you were in France, where presumably you were safe
and you heard that it was the law in the UK that if you arrived on a boat, you
would either be sent to Rwanda or sent back home, but you would not be allowed
to claim asylum. Do you think that would have made any difference to what you
did? For me, the trauma that I had during the trip to come to France and all of
those, that time that I was in France was also traumatic. And I was thinking
that in a country that I have no language, I don't have any relative and I don't
think of, I couldn't think of any future for myself. Again, I wouldn't think
that, I don't think I would have stayed there anyway because regardless of
whatever UK government was supposed to do to my case, I would be sure that it
wouldn't be worse than my situation back in Iran or in a situation that I was
during the trip. So I was sure that if I come here, it would be a fair and just
decision in my case when I present it. I wouldn't think that UK would do
something that harmed me ultimately, so I would come anyway. That was Farzad
talking to me this morning. Well, the Conservative MP Sir John Hayes was
Security Minister. He chairs the Common Sense Group of Conservative MPs. He is a
close friend of the Home Secretary Suella Braverman and it would be fair to say
that she has communicated with him in the past, which got her into a bit of
trouble. Sir John, good afternoon. Welcome to the programme. Thank you. Yes,
good to be here. Can I ask you about what we've just heard from, before we came
on air, from the Prime Minister's official spokesman. Once we have control of
our borders, we'll be able to open more routes, safe and legal routes. How do
you understand that to be working? Well, I mean, all asylum claims need to be
assessed fairly and reasonably. And of course it's true that Britain should
provide a safe haven for people in genuine need. But the asylum system has been
gamed for a long time now by a combination of echoing migrants, fat cat lawyers
advising them, and dodgy interest groups. And that's pretty clear. It needs to
be addressed, we need reform, and that's what I hope this bill will do. OK, but
Sir John, one of the things that people say is that people like Farzad from
Iran, somebody, well, from wherever, anybody who isn't from Afghanistan, Hong
Kong or Ukraine, doesn't have a legal route to get into the UK and claim asylum,
even if they have an entirely justified case. And in the case of Farzad,
obviously the UK thinks it's justified because they've granted him asylum. So
there is, as you know, has been a lot of criticism that there aren't safe and
legal routes. The government says it is going to open some up now. How do you
think they will work? Well, they have to be limited, of course. And the grounds
which we grant asylum need to be tightened. If you take Albanians, for example,
Germany offers asylum to very few Albanians that applied for it there. And yet
we offer asylum to quite a significant number. I think the last time I looked at
it was more than 10%. But what about somebody with a justifiable case? OK, but
the gentleman you just spoke to said the reason he didn't want to stay in France
is he didn't speak the language. Many of the people who arrive here don't speak
the language. If you travel through safe countries, asylum does have to be
asked. But if there were... Why on earth didn't you claim asylum there? OK, so,
Sir John, but what I'm keen to get onto is your thoughts on how you have a safe
and legal route. Because Farzad wouldn't have gone to France. He would have
applied, presumably, from Turkey. He fled Iran and he got to the neighbouring
country, Turkey, and then he felt unsafe there. He said he would have applied
from there if there were a safe and legal route. So I'm just wondering how you
see it working. Well, I don't know what the government's going to come up with,
but it's possible to have claims lodged outside the country rather than once
people get here. And even once those claims have been lodged, there's no reason
why they shouldn't be processed outside our borders. So if we're going to have
offshore processing, that would apply to people who have got a reasonable claim,
who've got to be assessed and looked at closely, but it can be done elsewhere.
Now, if people are really fleeing persecution, if they're desperate to get to
safety, they're not going to object to their claim being processed in a sensible
and civilised way elsewhere other than the United Kingdom. You see, the people
traffickers claim is that once you get, you will never leave. And that claim is
justified because we don't deport people who are illegal in sufficient numbers.
So we've just got to tighten the system up. You're right, there should be a safe
way of doing it, and we'll wait to see what the government says about that. OK,
and that safe and legal route, is it critical to have those? I mean, perhaps
being processed in France after a deal struck with President Macron. And do you
think that's essential to stop people coming? Because as we heard there from
Farzad, he was desperate to get to the UK, and without an alternative option, he
had to go via the boats. Yeah, I don't think that's an excuse, actually. I think
he could have claimed asylum in France, and I thought his argument was pretty
thin, actually. I wish him no ill, and I'm sure his needs were significant. And
indeed, as you say, we granted him asylum. But I do think if people are
desperate, they will claim asylum in the nearest safe country. Now, we then have
to make a take a view about how many asylum applications we can process quickly
and reasonably, how many other countries are going to deal with. We can't give
asylum to the world. No, I understood. And it does really have to be a
multinational effort. So that's the discussion with France and elsewhere. And
the bill that's being published tomorrow, as we understand, what it will mean is
somebody who comes to, and they may be from Afghanistan, they arrive in the UK,
they will be sent somewhere. We don't know where, but the plan is that they
would be held and then deported and prevented from ever applying for asylum in
the UK again. Can that work whilst the UK is a member of the European Court of
Human Rights? That's a good question. And of course, that's why the Rwanda
policy failed in its first incarnation. The appeal to the European Court
provided a barrier. And you're right that that circle will need to be squared.
Can you see it being squared? Well, I understand. I don't know. I haven't seen
the bill. But I understand that the bill may be very specific about the grounds
which you can claim, the grounds which you can appeal. Now, lawyers would have
looked at this very closely. We will need to look at it closely to ensure that
it is watertight, for we can't have another full staff. It's critically
important for the Prime Minister, the government and the country that we solve
this problem. And you're right, that is just a test. Will it pass the test you
set? I hope it will. Sir John Hayes, thanks very much. Thank you very much.
Coming up on the programme. MUSIC PLAYS That, if you didn't know it, is music to
represent the days when gladiators fought in front of paying crowds. Now, new
evidence has emerged to show more about how they lived and how they fought in
the British Isles. Do get in touch with us on social media, hashtag BBCWA. Our
email address is worldatone at bbc.co.uk. The UK will not necessarily rejoin the
EU's Science Horizon programme. The Nobel, that is a core, the Nobel laureate
Sir Paul Nurse said rejoining Horizon was essential and that researchers are
united behind that. But when I spoke to the Science and Technology Secretary,
Michelle Donilon, she said that certain conditions need to apply. And I asked
her what would get the UK government on board. It would have to be on acceptable
and favourable terms. We've obviously lost two years of this assessment of
Horizon. And also it would have to be value for money for the taxpayer. And we
couldn't afford to wait another two years of negotiating this and leave our
researchers in limbo. But yes, absolutely, we haven't deviated away from plan A.
What we have been doing as a responsible government in the meantime is
developing a plan B. One of the first things I did when I entered office was
make sure that I worked very hard with researchers, with businesses and other
stakeholders to try and make sure that we're getting that plan B into the best
possible position we can do should we need to employ it. But we're still working
on plan A. OK, so no guarantees for scientists, though, because you can't make
it. I understood it's what you want, but you obviously can't guarantee. And from
what you're announcing today, there is more money and there are some very, very
ambitious plans that you're talking about here, making the UK a global science
and technology superpower. One of the difficulties for the UK is always
competing with the size of the United States and with Europe. The funding that
you're talking about, can it compare? Well, look, the outcomes already, where we
are in this country, if we look at our technology sector, we're one of only
three countries in the world to have a technology sector that is valued at over
a trillion dollars. And that actually came about last year. We got over that
mark. But we're not complacent. We're saying we need to go even further because
we want to be unlocking technology and science to tackle the problems of today,
but also the problems of the future. And that's why we've launched this
strategic framework today to enable us to become a science and technology
superpower by 2030. And that's if you like the roadmap. Some of the stuff that
we're tackling in that is things like the regulation of bureaucracy, the skills
problems, how we're going to work with the private sector in terms of
investment, how we're going to collaborate internationally. OK, well, let's take
a look at a couple of them. First of all, talent. If you are to attract people,
you need to make it in the UK a good place, a nice place, an easy place to be so
that people want to come and live here. And there are problems with visas,
aren't there? There has been a tightening of the rules. Foreign students can't
bring spouses or children. And as soon as their course is over, they're booted
out. Do you recognise that you probably need to have a more gentler kind of visa
regime? I think some of the points you just raised there were factually
incorrect. So we have the graduate route in this country where then after
finishing and completing studies, you can stay for a number of years. We
increased that to two years. We haven't announced that that is ending. There's
been a great deal of speculation on this. Of course, we need a visa regime that
supports attracting talent from across the globe. We also need to be proactive
in acquiring talent. So that's why as part of the announcements today, we're not
just prepared to sit back and hope that people come. We're actually going to
have a scheme where we are trying to attract the very best in AI to come here, a
bit like a concierge scheme, if you like. That's part of the announcement. So,
sorry, how are you going to attract people? Via the Global Talent Network. Which
means what? That includes ambassadors and others. Where we actively go out, we
find those individuals. A bit like a headhunting scheme. It already happens for
certain areas. We've now specified it's got to happen for AI, which we know is a
game changer. And when you identify those people, what visas do they, they will
still have to apply for visas and the same visa rules will apply to them? Well,
there are visas available for skilled workers, and these people would qualify
very simply for those visas. And of course, if they were on courses, they could
qualify for the student visas and then the graduate route afterwards. There are
a variety of different visa routes to get these types of individuals. That are
all more expensive than other countries. Well, look, you know, we also want to
keep our rates at a fair and proportionate level. And we constantly monitor what
other countries are doing as well. We want to control immigration, but we want
to be tapping into that skilled talent base from across the globe. And we've got
some policies around growing our own talent. Well, what we do know is you have
said that AI chatbots like ChatGBT, which a lot of people are talking about,
could play a role in government. What role do you see for that sort of thing? So
what I was saying is that this is transformative technology and it's going to
happen, so Britain needs to be part of it. Do we need to have guidance and
frameworks in place? Yes. Is it early days? Yes, it is very early days. But in
the long term, this is going to play a role in every organisation, whether
that's in the public sector or the private sector. And it's going to help people
with their roles to, so they can get on with the day job maybe and get rid of
some of that bureaucracy and admin that might be associated with some jobs.
We're all trying to work out how it could help. I actually typed the question
into it this morning. What question should I ask Michelle Donilon? And it came
back saying Michelle Donilon is the UK's Minister of State for Universities. And
then... Well, like I said, it's early days. It's not perfect yet. It had some, I
have to say, it had some wonderful questions. It had some absolutely wonderful
questions. It had some absolutely wonderful questions if you were Minister of
State for Universities, but it did sort of fall at the first hurdle. Do you have
a vision of actually how an individual might be using it in their work? It's
early days. It's emerging technology in the sense that we need to see where this
plays out. But we need to be part of that as a country and a nation. But it's
obvious that these technologies are going to impact the way that we live our
lives, impact the way that we conduct our business, impact our roles. And we've
got to ensure that that's done in a positive way. We've got our frameworks in
place. We've got to have some form of regulation. But these will be
transformative technologies. Just a final thought. You will have seen that Sir
Jim Ratcliffe, Britain's richest man, has said of you when he heard you were
appointed to this role, he said, government surely has to be kidding. And
because you are only 38 and you're a history and politics graduate rather than
having a science background. How do you respond to that? Look, my age isn't a
factor in the normal world. I think people would say I'm middle aged as opposed
to young, but I will take the compliment from him and move on. My role is not,
it doesn't require you to be from a scientific background professionally. What
it requires is it requires somebody that's going to deliver, that's going to
work in collaboration. And that's certainly my style. Michelle Donnellan, the
new Science and Technology Secretary. Well, Lord Rees, Martin Rees, is the
Astronomer Royal, former president of the Royal Society. Lord Rees, good
afternoon. Lord Rees. Can you hear me, Lord Rees? Yes. Yes. Marvellous. Sorry.
Ominous silence there for a moment. Sir Paul Nurse has written this sort of
independent report today, a review of the science landscape. And he said that
joining the Horizon Europe programme is essential. You will have heard Michelle
Donnellan there saying that the government approach is that it's got to be on
acceptable terms. How do you characterise where we are and where we need to be?
Yes. Well, I think Paul is not alone. It's a universal view that the top
priority ought to be to get into a horizon. And of course, the way he was
thought to be open after the success in Ireland recently. And it's a bit
disappointing that the Prime Minister doesn't seem to have made any unequivocal
statements of his priority. And I think the scientific community is, I think,
pretty united that this should be the top priority and done as urgently as
possible. At any cost, though? I mean, surely there's an argument that it's got
to be, they've got to negotiate fair terms first. It can't be at any cost. Well,
but at any reasonable cost. I mean, obviously, there could be an absurd cost,
but there's every expectation that it would be a better way of spending money
than any alternative plan B. Right. So it, OK, so it seems you can't get the
guarantee, but you presume it would be the science community would be an uproar
if the UK didn't end up in it somehow. Well, and the signal it would send that
we want to re-engage with European scientists would be crucially important
because so much of our work is already collaborative with them. Now, the
government setting out today from this new department what it hopes to achieve,
this calling it, setting the UK government, the UK on the path it suggests to
superpower. Do you like the sound of what they're saying? Well, I think the
rhetoric is fine. I'd like to use the maxim, if we don't get smarter, we'll get
poorer. So the rhetoric is fine. But the mismatch between the rhetoric and
what's actually promised is enormous. I mean, what is needed, of course, are
huge transformations in our universities and education, getting far more start-
ups, making sure that they don't get taken over too soon. All those things need
to be done. And we've shown in the vaccine episode how well we can do. And we
can do the same in clean energy, robotics, aerospace and genomics and all those.
That's the aspiration. But what the UK has actually promised in this document is
really minimal. It's less than the amount that the present research council have
lost due to inflation in the last year. And so this is huge mismatch, which
worries me. They've talked about very small amounts of money. OK, so just in
terms of the start, just in terms of the amount of money they're prepared to put
into it, you say a lot more is needed? Absolutely, yes. And on visas, when you
talk about talent coming, what's the situation? Because we heard there Michelle
Donnellan saying the UK is going to go out and try to get the best people to
come here. Yes. Well, good luck to them. But the trouble is, I'm afraid the
perception of the UK has suffered in the last two or three years. And it's going
to be harder to attract people. I know from personal contacts and trying to get
people to come to work in our universities that it's got harder because of the
perception. And if you are someone who's ambitious and is in Asia, for instance,
I think the UK is now lower on the list of preferences as compared to Canada,
the US and Germany, say, than it was a few years ago. So one has to change the
external perception by more substantial changes than are actually promised in
this document today. And if you were to flag something up that they need to move
on, what would it be? Well, I think apart from Horizon, I think I would say to
make a campaign to have programmes in clean energy, genomics and aerospace. And
I know that Paul Nurse has produced a report saying that we perhaps need to
think about whether research can be done best, sometimes in research institutes,
public, private, jointly, and not just in universities. But we've got to think
how we can get a lead in these technologies. Bearing in mind we have some
strengths, we still have four universities in the world's top 10 by many
measures. And so we ought to build on them and the excellence we have in
particular areas of science, biotech and vaccines, and make sure that we raise
our game internationally. But it's going to need a bit more money and larger
scale thinking than the very modest scale of the funding that's mentioned in
this document. Lord Rees, thank you very much. Charles Bronson was given a seven
year sentence for armed robbery in 1974. But 50 years on, he is still in prison
and considered one of the UK's most notorious criminals. As we speak, he's in
the Royal Courts of Justice for a parole hearing that will decide if the 70 year
old will be released. Daniel Sandford has been in that hearing this morning. And
Daniel, before we get to what it's been like there, can you just give us a
little bit of a reminder, a lesson? Who is Charles Bronson? What's his history?
Charles Bronson's original name was Michael Peterson. He now likes to call
himself Charles Salvador. He's 70 years old. And as you say, he was first
convicted of armed robbery age 21 in 1974. But basically, apart from a couple of
brief spells outside prison where he very quickly reoffended again, he's been in
prison ever since. And he's being held in prison now because in 1999, he took a
prison art teacher hostage for almost two days and was given a life sentence for
that. So because he's got a life sentence, he needs to get the clearance of the
parole board to be released. But he's gone on being very disruptive and violent
in prison, really up until about 2018. For the last four years, he's been in the
close supervision centre at Woodhill Prison, where basically he's in his cell
for 23 hours a day. He does mix with three other prisoners, but is essentially
still on a very strict regime. But he's allowed to ask to be released and he has
asked again to be released from prison or if not that, then to be released to
open conditions. And what was the hearing like this morning? How's it going?
Well, he is still in Woodhill Prison and the hearing is taking place in Woodhill
Prison. But because parole hearings can now be open, there's a live feed to us
here at the Royal Courts of Justice where members of the press and public can
watch that hearing. First of all, it started with the prison officer who's
responsible for him saying that, yeah, there have been less outbursts. There's
been no violence recently. But when she was asked what would happen if Bronson
was released from prison, she said he would struggle in the community, wouldn't
have the skills to cope with such a vast change and asked if he was ready for
open conditions. She said, no, I think he still has a long way to go. But then
we heard from Bronson himself and it was a real bit of kind of court, although
it's a parole hearing knockabout. He was asked, first of all, to make his case
for about 15 minutes. He took about 10 minutes and he started off by saying,
first of all, it's no secret. I've had more porridge than Goldilocks and the
Three Bears and I'm sick of it. I've had enough of it. I want to go home. Of the
50 years I've been in prison, I probably deserved a good 35 of it because I've
been very naughty, not naughty, naughty, but just naughty. And he went on to
admit that he'd taken 11 hostages. He said he was battling against the system.
It was his way of getting back. There was nothing like wrapping a governor up
like a Christmas turkey, he said. And there were at times what he said was so
comic that people were laughing in the public gallery here at the Royal Courts
of Justice because he's got his huge personality and this gravelly voice. But he
did in the end make a strong-ish case for being a 70-year-old man who's now
given up being violent, who wants to just come out, use his bus pass and see his
mum again out in the community. I'm not sure many of us think he'll be very
successful in this bid, but it was at least a public hearing to make his case.
Daniel Sanford, thank you very much, and that parole board hearing going on, of
course. Now, as our understanding of the human genome and gene editing improves,
a major ethical question arises. How far should scientists go? It's one thing to
edit genes to cure heart disease or cancer or even to prevent conditions. But
what about editing genes to improve humans rather than just fix them and improve
them in a way that affects future generations? That's one of the things that's
being discussed at the third international summit on human genome editing hosted
by the Royal Society at the Francis Crick Institute. Now, the last time the
summit met in 2018, a Chinese scientist admitted that he'd changed the genetic
makeup of three embryos to make them resistant to HIV, changes that will be
passed on to future generations. One of those speaking at the event is Dr.
Rachel Horvitz, the president and CEO of Caribou Biosciences. It was one of the
first biotech companies formed to turn CRISPR gene editing technology into
medicines for humans. Dr. Horvitz, good afternoon. Good afternoon. And what you
are talking about and what you generally focus on is in the treatment, because
you have made huge advances in the treatment of cancer, haven't you, with this
technique? We have. So today we're focused on developing cellular therapies for
different kinds of cancers. And we do that through genome editing. We actually
take healthy T cells, part of the immune system from healthy donors, and edit
them with this CRISPR genome editing technology to teach them how to find and
kill cancer cells. And we have two phase one clinical trials that we are running
in the United States today. OK, and we should expect, I mean, CRISPR, just
briefly, it's like a little snipping tool, I think it's called, because it can
be so precise in the gene that it goes after, the bases within the DNA. That's
right. It's effectively the Microsoft Word for the genome. Now, maybe that's a
little unfair to Microsoft Word. It's quite not that sophisticated yet, but the
fundamental idea is that we can target this protein machinery that's part of the
CRISPR system to a site in the genome to specifically change the DNA sequence.
OK, and now the significance for cancer is what? Where are we at in terms of the
progress of using it? I think we're at the point of starting to truly recognize
the transformative power it could have. Speaking for our work here at Caribou,
what we've demonstrated already in early work in a phase one trial in human
patients in the United States is that these modified T cells, these edited T
cells can have significant anti-cancer activity. In fact, the very first patient
who received just one dose of this therapy in our phase one study remains cancer
free 18 months out from that single dose. Right. So you think it will be
transformative? I do. OK. Of course, a lot of people that you'll be talking to
today are using it in lots of different ways. The ethical concerns, I can't see
anybody bulking at you changing somebody's genome to get rid of cancer. There
comes a point, though, when you start thinking this is a bit uncomfortable. For
you, where is it? We've drawn a hard line at our company. No human embryo
editing, period. It was at this summit that I mentioned in 2018, I think was the
last time the summit was held, that a scientist said, revealed to the world what
he had done, which was to edit embryos. There are three young girls who survived
from that. Are they... what's happened to them? Do you know? We haven't heard
anything since. Really? Which is... but presumably somebody is following them in
China. I would expect so, but I don't personally know. Are there new rules? Are
there rules that are needed? Because every country is different. But broadly,
there is, one imagines, more of a consensus in the scientific community. I'd say
certainly in the scientific community, and I'll say especially in the business
community in this field, there's broad consensus that embryo editing is not
appropriate and should not be done. And I'm not aware of any companies in our
corner of the world who are doing any of this kind of work or even contemplating
it. We've heard already this morning at the summit about some of the evolving
regulations. You're right. Every country is different. And even China has
dramatically evolved their regulatory framework in just the past few years. I
mean, they put this scientist in prison for three years, but I think he's out
and trying to re-establish himself. These are questions we need to grapple with,
aren't they? I agree. Right. And pretty soon. Yes. Because it is an
inevitability people will be trying to enhance human beings. I don't know if
it's an inevitability, but I think it's absolutely critical that we as a field
and as a community address this proactively and not reactively. Dr. Rachel
Horvitz, thank you very much. Thank you. Now, a bit of a change, because we're
going to talk about Memnon and Valentinus. They are two gladiators who are
depicted in battle on the Colchester vase. We don't know who won their fight,
but what we do now know is that the ancient artefact, this vase, was made
locally and decorated in the Colchester area. Researchers say it's the first
artefact that links to an actual jewel in Britain. Glyn Davies is a senior
curator of Colchester and Ipswich Museums. Good afternoon. Afternoon. So what,
this is proof that the vase was made here and therefore the gladiators were
fighting here, is it? I think that's it. I mean, what's important is that we
know gladiators are fighting in Britain. You only have to see the amphitheatres
that they've left behind. But what's so special about the vase and the new
research is now that you look at it, you can see these figures who are named and
you can imagine that real event, because this inscription that runs around it,
around the rim, refers to them, but was cut before it was fired. So it's part of
the commissioning of the pot. And secondly, it's been proved to be made in
Colchester. So we think this is a local event, an event that really happened
with real people. And I think that's quite exciting. OK, I mean, we've known
about the vase for quite a long time. So what's the new analysis? Well, there's
several things. We found there was a person in the vase when I first started at
Colchester Museums. I was surprised to see that the cremated remains were still
with it. So we've had an osteological analysis done. So we've analysed the
skeletal remains and we've had isotope analysis done. So looking at the
strontium isotopes that are found in the petrous bone and that survived, that's
a bone in the ear. And this has revealed that this person was a male, probably
40 plus years, and they weren't local to Essex. OK, so you have only just learnt
this? Yeah, so 170 years it's been on display in Colchester Castle. And yeah, I
was I really was staggered. It's a cliche, but I was staggered to see this. And
a collaborative project with the University of Reading and Durham University
have revealed this. OK, so the bone, so we know this is the ear bone of the
person who was in the vase. Absolutely. I mean, I suppose it shows that we are
still learning things, even from stuff we thought we knew this long after. I
mean, it's a bit of a revelation. I think this only happens maybe once in your
lifetime as a curator where you take such an iconic object on display, you know,
before our eyes with the inscription, we could we could suddenly tell something
that had been assumed for 170 years. Was to be false, that the inscription
wasn't cut on later because this completely changes the nature of the object.
It's not a sort of souvenir piece that's been mass produced. It's depicting a
real event. So, yes. And we should just explain that inscription is the names
Memnon and Valentinus, who are there for eternity now, unless somebody drops
that vase, which I imagine you weren't allowed to happen, obviously. Glyn Davis
of Colchester and Ipswich Museums. Thank you very much. Just one headline. Wayne
Cousins has been sentenced for exposing himself while on duty as a Met police
officer days before he murdered Sarah Everard. That's it from us. I'm Sarah
Montagu. That's the World at 145. Today's editor was Scott Adam and the studio
director was Nathan Chamberlain. This is BBC Radio 4. Now we join Emily Knight
for Flight of the Ospreys. Today, the birds have reached the sands and cities of
North Africa. The autumn migration is tough for Britain's Ospreys. They're
heading for the warm waters and rich feeding grounds of West Africa. But as
we've seen in this series, they can be blown into the wild Atlantic, attacked by
goshawks or simply distracted by fish filled rivers and reservoirs en route. For
those that make it safely to the coast of southern Spain, there's a challenge
ahead. The Mediterranean crossing from Europe to Africa. This is the most
treacherous part of their journey, but yet it's only 14 kilometres of their
massive journey that they're making. These birds are designed for soaring,
utilising thermals, which they can only get off the land. As soon as they go
over the sea, there are no thermals. So, of course, these large winged birds are
dropping. It must be a really scary moment for them. And sometimes they do ditch
into the sea. We're following the Ospreys in the company of the biologist Sasha
Dench and her team from Conservation Without Borders. It's the 1st of October
and the team has just arrived in Morocco, keen to learn how we can make the life
of the Osprey and all other migratory birds a little easier. The site we had
opted to stay on the first night in Morocco was directly the other side of the
narrowest point of the strait. So from the balcony, you can watch birds arriving
from Spain through these really high mountains. And Jebel Moussa, I think, means
Mountain of Moses. We had a plan to go and visit the Jebel Moussa Rapture
Rehabilitation Centre that takes in all kinds of birds. Our first objective is
the rehabilitation of vultures. Here we are located on a globally important
corridor for vulture migration, the Straits of Gibraltar. Every year we find
vultures that arrive weakened, either because of the long distances that they
fly during migration, north-south or south-north, or for other reasons such as
illness. We find vultures poisoned because of uncontrolled discharges. Rashid
Alkamlishi of BirdLife Morocco is Sasha's guide to the rehabilitation centre,
which does take in injured ospreys but gets most of its business from exhausted
vultures. There are a lot of birds that are found exhausted or injured from
doing the crossing. So fishermen, reasonably regularly, actually have found
ospreys in the water, but quite often it's vultures that are trying to make the
crossing and relying on thermals, and there just aren't any thermals there. Yes,
that's true. We've had several cases of fishermen finding vultures. There have
been many cases where fishermen have found vultures floating on the water.
They've noticed that they're there because of gull attacks, not always but in
most cases. Sometimes vultures who are migrating for the first time in their
lives can't calculate the altitude of the departure flight and they fall into
the sea. There are so many cases like this. The main threat for raptors in
general are electricity lines and the infrastructure and transportation of
electricity. We also have wind farms. The worst problem is electrocution. Last
year we had a vulture that arrived with a dead foot. The foot was attached but
dead. After a veterinary examination we knew that the bird had been
electrocuted. The level of damage meant that they had to amputate the vulture's
foot. We kept the bird to breed in captivity. It serves now as an example for
people to understand this environment better and the risks and threats to birds
here. The relationship between birds and fishermen on this coast is complex and
fascinating. Some fishermen used to follow the ospreys to find the richest
fishing grounds. But when they found them, they didn't just throw a net into the
water. You need to realise that dynamite fishing has a long history. Some
historical writing talks about this activity existing for over five centuries.
Nisan Niyabani is a biologist and teacher, fascinated by the ospreys that land
on his shores. In dynamite fishing, people use biomimicry. They put themselves
at the same height as the ospreys and their gaze follows that of the osprey,
searching for a shoal of fish going past. A second person at a signal throws the
dynamite. The impact of the dynamite is enormous because not only do they kill
the fish that they collect, but in the process they destroy everything from
small invertebrates to mammals. I believe that the loss of an important species
like the Mediterranean monk seal is due to the atrocious use of dynamite. All of
that together, the damage to the sea floor, but also the disturbance of the
birds, and in particular at nesting time, had over the years caused the
population to dwindle to next to nothing. He had decided to work with the
fishermen to get rid of this, to look at alternative forms of fishing, trying to
avoid areas where there might be conflict with the birds was important. They
also then looked at the sort of fishing gear they were using to move from stuff
which created plastic waste to traditional fishing traps and pots and nets and
things made out of organic materials. And there's now an industry developing and
we saw, yeah, managed to sit there on the coastline and see three ospreys there
still fishing. So it's a fabulous story and still easy for the seabirds there,
which is great. However, we then went out with one of his friends of many years
that he's made through the dynamite fishing project, a fisherman called Kai Kai.
He took us out to an evening fish market. Like there's a vast range there, but
they all look very small. When I was small, I and young people like me went
fishing with a line or by boat. There were many types of fish and birds. Life
was beautiful. We only fish close to the coastline and close to the port. Now
the boats travel far out to sea to find something to fish. All the local fish
have been erased. There were 10 fish processing factories employing thousands of
men and women in the sardine and anchovy industry. All the factories have
closed. The last one closed in the 1990s. They closed because there was so
little raw material. I had some great times when there were stocks of fish. I
never thought that we would have this misery, this crisis. Fish is our only
resource, our only work. People have lost a great deal and the area and the town
have also lost a great deal. The osprey, it's part of the heritage of our area.
It's the basis for attracting tourists and scientific investigation. These
species need to be respected and they're a great indicator of resources. If we
have ospreys, we have fish. When we no longer see the ospreys, we will know
there is nothing left, once and for all. So we just all got really excited about
this huge flock of birds in the distance. They looked like they might be coming
towards us, but the flock was behaving really strangely. So we wondered, was it
ducks? Was it something else? And then looking at it with binoculars and then
again on other lenses, we realised it actually wasn't birds at all. What it was,
was an enormous sheet of plastic that was just being blown around in the wind
and was basically going to head straight out to sea. So what should have been,
we hoped was going to be a spectacular experience, actually turned out to be
quite horrific. From the Mediterranean crossing points, the ospreys follow the
coast of Western Morocco, passing through northwest Africa's most densely
populated regions, the fast-growing urban centres of Rabat and Casablanca.
Wetlands are disappearing around Morocco at a drastic rate. We had a fantastic
guide in Mohamed Hilmi, who's in his late 20s, he's studying birds and bird
ecology and has been interested in it since he was young. He lives in Saleh,
which is a city next to Rabat. And within Rabat, there was one remaining
wetland, which was home to a couple of species that were basically found just
there. It's also the only freshwater wetland for quite a long distance. And
plans appeared to drain the wetland, fill it in and build a storage facility for
produce. It's going to be basically a market, a huge market where they stock
fruits and vegetables, grains. There was a lake on all this area here, and with
the very thick freshwater vegetation, which was very important for birds, either
for hiding, having a shelter or for breeding. In fact, there were many rare
species that were breeding here. And by rare, I would say that for some of them,
there were not more than 20 pairs in all of the country. Are there other
wetlands nearby that they can use instead? Unfortunately, in this area of Rabat
and all the area next to it, there is no freshwater lakes or rivers, because
even the river, when they constructed the dam, it became brackish, salty,
because the dam stopped the fresh water from coming from the mountains. And now
it's practically only marine water that goes all the way up to the dam wall. Has
this made you give up on conservation in Morocco? Well, it didn't make me want
to stop trying to change things, but it's made me very angry. Because our
future, the future of all of us, depends on this nature and this wildlife.
Morocco's surviving waterways are a vital resource for many species, but there's
one particularly distinctive bird that Sasha, along with her camera team of
Jason and Charlotte, are keen to catch on film as they drive south towards the
Sahara, the northern bald ibis. It has a bald head, mostly black feathers, quite
multicoloured in the right sort of light. But I think they're quite beautiful.
Many have seen them as less beautiful because of this bald head. Across Africa,
the ibis has been revered as a god in some mythologies, etc. Across Europe, not
at all. So it was revered mostly for banquet tables and was eaten in really
large numbers. And that's the primary cause behind it disappearing. Also
pesticides and other things. So I'm currently here in Morocco filming the
southern bald ibis, which is a very rare bird species, of which there are only
700 left in Morocco, and that is the majority of the wild population. Tamri is a
little place that you would not notice. You would drive straight past it on the
long desert road, but there is a small stream that goes right out and it feeds
out into the coast, and where it's carved a groove through the sand and the
sandstone, it opens up into some cliffs. The birds here actually don't migrate.
Some of them are being raised in a breeding programme and then being actually
taught to migrate, which is quite interesting. The birds here are very, very
confident, which is great for us because they're coming close to our cameras, so
it means we're getting lots of footage. Hopefully we'll see these birds more as
they're reintroduced into different areas, such as Europe, where they were once
found. It's a bird that has been persecuted to the level where actually the
entire migrating population is now extinct. It's a migration route that they
used to fly along with the osprey, and what we're left with in a few tiny
populations in a few places. Conservationists and people living around these
sites are working pretty hard to try and maintain, and the Prince Albert of
Monaco has stepped up and put in funding to try and look after this population.
But for us, it was a visit as a reminder of what can happen to a population if
you don't step in and do something fast enough. In the next episode of Flight of
the Ospreys, the team reach the Sahara Desert and spot the loneliest osprey of
them all. It's in such a remote area, there are actually no roads directly to
the coast where she's fishing or inland to this group of bushes. What she is
actually perching on is a very large sand mound. She's found a lonely mound and
she's making it work. Flight of the Ospreys was produced by Emily Knight and
Alistair Cross. And next week at this time… It's been 20 years since America and
Britain went to war in Iraq. There were horrible days. In a new series I examine
the build-up to the war. Although it looks as though 9-11 was the trigger, I
don't think it really was. Hearing from insiders, some who haven't spoken until
now. The potential for regime change was very high on their list of priorities.
And I look at the legacy. I'm just sad because Iraq is a great country. Shock
and war. Iraq 20 years on. We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are
distributed via third-party services and platforms. And the BBC stream you are
currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an
internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the
manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to
stream on BBC Sounds. Selma Chalabi explores his legacy in My Cousin Regime
Changer. And that's it.