TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-07H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 A long wave on BBC sounds and digital radio. This is BBC Radio 4. Good morning,
it's six o'clock on Tuesday the 7th of March. This is Today with Justin Webb and
Nick Robinson. The headlines this morning, the Home Secretary says the
government is pushing the boundaries of international law with new legislation
it's introducing today on channel migrant crossings. Key health unions are
meeting the government for talks to try to avert more NHS strikes in England and
also in today's programme after the sentencing of Wayne Cousins yesterday. Will
flashing be taken more seriously by the police and by society? We'll be talking
to students in their 20s who've all witnessed it. This kind of behaviour is
quite normalised and it happens to so many of your friends. When it does happen
to you, your first instinct isn't oh how am I going to report this, it's more
like actually if I did report it, realistically is anything going to come of it?
We'll ask at what stage is it right for scientists to intervene to treat serious
hereditary disease and... Here off the coast of Pembrokeshire puffin numbers
have been steadily increasing but Skoma is an exception. Ahead of Sir David
Attenborough's return to the TV screens this weekend we'll hear more about the
puffins of Skoma Island. The BBC News was read this morning by Tom Sanders. The
Home Secretary Sivella Brafman has accepted the government is pushing the
boundaries of international law with new legislation it's introducing today to
stop asylum seekers crossing the English Channel in small boats. It's thought
the measures will put a legal duty on ministers to remove anyone who enters the
UK illegally. Here's our political correspondent Ian Watson. Introducing a new
law to stop small boats was announced as one of the Prime Minister's priorities
in January. Writing in today's Sun newspaper he says a new law will send a
signal that anyone entering the country illegally will be swiftly removed. This
new duty to remove would be given precedence over existing legislation on asylum
and human rights. Though there'd be exemptions for under 18s and those with
serious medical conditions, ministers are expected to acknowledge that there's a
risk of a clash with some aspects of the Human Rights Act. Several health unions
will begin talks with the government this morning aimed at averting more NHS
strikes in England. The Health Secretary Steve Barclay will meet unions
representing nurses, ambulance workers, physiotherapists and midwives. They've
all put industrial action on hold while negotiations are underway. More from our
health correspondent Jim Reid. What are described as intense negotiations are
expected to start around 11 this morning and run through until Thursday evening.
Discussions will focus on pay with a one-off bonus likely for the current
financial year and the possibility of a pay rise above the current offer of
three and a half percent for next financial year which starts in April.
Government sources said the Health Secretary believed both sides were committed
to reaching a fair and reasonable settlement. Unions though have warned that
industrial action could resume if there's no progress by the end of the week.
The latest WhatsApp messages leaked by the Daily Telegraph suggest the former
Health Secretary Matt Hancock was in favour of threats to block funding for a
disability centre unless the Tory MP lobbying for it voted to toughen up the
tier system of Covid restrictions in England. The measures passed at the end of
2020 had faced a potential rebellion from some Conservatives. A spokesperson for
Mr Hancock said the newspaper had given an entirely partial account of events
driven by an anti-lockdown agenda. Howard Johnson has been looking at the
messages. In one exchange Mr Hancock's political aide Alan Nixon suggested to
the then Health Secretary that pressure could be put on backbenchers whose re-
election hinged on central government funding. During the discussion the Bury
North MP James Daly's campaign for a disability hub in his constituency was
mentioned. Mr Dixon proposed that funding for it should be off the table if he
rebelled. Mr Hancock replied yes 100%. The idea wasn't taken forward and Mr Daly
tells the Telegraph he was never threatened. But the former Tory party chairman
Jake Berry has called the exchange absolutely disgusting. Ukraine's president
has instructed his military commanders to find additional forces to boost the
defence of the besieged eastern city of Bakhmut. Russian troops have been
bombarding it for months and now surrounded on three sides. In his latest
nightly address Volodymyr Zelensky said his most senior generals all advised
against withdrawing from Bakhmut and insisted no part of Ukraine would be
abandoned. Age UK is calling for anyone with a prepayment energy meter to be
given the opportunity to have it removed for free. The charity says half a
million older households have these meters which are more expensive than paying
for gas and electricity via direct debit. Energy companies say the meters help
ensure customers don't fall into too much debt. Researchers are warning that the
annual damage caused by flooding in England, Scotland and Wales could increase
by more than a fifth over the next century unless international pledges to limit
global warming are fulfilled. Flooding already costs the UK Â£700 million a year
and scientists at Bristol University have produced a detailed map simulating how
things might change if temperatures keep rising. Our science correspondent
Victoria Gill reports. To make these future flood risk maps scientists use
layers of information about Britain's terrain, river flow, rainfall patterns and
sea level, all the causes of flooding. They combine that with the Met Office
climate predictions over the next century. This built a detailed picture of the
risk to people's homes and businesses from flooding as climate warms. It shows
that even if all the international promises are met and temperatures are kept to
an increase of about 1.8 degrees Celsius, places including the south east and
north west of England and south Wales are likely to experience more flooding and
more damage. But there are swathes of north east and central England as well as
eastern and northern Scotland that will see very little change. This new detail
assessing the risk to every community could help inform decisions about flood
defences and where to build new homes. Archaeologists have discovered a Roman
shrine beneath a former graveyard next to Leicester Cathedral. It was found
during a dig to prepare for construction of a new centre for tourists visiting
the tomb of Richard III, whose remains were found less than 50 metres away in
2012. It's thought the shrine partially explained to local legends that the
cathedral had been built on the site of a Roman temple. Tom, thank you very
much. Six minutes past six, time for the weather now. Let's head over to the BBC
Weather Centre. Chris Fawkes is there. Morning Chris. Hi Nick and today we've
got a band of rain, sleet and snow affecting southern areas of the UK, pushing
southwards and it's behind that that we get into the colder air. So many parts
of the UK have already got the colder weather conditions with us, certainly a
widespread frost for the north and we'll continue to see plenty of snow showers
across northern and eastern areas. Now for England and Wales, for many it is
quite a cloudy start to the day and this band of rain is affecting southern
areas of Wales, across the south midlands, east Anglia and southern counties of
England. On the northward edge, the back edge of this system, we are seeing the
rain turn to sleet and snow so it's not out of the question that you could see
an odd centimetre of snow here and there as that system continues to push its
way southwards. Now behind that, eventually across Wales, the midlands, east
Anglia, we should start to see some brighter skies push in but there could be a
few snow showers here and there. Northern England, into the frosty conditions
this morning, should be a fine start with some sunshine but further snow showers
affecting areas particularly close to the North Sea coast with potential for a
few more centimetres of snow to build in in places. For Northern Ireland, it's a
day of sunny spells and snow showers. Most of the snow showers will be affecting
north-western counties. Eastern counties will be relatively well sheltered and
have a drier weather with more sunshine. And in Scotland, while we've already
got 12 centimetres of snow lying on the ground in the highlands, more snow to
come today across the north with another 5 to 10 centimetres over hills, 2 to 5
centimetres at low elevations across the north and east, the south west seeing
fewer showers and more sunshine. But it stays cold today wherever you are,
temperatures around 3 to 5 degrees. And then I just want to mention, we're going
to get some snow tonight and into Wednesday across southern areas of England and
Wales. Could bring some localised disruption and then for Thursday, extremely
disruptive snow looks set to spread in to northern areas of the UK. Some of the
hillier areas could see 30 or 40 centimetres. Whoa, Chris, thank you for that.
Worth adding, definitely. Eight minutes past six is the time. Let's have a look
at the papers and indeed the news websites as well. Time, the Times reports that
the Home Office is expected to buy two former RAF bases in Lincolnshire and
Essex. Is that right? Yes. Which would have detained thousands of illegal
immigrants before their removal, either to their home nation or to third
countries such as Rwanda. It quotes government sources who admit they can't say
if the proposals are definitely compliant with Britain's obligations under the
European Convention on Human Rights. They expect a legal challenge. You sound
slightly sceptical about this. I'm always slightly nervous of reading
yesterday's papers instead of today's when it comes up on a screen in front of
me. But that's possibly my age. The Telegraph reports that the bill will
specifically state the new laws may not comply with the convention, although
ministers believe they do. It says the Home Secretary, in promising to push the
boundaries of international law, is directly challenging European judges. The
paper adds that the legislation will give Sowella-Brotherman powers to counter
European court injunctions, such as the one which last summer blocked the first
deportation flight of Channel migrants to Rwanda. We will push human rights law
to the limit, reads the headline in the Mail, which says measures will be rushed
through Parliament and could be in place by the summer. Writing in The Sun,
Rishi Sunak himself says the plans are going to take back control of our borders
once and for all, while the Home Secretary tells the Daily Express that the
government owes it to the British people to solve the issue of Channel crossings
and that Labour and others who oppose these measures are betraying hard-working
Brits. The Eye says some Conservatives think the measures are unworkable because
the UK lacks capacity to detain tens of thousands of asylum seekers and may
struggle to find countries to take them when they're removed. It quotes former
Tory Cabinet ministers who fear the Prime Minister risks over-promising and
under-delivering. According to The Telegraph, Oxford University is banning
romantic relationships between lecturers and their students. Under the current
policy, they are strongly discouraged and must be declared to a line manager,
but from next month anyone with responsibility for a student faces the sack if
they start a relationship with them. The staff are going to be strongly
discouraged from any other close personal contact which transgresses the
boundaries of professional conduct. University College London and Nottingham
University already have similar measures in place. The Guardian reports that
more than a thousand so-called super-emitter sites pumped the greenhouse gas
methane into the atmosphere last year. The paper says there were a single leak
at a fossil fuel facility in Turkmenistan, gave off gas at a rate equivalent to
running 67 million cars. Methane now accounts for a quarter of global heating.
And the Daily Mirror says reports that Boris Johnson has nominated his father
Stanley for a knighthood are beyond belief. Soon Act must stop this farce. It
implores the independent website, quotes unnamed Conservatives who think the
nomination is outrageous and ridiculous nepotism completely without merit. Its
headline reads, Arise Sir Dad. And that was all new news. I can guarantee it.
Actually that wasn't, was it? We talked about the programme yesterday. I think
I'm right to be bemused. Anyway, 11 minutes, yeah, 11 minutes past six. As you
say, and Lucy Williamson, our Paris correspondent, is on the line as in Calais
this morning because it is clear that much of the government's effort to stop
small boats is going to depend on a better relationship with France. We should
see that going to Paris on Friday, of course, to see the French president. Lucy,
from where you are this morning, how does it look? Number one, from the point of
view of the migrants and the people who want to come across, but number two as
well from the point of view of the French authorities? Well, I think if you look
at previous policy announcements that have come out of the UK, it's clear that
policy announcements alone don't change the minds of people in the camps here.
When you think back to the Rwanda policy, I mean, there was a few days of
anxiety in the camps here, but that very quickly gave way to a sort of shrug and
sort of it was added to the list of things that people don't really like to
focus on. They've been through so much to get here often that they've had to
really push away any thoughts of risks or the potential pitfalls of making this
journey. And having got to this point, I think many people simply don't want to
focus on things like this, particularly when there's no concrete action on the
ground. So I think all this discussion of exactly how and when these plans might
be put in place by the UK government, I think that's really crucial in terms of
the impact they have here, because certainly just announcing a policy so far in
the past hasn't made much difference to people. But we're waiting to hear from
the French authorities their response to these plans. But as you say, with the
Prime Minister coming out here on Friday, it may be that that's when we get a
bit of a feel for it. And certainly there's a bit of, there's a sense of perhaps
an opportunity to reset the relationship between London and Paris with this
summit. So we'll have to see what comes out of that in terms of the French
response. I mean, some of the key things that Britain has been asking for in
recent years, like the ability to send migrants back to France, has been a hard
no from Paris. They want London to negotiate with the EU as a whole, not just
with France. So unlikely perhaps to see any movement on that. But let's see what
does come out of that meeting. Lucy Williamson in Calais. Thank you. 13 minutes
past six. We won't abandon any part of Ukraine. That was the defiant message
last night from the country's President Zelensky after speculation that his
troops might abandon the fight for the eastern city of Bakhmut. Our diplomatic
correspondent is in Kyiv. James Lander joins us on the line. Morning to you,
James. Defiance from the President? Yeah, defiance, which is a familiar tone
from President Zelensky. But I think he was responding very, very clearly to
reports in recent days. There've been some suggestions that there'd be divisions
between him and some of his generals over what to do with Bakhmut. There'd been
suggestions in Western think tanks and amongst Western analysts that maybe
Ukraine might be considering some sort of tactical limited withdrawal from at
least parts of Bakhmut. You had Lloyd Austin, the US defence secretary, saying
yesterday, well, Bakhmut is more symbolic than strategically important, and that
if it fell, it wouldn't turn the tide of war. I think this morning that what
Ukraine's leadership are trying to say is, no, no, no, we are still in the fight
here. I don't think that rules out necessarily at some point some sort of
strategic tactical withdrawal sometime in the future. But right now, they simply
do not want to give any kind of signal or any kind of encouragement to Russian
forces that they might be about to pull out. And so I think that's why they're
making it very clear. Mr. Zelensky had a meeting with his generals yesterday.
They briefed a little bit about the meeting, and then now they've briefed
overnight that President Zelensky has made it very clear he wants that defence
to continue. James Landale in Kiev. Thank you. It is quarter past six. Let's
have our first look at the business for the morning. It comes from Sean in
Salford. Morning, Sean. Morning, Justin. Yes, it does. We're going to be hearing
from manufacturing leaders today. The chief executive of the manufacturing trade
body Make UK, Stephen Phipps, and expected to attack what he sees as a lack of
industrial strategy by the government. The Telegraph this morning saying he was
going to describe the Conservative Party as having a disregard for the rule of
law alongside calls from the sector for closer ties with the European Union. I
caught up with Verity Davidge, who is director of policy at Make UK. I think
it's made it quite challenging for companies to make quite significant
investments. We have seen them actually continue to invest in their people in
terms of skills and training, really strong focus on apprenticeships. But we
haven't quite seen that real intention to or realisation of investment to invest
in kind of green and digital technologies, which are really important to
transition to net zero. Now, alongside the criticism of the government today,
there's going to be a survey by the trade body that says British companies are
bringing back manufacturing to the UK, with 40% of businesses doing some so-
called reshoring over the last year. I've got Tony Hague with me, who's chief
executive of PP Control and Automation, which is a contract manufacturer for
machinery and electronics in Walsall in the Midlands, employs 230 staff.
Morning, Tony. Good morning. Just first up with what the chief executive of Make
UK is talking about today, about government's approach to strategy and
industrial strategy over recent years. Do you think there's been one? What
impact has it had? No, I don't think there has been one. I don't think there's a
strategy we can really align to over decades now. There's been short-term
measures, but no long-term vision. What consequence does that have for PP
Control and Automation? I think not just for our own business, but for any
manufacturing company without an industrial strategy, a longer-term vision of
investment. Everything's very much short-term thinking. I think that's what
we've seen in the UK now over many years. Are you able to invest in your
business as much as you'd like? I think as an individual business, you can take
the right decisions for your own organisation. But I think when you compare the
UK to other European nations, North America, etc., without that longer-term
vision, that longer-term strategy, which businesses can all align to, I think it
has limiting factors. And what about the supply chain? Make UK talking about the
amount of reshoring British businesses are doing right now, 40% of them in the
last year, bringing back their supply chain to be within the UK. Are you doing
that? Absolutely. I think it's been driven by supply chain risk mitigation.
We've all seen extended lead times. We've seen a lot of volatility in the supply
chain. We've seen the cost and availability of freight go through the roof as
well. So it's actually been a really important part of most company strategies
to find suppliers closer to home. Does that cost you more? No, it's not so much
costing more necessarily. It's been the challenge of finding the right
suppliers. So depending on the product or the service you're actually looking to
acquire, it may not actually exist in the UK any longer. So it's finding the
right companies that have got the right capabilities, capacity and competence
that can actually meet your needs and of course be competitive in the global
market. And how easy can you find that in the UK? As I say, it depends very much
on the commodity or the service you're looking to acquire. For our own business,
we've been very successful because of the types of products that we're typically
bringing in our contract manufactured parts. So for us, it hasn't been a major
issue, but for other companies, it may be more of a challenge. And is it
something that, as you see the global supply chain settle down in the years to
come, you'll be looking to sort of unravel again and pick up suppliers from
around the world? I think it depends on people's memories. I mean, what's driven
companies to look at reshoring. If it's part of a strategy, then I think
reshoring is a good thing. If it's a short term tactical measure just to manage
a difficult supply chain right now, I think people will go back. But I think if
you look at some of the reasons people looking at reshoring or reassuring isn't
just because of the short term pain that we've had, but people are looking at
the longer term benefits, I mean, the environmental impact, for example, the
fact that consumers and companies now want to be doing business with suppliers
that have some more focus on corporate and social responsibility, ethical
trading. So I think it all depends on whether what you're doing is for a short
term tactical measure to keep your business going or part of a longer term
strategy. Tony, thank you. Tony Haig, the Chief Executive of PP Control and
Automation in the Midlands, talking about business trade bodies. I see some
headlines around this morning, the Director General of the Confederation of
British Industry has stepped aside from his role while an investigation into his
conduct at work is completed. Tony Danker has apologised in a tweet saying he
was mortified to hear that he'd caused offence or anxiety to any colleague and
that it was completely unintentional. The CBI said it took all matters of
workplace conduct extremely seriously and Matthew Fell, now the UK Policy
Director at the CBI, will lead the group while that independent investigation
continues. So we'll keep an eye on where that goes next. I've got Will Walker-
Arnott with me, who's Senior Investment Manager at Charles Stanley. Morning to
you, Will. Morning, Sean. Well, I see there's a note that Citigroup had out
yesterday talking about how the UK equity market, stocks and shares here,
compare to how they're valued in the United States. Now, all of this sort of
ringing a lot of bells with the conversations we're having about where companies
decide to gather more investment. Arm has been very active in the UK, and the
gathering of more investment, you know, Arm has been the one getting big
headlines in the last week about choosing New York over London. Is there a
relative cheapness in the UK? Is that having a damaging effect on London? Yeah,
undoubtedly. I mean, the city suffered a few body blows over the last week,
hasn't it? And yeah, the discount you're talking about is certainly there. One
of the issues we've got in the UK is sort of the makeup of our investors.
There's a lot of pension funds which invest in the UK market. They're sort of
much more conservative. They prefer companies with good dividends, strong
balance sheets, and they're less willing to invest in the sort of high growth
companies you see in the US. And that means that these companies don't get such
a good valuation in the UK. Here in the UK, looking at how consumers are doing
at the minute, Barclays have got their latest consumer spending report out.
We're going to find out a bit more at seven o'clock from Greggs about what
consumer spending is like on the high street at the, you know, at the sort of
lower income end of things. What is going on overall from Barclays? Yeah,
interesting report. I mean, they're showing that actually consumers are
beginning to tighten their belts and there is definitely a change in behaviour.
So if you look at supermarket shopping, the Barclays report shows that people
are cutting down on treats and luxury items. They're purchasing more budget and
value lines and they're actually shopping at a range of shops to get the
cheapest goods. I think this will play into looking forward to Greggs results at
seven. I think this will play into their hands because they're very well
positioned for a cost of living crisis with their focus on affordable food and
drink options. Their last report at the end of the year showed sales growth of
about 18 percent. So I think they'll continue to do well. Will, thanks very
much. Will Walker-Arnott, Senior Investment Manager at Charles Stanley. Now,
what about the science industry and how that affects businesses here in the UK?
We heard alongside that Brexit deal a week ago between Rishi Sunak and Ursula
von der Leyen that the door would be open for the UK and scientists in the UK to
return to that Horizon programme. The European Union's key scientific research
programme. We've had the government say it's got a new Â£370 million science and
technology framework. Dr Georgia Longobardi is with me, founder and chief
executive of Cambridge GAN, which designs energy efficient semiconductors out of
Cambridge. Good morning to you, Dr Longobardi. Good morning to you. Morning.
Just first up on the Horizon Europe programme, because since that announcement
from Ursula von der Leyen that if the Windsor Agreement and everything with the
Northern Ireland Protocol gets agreed and signed off, that the UK would be able
to re-enter. There's been some mootings that that may not actually be the case
and we might go down a different route. Could a different route work for
businesses like yours in the UK? I think it depends very much on what the
business route is. If there is more investments than the previous one and how
smooth the process of transition towards a new programme can be. Many of these
funds to apply for them, one has to put in place a very complex proposal, as it
should be because it's money being received. But changing things and just adding
a burden to the people that are already looking for funds could be an issue. So
it depends very much on the benefits of the different plan. And we have been
working with Horizon for quite a long now. So we know very well how that works
and the benefits that you can bring. Would it have an effect on what you do,
designing chips, if we weren't in the longer run part of that framework?
Absolutely, absolutely. Without any doubts. I mean, my company and the impact
that the company is having on the overall semiconductor industry depends on
research and collaboration. Some of our major players and partners, they came
out of programmes like Horizon 2020. So it would have a huge impact on my
business and many other businesses like mine a few years back. So I think the UK
should do something about it. But when we hear that there may be a favoured
alternative research programme led by the UK involving non-EU countries, as well
as those across Europe, what would be wrong with that? Why would that change
things for you? In general, that's why I said it depends on the funds and it
depends how smooth the transition into the new programme is. So if there is a
solution for which there is an interim first solution without leaving the UK
players without anything for a couple of years, for example, while a new
programme is set up, and then having the product, then it would be fine. But we
had to be careful not to leave any long period of time without any support,
because this is where researchers leave. They are not attracted to the UK
anymore. There is a feeling of anxiety that is not good for continuing research
plans. Just finally, Georgia, decades later, you're in exactly the same industry
as Arm itself, designing semiconductors. What do you make of that company's
decision all these decades later to be in New York? Does it make sense to you to
go there to list and gain investment? Well, it's a difficult question to answer,
but I believe that there are several advantages in being listed in the US stock
exchange. And one of them is the understanding of the deep tech markets within
the US. So it could be that the reason, unfortunately, when one leads a business
has to take decisions based on the benefits of the business itself. And I think
the London Stock Exchange has to think clearly about how to support the public
offering for companies in deep tech. I don't think they are there yet in being
able to provide right valuations for these companies. Dr. Georgia Longobardi,
founder and chief executive of Cambridge Gann, thank you very much. After seven
o'clock, I'll be having a close look at the housing market. We've seen
predictions of, and we've seen house price falls recently, how's that affecting
estate agents around the country? Sure. Thank you very much, Indy. 27 minutes
past six. Our first taste of the sports news now with Rob. Morning, Nick. The
rise and rise of Brentford is our top football story this morning. In just their
second season in the Premier League, they're now only three points off the top
six and therefore have European competition in their sights after last night
beating London neighbours Fulham by three goals to two. Brentford's goals from
Ethan Pinnock, Ivan Toney a penalty to make it 22 out of 22 from the spot for
him, and Matthias Jensen. Measured post-match comments now on the club's
European ambitions from manager Thomas Frank. For me, it's very important that
we of course are allowed to dream and we've said from the beginning we want to
end as high as possible, so we're always aiming to end as high as possible. We
are in a good place and it's all about keep continuing and of course we hope
that in the end of the season we are in a fantastic place, but that's very, very
far ahead. We need to focus on Saturday. When they play Everton just a few miles
away it's Chelsea versus Borussia Dortmund at Stamford Bridge this evening in
the second leg of their Champions League last 16 tie. Chelsea 1-0 down from the
first leg but with a win at the weekend at last to build on. Here's their
manager Graham Potter. We're playing against the top opponent who are in a
really good vein of form, so it's a huge challenge but at the same time what an
opportunity. Stamford Bridge is going to be rocking, I'm pretty sure, and we're
going to give everything to win the game and to go through. Commentary of course
this evening on BBC Radio 5 Live. Now the boxer Connor Benn has revealed that he
had suicidal thoughts after the accusations of doping made against him following
the cancellation of his fight against Chris Eubank Jr last October. He twice
tested positive for the women's fertility drug Comiphine, a result which could
result in a lengthy ban. Benn has strenuously denied the doping charge while
both the British Boxing Board of Control and UK Anti-Doping continue their
investigations and speaking on the Piers Morgan Uncensored programme, Benn said
he'd had night terrors and panic attacks, adding, I didn't think I was going to
make it through. So no clean sweep for England's White Ball team in their last
one day Cricket International in Bangladesh. They were beaten by 50 runs but
still took the series 2-1. Here's captain Joss Butler speaking yesterday on the
positives he takes from the series. I think the way we bowled I think has been
great. We've managed to take 10 wickets in every game. I think having Joffre
Archer and Mark Wood back available and bowling alongside each other has been a
real plus. Madil Rashid continues to perform fantastically well and was player
of the series and I think with the bat, you know, Milan and Roy scoring
brilliant hundreds, you know, to win us those first two games and that's
probably, you know, the area we missed out on today. Here are the tips. Sandown
150, number two, Magistrato and also from the meeting at Sandown in the 335,
it's number three, West to the Bridge. Doesn't anybody have to speak to Piers
Morgan to get a night terror and a panic attack? You might say that. It's an
open question. Yes, partly because there's nobody watching. Thank you, Rob. BBC
Sounds. Seven years ago I was filming at East London Mosque when the story
broke. The three school girls from the area had gone missing. They were heading
to Syria to join the Islamic State group. Breaking news this morning, three
British school girls are reportedly missing. Shamima Begum was the only one of
the girls to emerge from the ashes of the so-called caliphate. I've retraced her
steps from the UK through Turkey and into Syria to find people who knew her and
to investigate the truth of her story. What do you think people think of you? As
a danger, as a risk, as a potential risk. From BBC Radio 4, the Shamima Begum
story, series two of I'm Not a Monster. Listen on BBC Sounds. It is now half
past six. You're listening to Today on BBC Radio 4. Justin Webb and Nick
Robinson and Tom Sanders has a summary of the news. The Home Secretary, Suella
Braverman, has accepted the government is pushing the boundaries of
international law in its plan to end small boat crossings in the English
Channel. Legislation is being introduced in the Commons today to ban those
arriving in the UK in this way claiming asylum or returning to the country in
future. It's thought the measures will put a legal duty on ministers to remove
anyone who enters Britain illegally. Several health unions will begin talks with
the government this morning aimed at averting more NHS strikes in England. The
Health Secretary, Steve Barclay, will meet unions representing nurses, ambulance
workers, physiotherapists and midwives. They've all suspended industrial action
while the negotiations take place. The latest WhatsApp messages leaked by the
Daily Telegraph suggest the former Health Secretary, Matt Hancock, was in favour
of threats to block funding for a disability centre unless the Conservative MP
lobbying for it voted to toughen up the tier system of Covid restrictions in
England. The MP in question, James Daly, told the paper he wasn't in fact
threatened but the former Tory party chairman, Sir Jake Berry, called the
exchange an absolute disgrace. A spokesperson for Mr Hancock said the newspaper
had given an entirely partial account of events driven by an anti-lockdown
agenda. Ukraine's President Zelensky has instructed his military commanders to
find additional forces to boost the defence of the besieged eastern city of
Bakhmut. Russian troops have been bombarding it for months and now surround it
on three sides. Age UK is calling for anyone with a prepayment energy meter to
be given the opportunity to have it removed for free. The charity says half a
million older households have these meters which are more expensive than paying
via direct debit. Tickets for this year's Eurovision Song Contest go on sale
from midday. It's the first time the competition has been held in the UK since
1998. Fans will be able to attend nine shows including technical rehearsals
during the week of the contest in Liverpool in May. Tom, thank you very much
indeed. 28 minutes to seven. Now today is the day we get the detail of those
promises to change the law to stop people crossing the channel in small boats
and the government is saying that this will stretch the limits of international
law. Let's talk to our chief political correspondent Nick Erdely. It sounds as
if that's a boast rather than a warning, Nick. I think that that's absolutely
right, Nick. From what we've had briefed so far and from the details that have
emerged in the past few days, this does sound like a pretty radical plan that
goes into some new areas. So what we know is that the legislation will include a
legal duty for the Home Secretary to remove people who arrive on small boats.
That will have precedence in law and in effect blocking asylum and human rights
applications in all but a few circumstances, for example for under 18s and those
suffering what insiders are calling a grave medical ailment. That will be
backdated so it will apply from today, the day that legislation is introduced in
Parliament. And as you say, the Home Secretary is boasting that that will
stretch the boundaries of international law to try and deal with this issue. It
does seem radical. Let's see the details later. There'll be a lot of Tory MPs
who want to see it written down before they accept it. There are of course a lot
of promises that are being made to stop people arriving on small boats. There
are of course a lot of practical challenges, how you detain and deport
potentially tens of thousands of people. There will be political challenges in
the House of Lords as well. But it does feel to me like that politics is a
really important element today. If you read both the Prime Minister in The Sun
and the Home Secretary in The Telegraph, they are both laying down a bit of a
political gauntlet. The Home Secretary, for example, saying that Labour, the
Conservatives, are not backing hard-working Brits by not backing the plans. It
feels a lot like the Conservatives are setting this up as a big issue for the
next general election. Meantime, the latest WhatsApp message from Matt Hancock
to his advisor and vice versa is leading a former Tory chairman to get very
upset indeed. It is. I mean, it might come as no surprise to people around
Westminster that whips like to dangle incentives to win support in key votes.
But it's quite something seeing it written down in these WhatsApp messages. So
Matt Hancock's aid and the former Health Secretary are talking about votes
around local lockdowns, the tiering system we all saw during Covid. The aid
suggests that one MP, James Daly, wants a disability hub in his constituency,
that it should be taken off the table if he rebels on these tiering systems.
Matt Hancock agrees 100 percent, he says. Now, we're told by all interested
parties that this didn't actually happen. That threat wasn't made. Isn't that
the curiosity about the story? This is a threat that was never actually made,
let alone actually carried out. We know that these sorts of things are discussed
behind the scenes all the time. Yes, I mean, I think that's true. But as I say,
seeing it written down, seeing in black and white the way that government
ministers discuss funding, discuss how it can be used to incentivise backbench
MPs to vote for them is quite something. And it has angered a lot of Tories.
What all of these stories that we've been discussing over the last few days have
done is wind up a lot of Conservatives who think the government was too strict
on lockdown, as you say, former chairman Jake Berry saying that these latest
accusations are a disgrace and that Matt Hancock has big questions to answer.
He, of course, says that this is all a partial account that doesn't tell the
full story. Nick Erdely, thanks. It is 24 minutes to seven. Friends of the three
young people who died in a car crash in South Wales have suggested that the
police could have done more to find them. The five people in the car were
trapped for days after coming off the road. Thomas Morgan is our correspondent.
What is being said and by whom, Tom? Well, it's the friends and family that are
causing, well, are making those accusations online and saying that the police
could and should have done more. They were appealing for anyone for information
on social media over the weekend. The crash happened, we think, sometime in the
early hours of Saturday morning. The police started investigation sometime on
Sunday and the car was then found 48 hours later in the early hours of Monday
morning. Now, in fairness, where the crash happens, I'm standing nearby here,
you really never would have known or never would have been able to see what had
happened. It kind of is off a kind of river between trees here, a clearing here,
so nobody really would have seen it. And it's a very busy road. This is a main
dual carriageway between Cardiff and Newport. Potentially thousands of motorists
wouldn't have driven past and nobody, it was called the alarm bells, and nobody
mentioned anything over the weekend. Now, we know so far that three were found
dead, Eve Smith, Darcy Ross and Raphael Jean, but two remain in the critical
condition in hospital. Sophie Roussom, the 20-year-old, she had an operation
last night. We're waiting for an update on her. And 32-year-old Shane Lockland
is also in a critical condition. Now, the police, there's two forces that have
been involved in this. Gwent Police, which is the Newport area, that's where the
three young women come from, they are dealing with those families. But is it
South Wales Police that is leading this investigation? And both forces have put
themselves forward to the Independent Office for Police Conduct so that they can
get independent oversight on this. But they haven't commented at all on those
comments from friends and families as to whether or not more could have been
done. But also, what actually happened? Why the car left the road? Well, I think
that's the main part of the conversation, really. We know that the three young
girls were out on a night out in Newport. They then met the two young men. They
drove all the way to Porthcawl and then back to Cardiff. That's a 70-mile round
trip. And then the last sighting of them was around 2 a.m. on Saturday morning,
a couple of miles away from the crash site. Now, it's still unclear how, what
happened between the last time they were seen and how it came to be where I'm
standing here in the early hours of Saturday morning. That will be the main part
of the investigation as it carries on now. Thomas Morgan, thank you. At 21
minutes to 7, let's look at the front pages. The article by the Prime Minister
for the Sun leads their front page to have a very striking image. It is a no-
entry sign with the words no entry over a photograph of a boatload of migrants,
potential asylum seekers. In the channel, small boat migrants banned from today,
the word in capital letters, because what Rishi Sunak writes in the paper is
that if, and it is of course, and if the law is passed in the House of Commons,
then it would be backdated so that anybody arriving from today would be
automatically denied asylum, except in those couple of exceptions we heard of
from Nick Erdely. The Times version of the story is PM plans annual cap on the
number of people who are refugees and on its front page, the Daily Express has
Suella, the Home Secretary there, who's been speaking to them, back law to stop
boats or betray Britain. That's her phrase, that Labour and others who oppose
those measures are betraying hard-working Brits. The Financial Times on its
front page, in fact, its lead story, says that Taiwan's President Tsai Ing-wen
has persuaded the US House Speaker, Sir Kevin McCarthy, the Speaker of the House
of Representatives, the most senior member of the House of Representatives, to
stop boats and betray Britain, to meet in California rather than Taipei, the
Taiwanese capital, in order to avoid an aggressive Chinese military response as
tensions run high between Beijing and Washington. Several people, the FT says,
familiar with the situation say that the Taiwanese President and McCarthy had
agreed to meet in the US because of Taiwanese security concerns. The California
Republican saying last year he wanted to visit the country if he was elected to
the top leadership post. You'll remember that Nancy Pelosi did go to Taiwan back
in August of last year, the first visit by a Speaker in 25 years, and there were
some pretty robust consequences from the Chinese, including military exercises
and the firing of ballistic missiles over Taiwan for the first time. So that
seems to have persuaded, in this case, both the Taiwanese and the American side
not to go again. Papers are excited, as we all are, of the return of Sir David
Attenborough to our screens this Sunday. His photograph shines out from many
front pages. There's a photograph in the mirror which he calls a picture
exclusive. Sir David risked bird flu for the first sight of chicks. These were
Manx shearwater chicks, which he'd wanted to see, which produces the striking
headline on page seven of the Mail, Don't Kill Sir David. The BBC apparently
scrapped a plan to film the presenter, he might know, he's now 96 years old,
with chicks in order to shield him from bird flu, because the advice was that if
he filmed alongside them, they might land on his head or rather take off from
his head. We're going to be talking to the producer of Land or Take Off, the man
who took him on the boat across the water a little later in the programme. The
time is 18 minutes to seven. Our main headline this morning is that the Home
Secretary, Sweller Braverman, has acknowledged that the Government's plans to
end small boat crossings in the Channel, which will be tabled in Parliament
today, push the boundaries of international law. Conservative MPs queued up
yesterday in Parliament to criticise the Labour leader, Sir Keir Starmer, over
his decision to appoint the former senior civil servant, Sue Gray, as his Chief
of Staff. Here is our parliamentary correspondent, Sean Curran. At the weekend,
it was widely reported that Conservative MPs, who are supporters of Boris
Johnson, planned to start the parliamentary week by tabling urgent questions
about Sue Gray and her new job. But it's the Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, who has
the final say about whether or not they get to ask them. I was quite surprised
by the number of urgent requests. Well, no, I'm not surprised on that, but I was
surprised that they all have the same wording and the same length of sentence.
He warned MPs not to try what he called mass lobbying again. Urgent questions
are usually a way of putting the government on the spot by forcing a minister to
appear at the dispatch box. But the Cabinet Office Minister, Jeremy Quinn,
seemed only too happy to be in the Commons, replying to a question from the
Conservative former Justice Secretary, Sir Robert Buckland, about civil service
impartiality. Mr Quinn said this was an exceptional situation. It is
unprecedented for a serving permanent secretary to resign to seek to take up a
senior position working for the leader of the opposition. As honourable members
will expect, the Cabinet Office is looking into the circumstances leading up to
Sue Gray's resignation. He said rules applied when very senior civil servants
wanted to leave. They had to go through a process run by the Advisory Committee
on business appointments. The rules state that approval must be obtained prior
to a job offer being announced. The Cabinet Office has not as yet been informed
that the relevant notification to Okobo has been made. Sir Robert Buckland said
many MPs had been surprised and disappointed at what had happened. He said this
was all about trust in the civil service, and he asked about the Advisory
Committee on business appointments. Will he confirm that this appointment, if
indeed it is to be taken up, cannot be taken up until it is formally approved
following advice from that committee? And secondly, is it correct that the
prevailing Okobo advice for civil servants has a potential waiting period of
between three months and indeed up to two years? A lot of Conservatives were in
the chamber, but there was no sign of Boris Johnson. Labour's deputy leader,
Angela Rayner, accused Tories of indulging in conspiracy theories. What will
they ask for next? A Westminster Hall debate on the moon landings? The bill of
dredging the Loch Ness? Or a public inquiry into whether the earth is flat? The
biggest threat to the impartiality of the civil service is the party opposite.
And their decade of debasing and demeaning standards in public life. The SNP's
Kirsty Blackman said ministers would be nowhere without the hard work of
impartial civil servants. It's very important that the minister talks to his
backbench colleagues and ensures that in making statements about individuals,
they are not tarring the entire civil service with some of the allegations that
they are bringing forward. But a Conservative former cabinet minister, Jacob
Rees-Mogg, thought the events of the last few days had undermined all of Sue
Gray's previous work. Does this not smash to pieces the idea of an independent
civil service, when we know that one of the most senior civil servants in the
country was conniving in secret meetings with the party of opposition? Labour's
Barry Shearman thought the Speaker had rumbled what was going on. I was walking
over here with a respected backbencher from the government side who said I'm not
going over, they've been trying to get everyone here this morning, the whips are
on a five-line whip. After a while, it was only Conservatives who were standing
up to question the minister. One said the civil service was now under a dark
shadow. One called the appointment a dark stain on democracy. Another, Peter
Bone, thought the Labour leader was the person who was at fault. We've been
plunged into a constitutional crisis. Members of this House, whether they're
ministers or not, need to be able to talk to senior civil servants without fear
that that information is going to be used for party political purposes. And he
said he didn't know if the civil service could recover. And that was Sean Curran
reporting on yesterday in Parliament, more from him at 8.30 on BBC Radio 4
Longway. It is now 13 minutes to seven, they're known as the Hammers, they're
the squadron which flies Israeli F-15 fighter jets on missions to strike targets
inside Syria. Tomorrow, nearly all reservist members will refuse to attend a
planned training session in protest at the government's plan to radically
restrict the power of Israel's Supreme Court. The 37 out of 40 pilots and
navigators in the IAF 69th squadron say they will instead devote our time to
dialogue and reflection for what they say is the sake of democracy and national
unity. It is a powerful symbol of the anger many Israelis feel, an estimated
quarter of a million took to the streets over the weekend. We'll talk in a
moment to a retired Air Force general. First, our Middle East correspondent, Tom
Bateman. What is the issue that is dividing Israelis in this way, Tom? Well, it
is that the new nationalist government led by Benjamin Netanyahu is proposing
and is halfway through putting through the Israeli Knesset, the parliament, a
series of judicial reforms that would fundamentally change the powers of
Israel's courts and namely in two ways. They would give the government overall
control, the power to appoint judges, including judges in the Supreme Court, and
it would also effectively strip the Supreme Court of the power to strike down
legislation that it sees as effectively unconstitutional in Israel. Benjamin
Netanyahu says that this is about preventing the court's overreach, which many
on the nationalist right wing claim the courts have been guilty of. What its
many opponents say is that this is effectively ending or stripping away the
independence of Israel's judiciary and effectively opens the door to a demagogic
government that can basically do whatever it wants with a simple majority. Tom
Bateman, our Middle East correspondent. Well, listening to that is not just a
retired Air Force colonel, but if you're one of our older listeners, you will
remember the voice of the spokesperson for Prime Minister Yitzhak Ravin, Uri
Dromi, who joins us on the line. Good morning to you, Mr Dromi. How significant
is this protest by Israeli pilots and navigators? Uri Dromi, can you hear me?
Yes, I can hear you. Good morning. How significant is that protest? Good morning
to you. How significant is that protest? It is very significant because Israel
is facing many military threats and its Air Force, our Air Force, is really the
main vehicle to thwart these threats. And as you see in Syria, or Iraq, every
night there's something happening and the Air Force is there. And our Air Force
is based mainly on the reserves. So if those reservists, pilots and navigators,
declare that they are worried about what this legal revolution is going to do to
Israel's democracy, that's very significant. I'm struck that you use the word
revolution. They talk of democracy and national unity. Is that really, in your
view, what is now at stake? It is because, you know, Israel's democracy is very
fragile. We have few checks and balances, such as strong constitution in the US
or bicameral parliament in the UK. And to give the government all the power and
to weaken the Supreme Court will really lead Israel to lose its democratic
nature. And the pilots and the navigators have some kind of an unwritten
contract with the government, with the state, saying, we're going to serve,
we're going to maybe risk our lives if necessary, but we're going to do it for a
Jewish and democratic state. If the government is leading Israel towards
authoritarian regime, then the contract is breached unilaterally by the
government. And therefore, these brave pilots and navigators say, wait a minute,
stop. Let's sit down and talk. This is what this is about. And some argue that
it is about something even bigger than that. It is about Israel's national
identity, a deep divide in Israeli society, as well as politics about what
Israel stands for and is. Definitely. It's no secret that this current
government, the coalition, is composed of elements which really are against
Israel being a liberal democracy. We thought they are pushing Israel or pulling
Israel towards theocracy. And we just saw some terrible events happening in the
West Bank. And therefore, add to this the fragile nature of our democracy. It's
very, yeah, stake is a bigger thing. It's what Israel will, how Israel will look
in the future. And so we are fighting now and we are protesting not only about
the current legal revolution, we're fighting for the soul of Israel in the
future. Uri Donry, thank you very much for joining us. It is eight minutes to
seven. A review for the government has stopped short of recommending a ban on
laughing gas. The Independent Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs was asked
by the Home Office to look into the harms caused by the substance. Ministers had
been considering a ban on both the sale and the possession of nitrous oxide to
try and tackle antisocial behaviour. Let's talk to Professor Ian Hamilton, who's
an expert on drug addiction, honorary professor at the University of York.
Professor, good morning. Good morning. Have they done the right thing? They
have. And I'm pleasantly surprised. It wasn't what I was expecting, because I
think there's been considerable pressure on the committee, both publicly and
probably privately as well, from both the previous Home Secretary, Priti Patel,
and the current Home Secretary, Sweller Braverman. Both have made it clear what
they would like to happen. Why are they wrong in your view, then, and the
committee right? Well, I think that there's been obviously some concern about
recent cases where, particularly young people, have developed some neurological
problems. But obviously, it would be ideal to have a drug that causes no harm,
but I think we have to be realistic, that all drugs carry a risk. But the reason
I think they're right for resisting pressure to bring this drug under the Misuse
of Drugs Act is that we have probably about half a million people who use the
drug, and only a very small proportion of them develop problems. And those
problems, I think, could be reduced substantially, as the committee says, with a
number of measures, including education. Isn't it a wider problem, though, than
simply the neurological problems occasionally suffered by people who use it, but
also the kind of wider antisocial behaviour, which seems to have been one of the
things that's been concerning both of those Home Secretaries? Yes, absolutely. I
think probably littering is something that most people will be aware of. Walking
down any city centre street, you see the small, what are known as whippets, the
containers of nitrous oxide being discarded. But again, I think we've managed to
tackle these kinds of social problems in other ways, without having to reach to
banning cigarettes or alcohol, for instance. We've had the same kind of problems
with antisocial behaviour with those substances, and managed to make a dent in
it too. I suppose the other question is the extent to which a ban might have
persuaded some people who would feel otherwise easy about using this drug not
to, and that would be a good thing for them and a good thing for society
generally. Well, it's difficult to know, isn't it? Because we're in a binary
position where it's either banned or it's not. So I think one of the things we
do know from the past is that banning substances tends to have not exactly the
effect we want. I mean, if we think more broadly about the war on drugs, we have
to be, I think, grown up and pragmatic and accept the fact that young people and
adults will use drugs, and it's how we make that drug use as safe as possible.
And I think, overall, I'm not recommending nitrous oxide by any means, but I
think it's one of the safer drugs, certainly in comparison to other drugs that
are used recreationally. Now this committee, the Independent Advisory Council on
the Misuse of Drugs, it is independent, as it says in its name, independent of
government. Does the government always follow its advice? In other words, is
that the end of the matter now? No, I don't think it is. And I suspect what's
going to happen is Sweller Breverman will receive the report and then go ahead
and ban nitrous oxide anyway, albeit with some provision, because it does have a
commercial use, you know, in catering and in medicine as well, as an anesthetic.
So I think my call would be that she'll ignore this and she will, as I say,
bring it under the Misuse of Drugs Act, which I think is a shame and it flies in
the face of what the government mantra has been over the last few years about
being guided by the evidence. It seems to apply in the pandemic, but not when it
comes to recreational drug use. Professor Ian Hamilton, thank you very much.
Three minutes to seven, time for the weather. Here's Chris Fawkes. Hi Nick, and
we've got some potential for disruption over the next several days. Today,
weather-wise, we've got a weather front that's bringing a bit of rain across
southern areas of Wales, southern England, East Anglia and the South Midlands.
Actually, on the back edge of this rain, we are seeing a little bit of sleet or
snow mixed in, so we might even see an odd centimetre or so in places. So the
north of this feature is going to be a slow process, but eventually North Wales,
the North Midlands will tend to brighten up with sunny spells pushing in later
on today. Northern England, Northern Ireland and Scotland, we're looking at cold
weather with a widespread frost, plenty of sunshine around, but there will be
some further snow showers. The snow showers coming in for north-western counties
of Northern Ireland primarily, the north-east of England and across into
northern and eastern areas of Scotland, with several more centimetres of snow
building in through the day, five to ten centimetres over the hills of Northern
Scotland. So there is a potential for seeing some disruption today. Temperatures
struggling, highs of between three and five degrees Celsius, so feeling cold and
quite a gusty northerly wind for many of us as well. Now, overnight tonight and
into Wednesday, we're looking at a band of snow moving into southern parts of
England, South Wales, probably the South Midlands as well. Several centimetres
from this possible, maybe five at low levels in one or two spots and as much as
ten over some of the hillier areas, so that has the potential to cause some
disruption. But then skipping ahead to Thursday, we're looking at blizzards
working in across parts of northern England, Northern Ireland, Scotland. There's
scope for five to twenty centimetres of snow at low levels, but up to forty over
high ground. That is likely to strand vehicles, so plan ahead. Chris, thank you.
Later this morning, BBC Radio 4 asks, where will the musicians of tomorrow come
from? There's a crisis in UK music education. In today's climate, there's a lot
less funding available to support many young musicians who would like to pursue
their interest. I'm Soweto Kinch, a musician myself, and in a new three-part
series, I'll be finding out why the future of British music is under threat. If
you don't have adequate provision in our schools, that is going to have an
impact on the talent pipeline and it is going to have an impact in terms of the
diversity of that talent pipeline. Is it in danger of becoming an elitist
occupation? Rethinking Music on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds starts this morning at
11.30. Coming up, tens of millions of people will watch, only a few thousand
will get a ticket. We're talking about Eurovision just before those tickets go
on sale, and the view from Calais about small boats. You're listening to Radio
4.