TRANSCRIPTION: KZOO_AUDIO/2023-02-19-23H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 === The death toll is over 46,000. Today's commentator is Keisuke Yamada, Jiji-
Toujin. Good morning, Mr. Yamada. It's Saturday, but the Nando missile from the
North Korean war zone has landed in the Japan Sea. It was pretty close this
time. If you look at the map, it's 200 km, but it's a very steep place. If you
look at it, it's not only in the Japanese mainland, but also in the Japanese
mainland. It could have fallen to the ground. But even if it didn't, it could
have been damaged by the fishing ship. The purpose of this is to become a threat
to Japan. It was made real. So what should we do? I think we've had a problem
with that. We'll talk about it later. Let's hear the news. The North Korean
military has also announced that it will be training with the US military. Both
are expected to have been launched by the North Korean ICBM. On the 18th, the
North Korean Prime Minister said that there was no problem with the missile
launch. According to the reporters, the North Korean missile launch was
immediately confirmed by the North Korean government. The North Korean
government also received reports from the North Korean government. On the 18th,
the US Secretary of State of the Republic of China and the German Foreign
Ministry said that the North Korean military was not able to admit the North
Korean military. On the other hand, the US Secretary of State of the Republic of
China said that the North Korean military was clearly against the international
visit and the civilian air treaty. He said that he had made a statement. There
were two shooting in the south of the United States, in Memphis, Tennessee. One
person died and 10 people were injured. Five of them are dead. According to the
police, the shooting took place at a nightclub in the city. The shooting squad
was seen to have escaped. It's been about two weeks since the attack on Turkey
and Syria. The Turkish authorities announced that they would end the rescue
operation, excluding two prefectures. The number of dead people who died in
Turkey and Syria exceeds 46,000, but the number of apartments in Turkey alone is
345,000. The number of deaths is expected to increase in the future because the
number of people who died in Turkey is also severely damaged. The My Number Card
is a joint venture between the My Number Company, which is a local public
organization information system organization that is in charge of the
distribution of My Number Cards. 84% of them were contracted without competing.
There is a possibility that the competition will be costly because it does not
work. Next is sports. The world championship of snowboarding. The girl from
Parallel University of Japan won for the first time by Mikki Tsubaki, 19 years
old. The first time the Japanese team won at the Alpen The joint venture of
Kodami Open was held at the Tokyo Tatsumi International Swimming Park yesterday,
and the 100m women's swim team won by Ikeri Kak. It's a G1 of horse racing. The
February Sticks was held at the Tokyo Horse Racing Park yesterday, and the most
popular lemon pop won the G1 and won the first victory. Burg Bakery Produce Mana
Sandwich is located next to the Burg Bakery in Aramona Center Aramona. Please
enjoy the Japanese sandwiches made with delicious Burg bread. There are more
than 30 kinds of ingredients and sweets sandwiches. You can also enjoy homemade
strawberry milk made with fresh strawberries, chocolate dipped cute candy
strawberries, chicken broth soup, soft cream, coffee, etc. from meals to
desserts. Mana Sandwich is located next to the Burg Bakery in Aramona Center
Aramona. News Zoom Up North Korea has issued a new warning to the United States
by acknowledging that yesterday a anti-aircraft missile Kasei-15 was fired. In
Hokkaido, a video has been posted on social media about a missile that was seen
just before it fell. News Zoom Up Today's commentator is Yama-san from Jiji-
Tushin. Yama-san, I heard that the video captured the scene of a missile falling
on the street in Hokkaido. I don't think there was a case where a live missile
was captured. It was about 900 km away from the target. It was about 200 km away
from Oshima. If you make a mistake, you may have been hit by a missile. The
missile was fired around 5.21 pm on Saturday. It was about 200 km away from
Oshima. It is estimated that it fell in the Japanese Sea in Japan. This video
captured the scene of a missile falling on the street in Hokkaido. This video
was posted on social media. This island is called Oshima. It is close to
Matsumai. On this day, the missile was not fired near Gyanma. If the sea was in
good condition, the missile would have been fired. If the missile fell in Japan,
it would have been fired. If the missile hit the ship and caused damage, how
would Japan respond? The government opened the National Security Council and the
NSC Council. It is clear that the North Korea has attacked the North Korea. The
issue of crisis management is also asked. The Japanese press introduced the
news. The missile was fired at 5.21 pm. The Prime Minister went to the clinic 20
minutes later. He was just about to leave. The North Korean government is
concerned about the situation. The North Korean government said that the missile
fell in the North. North Korea does not want to attack the North. North Korea
does not want to attack China or Russia. North Korea does not want to attack
China or Russia. But North Korea knows that the missile will be in trouble if it
falls in Japan. I think the Japanese government knows that the missile fell in
Japan. The EZ is outside the Japanese territory. If the missile falls in the
Japanese territory, it will be fine. The reaction to the missile fell in the
North. The Japanese government is concerned about the situation in the United
States. The news came in. The defense ministry announced that North Korea may
launch a ballistic missile again. The defense ministry is continuing to do so.
The Japanese and the U.S. have also been practicing this. There may be a clear
intention to launch a ballistic missile in Japan. I think the Japanese and the
U.S. need to work together in this situation. But the Japanese and the U.S. have
not been doing well. The U.S. and Japan had a joint training yesterday. The U.S.
is conducting a large-scale military exercise in March. The U.S. and Japan are
working together. How much will the U.S. and Japan cooperate? If North Korea
does not cooperate, North Korea will attack. I think it is a question of whether
North Korea will be greedy. In Japan, we do not know how to respond. The North
Korean government is more concerned about China than North Korea. The North
Korean government is more concerned about China than North Korea. But North
Korea is flying missiles. The North Korean government is more concerned about
China than North Korea. How will North Korea take the missiles? The North Korean
government is more concerned about China than North Korea. I think the situation
in Japan and South Korea is not in a good place. I hope that the North Korean
government will take this opportunity to make it a little more cooperative. The
North Korean government is more concerned about the cooperation between the
three countries. I think the North Korean government is more concerned about the
cooperation between the three countries. I think the North Korean government is
more concerned about the cooperation between the three countries. I think the
North Korean government is more concerned about the cooperation between the
three countries. I think the North Korean government is more concerned about the
cooperation between the three countries. I think the North Korean government is
more concerned about the cooperation between the three countries. The North
Korean government is more concerned about the cooperation between the three
countries. The North Korean government is more concerned about the cooperation
between the three countries. I think the North Korean government is more
concerned about the cooperation between the three countries. I think the North
Korean government is more concerned about the cooperation between the three
countries. I think the North Korean government is more concerned about the
cooperation between the three countries. I think the North Korean government is
more concerned about the cooperation between the three countries. I think the
North Korean government is more concerned about the cooperation between the
three countries. I think the North Korean government is more concerned about the
cooperation between the three countries. I think the North Korean government is
more concerned about the cooperation between the three countries. I think the
North Korean government is more concerned about the cooperation between the
three countries. I think the North Korean government is more concerned about the
cooperation between the three countries. I think the North Korean government is
more concerned about the cooperation between the three countries. I think the
North Korean government is more concerned about the cooperation between the
three countries. I think the North Korean government is more concerned about the
cooperation between the three countries. I think the North Korean government is
more concerned about the cooperation between the three countries. I think the
North Korean government is more concerned about the cooperation between the
three countries. I think the North Korean government is more concerned about the
cooperation between the three countries. I think the North Korean government is
more concerned about the cooperation between the three countries. I think the
North Korean government is more concerned about the cooperation between the
three countries. I think the North Korean government is more concerned about the
cooperation between the three countries. I think the North Korean government is
more concerned about the cooperation between the three countries. I think the
North Korean government is more concerned about the cooperation between the
three countries. I think the North Korean government is more concerned about the
cooperation between the three countries. I think the North Korean government is
more concerned about the cooperation between the three countries. I think the
North Korean government is more concerned about the cooperation between the
three countries. I think the North Korean government is more concerned about the
cooperation between the three countries. I think the North Korean government is
more concerned about the cooperation between the three countries. I think the
North Korean government is more concerned about the cooperation between the
three countries. I think the North Korean government is more concerned about the
cooperation between the three countries. I think the North Korean government is
more concerned about the cooperation between the three countries. I think the
North Korean government is more concerned about the cooperation between the
three countries. I think the North Korean government is more concerned about the
cooperation between the three countries. I think the North Korean government is
more concerned about the cooperation between the three countries. Professor
Suzuki of the University of Tokyo said that the production of one person is not
affected. For example, the production of Russia is very weak. I think this is a
very fundamental problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important
problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem.
This is a very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a
very important problem. This is a very important problem. This is a very
important problem. This is a very important problem.