TRANSCRIPTION: KZOO_AUDIO/2023-02-20-02H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 ["Pomp and Circumstance"] ["Pomp and Circumstance"] ["Pomp and Circumstance"]
["Pomp and Circumstance"] ["Pomp and Circumstance"] ["Pomp and Circumstance"]
["Pomp and Circumstance"] ["Pomp and Circumstance"] ["Pomp and Circumstance"]
["Pomp and Circumstance"] ["Pomp and Circumstance"] ["Pomp and Circumstance"]
["Pomp and Circumstance"] ["Pomp and Circumstance"] Let's smile The sweat of the
morning that the old man shed Protecting the kind family Where are you? Let's
make our dreams and happiness come true together Let's walk in this history
Forever The red sunset on this island The burning morning sun of your town Even
if we are far apart We will be connected Let's walk in this history Forever
Let's overcome the time Connect the bridge of our dreams The seeds that the old
man sowed Let's bloom flowers and become flowers Let memories be on your heart
Let's go to the future where we are alone Let's change the time we can't enjoy
Let's feel the joy of being together again Today is the day we meet Let's sing
together Let's bring together the lonely rhythm Forever The ripples of the wind
The sound of the rain The sound of the rain The sound of the rain The sound of
the rain Let's walk in this history Forever Let's walk in this history Forever
Central Pacific Bank is a bank for you Hello, everyone from the Keizu listeners
in Hawaii! I'm Uta Sanshin from Okinawa. I'm onigae Sabira from Nakasone
Hajimen. I got to know you in Hawaii from the first time I came to Hawaii. You
welcomed me warmly as a Michelin star, and I'm grateful for your support. I'm a
huge fan of you. The people from Okinawa who immigrated to Hawaii have left
their hearts behind and told me about Okinawa in the midst of the pandemic. I'm
so glad that young people are still living in Okinawa and that they can feel
that Okinawa that has been going on for so long in Hawaii. I'm so glad I was
born in my hometown. And today, I'd like to introduce my song, Niifei Deiviru.
It's 2020 when the coronavirus started. I couldn't hold a festival, but instead,
I was able to broadcast it online. I was watching the online broadcast, and I
was able to listen to it because I was inspired by the young Okinawans who
wanted to continue broadcasting without losing the light of Okinawa. Please
listen to it. From Nakasone Hajime, Okinawa. Niifei Deiviru, please continue to
support us. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. I'm so glad that young
people are still living in Okinawa. And today, I'd like to introduce my song,
Niifei Deiviru. It's 2020 when the coronavirus started. I'm so glad that young
people are still living in Okinawa. And today, I'd like to broadcast it online.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you everyone, thank you everyone!�로ん train taking
trains. Aloha! I am Akira Kawabata, from Yoronjima, which is located in the far
south of Kagoshima, near Okinawa. I am Akira Kawabata, the vocalist of The
Kobura Twisters. Speaking of Hawaii, I have always thought that it is a place
that has been friendly to me, and that it is a place that has a rich culture. I
have the image that it is a place that has a lot of southern islands.
Unfortunately, I have never been there. Even on my island, Yoronjima, I love
flaredance, ukulele, and Hawaiian music and culture. I think that there are many
similarities and differences between the two islands, so I would like to visit
Hawaii someday. This year, Okinawa is the 50th anniversary of the Japanese re-
establishment, and various events are going on in various places. I think that
it is a year of unending, so I hope that Okinawa and Hawaii will continue to be
in the same place. I hope that the music will be exciting in various situations.
That's all. I'm Akira Kawabata. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.