TRANSCRIPTION: KZOO_AUDIO/2023-02-20-01H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 You're listening to KZOO, K-Z-O-O Honolulu, Hawaii. Rice, tea, pickles, and
vegan soy meat. Using the sea of Japan, it's a great side dish for chikuwa and
takikomi rice. The usual dishes are very delicious. Soy sauce, miso, etc. There
are also sweet things. Matcha sweets, sweet and fruity dried fruits, etc. It's a
delicious dish full of charm. Please watch, eat, and feel the shimane. Shimane
Fair is being held. February 17, 18, 19, on the same day, in Hawaii, the whole
world, we are waiting for you with a lot of delicious food. I'm going to the
beach. I'm going to karaoke. I'm going to drink beer. I'm going to drink water.
I'm going to have a good time. I'm going to have a good time. I don't think so.
I want to give a present to that girl. I'm in love with you. I'm in love with
you. I can't get away from you at all during the day. I'm in love with you. I'm
in love with you. I can't get away from you at all during the day. Everyone
gathers at his house. Let's make a fuss again after a long time. I'm angry. I'm
sorry. I'll drink it again. I've done too much. I haven't forgotten the
important things. After all, we are drinking with a face to face. I'm in love
with you. I'm in love with you. I can't get away from you at all during the day.
I'm in love with you. I'm in love with you. I can't get away from you at all
during the day. I'm in love with you. I'm in love with you. Don't be shy. I'm in
love with you. Let's dance together. I'm in love with you. I'm in love with you.
Let's dance together. I'm in love with you. I can't get away from you at all
during the day. I'm in love with you. I can't get away from you at all during
the day. I'm in love with you. I can't get away from you at all during the day.
I'm in love with you. I'm in love with you. I can't get out of my head during
the day Oh yeah You're listening to KZ Radio AM 1210 Honolulu, Hawaii with DJ
California Roll. I'm in exile and I'm into you. The next song is a ccd that
doesn't stop the romantic. Oh yeah You know Romantic Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh yeah Oh
yeah