TRANSCRIPTION: RDB_AUDIO/2023-02-19-21H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Donkey Kong yee yee yee taza kaza ki sanandom tat afasa mbitanou sonreika no
varangam breftulan ki anga tinganua firifiris enu wita kulaw nangan tenganti
wulkada ni alu kamisou lanza nengi nasiranu mas sengin mbitanu fi tingalaa eno
tara kwanda ami sumafi pengenasi chimiti chimitola manama lala ngazan tanga trik
sa hawa ili tanubano taanuranga chimitika dit sofo diswanno kombo la chiwa ma
eza ma mindu maa ngu patyan sou maa chiwa gidenosuna kwa ma ngandataza bedu
futuranu va tzara no tianetou kwa is tanda e anulubat mafana no e musen no e za
hawa denzou sen sen denzou sa ki ta panfanga anakuri nya ma liwa tzitrangu njeri
ya kanatza injali sein fen fita kantan fanza kantat sanga sanga niya denzenga
sinen kas ma eya no ta fita su lafa khauren ka tsu tafa usha kezan tanu mas dik
na tzmanan bat na kwa angana kuren spa ula ngana ngan malas sa ya no juru moten
ama renga tanjung ma sova re sasabung i dangan fangan tingan kumbeva tzisaka
fangan nara ngani na ezen alewa kwa me e musen no e za hawa denzou sen sen
denzou anakuri nya ma liwa sen sen denzou ya kanatza injali sein sa ki ta
panfanga alewa mpune lewa mandra ha tosandre sa kwa diwipitulele mbo apare si ko
manja nunpas manja ra sandi ko tzimufua kanpas anu kwangi papi nanji ulmabil
tintera ka fangan fow fatan tzisaka fangan namsa fidlal nginbwanga fonti sampa
ngang pangan panganla kuran gana kwa chawano tzimtiamna kwa iketki paraka acha
no rek pa tzika ja mblitki nenga paramanana tibetula singaloha no manjikara
kurni uchi menzutafa foha pekutuma rota naki ena nmanakari anko tziman za tari
akwari afo za azari anga din i musen no din i musen no sen sen denzou sen sen
denzou nanakuri nyamare nanakuri nyamare ya nanasa itzali se nanasa itzali se
din i musen no sen sen denzou nanakuri nyamare nanakuri nyamare ya nanasa itzali
se ya nanasa itzali se ye tzirira kamisa ni denen na we we betenati klote no
falala kwa ra we eno wek faminwana fante ni leku enole milana kandao iya raditi
sara duwane paradisi azafatira ni sineti nata kundami na we sawe farasita kote
zana kumba wetnawe tonawe tonawe niwe kandu saanu lute sawe ta se kuzi nomiti
fati mono tamu lute ale so ya tsa wanare ale so ya tsa wanare so ya tsa wanare
anambara kunia wanatiku bela wanama dopa fante kwe ale so ya tsa wanare ale so
ya tsa wanare ale so ya tsa wanare anambara kunia wanatiku bela wanama dopa
fante kwe ye ye ye ye seti nonita tiafiku ye pizu nonu wafiku kazi ande anano
tumetu tiafiku kazi anano tumetu tiafiku kazi anano tumetu tiafiku fa tsu la
viku e bola no fuku teto e manda patunga leza natzik fatiku sambati ufalu ravu
ravu nazayu natzik sa ya tsa wanu fenonu waan saka sa ttinua fuke fanu fatsi ane
olasaka Uzi ngomiti farti nomi otamulu twe Ale, so ya tsa wanawwe Ale, so ya tsa
wanawwe Anamba rakunia wanatiku We no wanawwa dopo farti kwe Yeah, yeah, yeah,
yeah Ale, so ya tsa wanawwe Ale, so ya tsa wanawwe Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah Anamba
rakunia wanatiku We no wanawwa dopo farti kwe Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah So much to
believe in We were lost in time Everything I needed Fell into your eyes Always
thought of keeping Your heart next to mine But now that seems so far away Don't
know how to love and leave without a trace Where the silent hearts go Where does
my heart beat now? Where is the sound That only echoes through the night? Where
does my heart beat now? Without feeling inside Where do all the lonely hearts
go? Candle in the water Drifting helplessly Hiding from the thunder Come rescue
me Driven by the hunger Of the endless dreams I'm searching for the hand that I
can hold I'm reaching for the arms that let me know Where the silent hearts go
Where does my heart beat now? Where is the sound That only echoes through the
night? Where does my heart beat now? I can't leave without Without feeling
inside Where do all the lonely hearts go? Where do all the lonely hearts go? In
one book, sure, overcomes the silence Love still survives Two hearts in need of
one another Giving wings to fly Where does my heart beat now? Where is the sound
That only echoes through the night? Where does my heart beat now? I can't leave
without Without feeling inside I need someone to give my heart to I'm feeling
stronger and stronger and stronger I'm feeling inside I'm so made to last till
the end of time Hey, little fella, let's just show together I was listening
before, now I don't care no more Look around now The sorrow that is gonna get me
down It's only begun, yeah One look is all it took To remember that sweet
surrender I recall to you That sweet surrender Sweet surrender My determination
Came creeping across the nation It's your most day for anyone So you can't take
home everyone Cause it's only just begun One look is all it took To remember
that sweet surrender I recall to you That sweet surrender I don't know, I don't
care Cause I'm living without you baby Even when I know what's going on Yeah, it
only took one look One glance would have set my heart Set my romance Do you
believe my sweet surrender? My sweet surrender Hey, little fella, now you're
shows together I never wanted you to listen before So why should I walk out the
door? Stick around now And so the story goes on through the night It's only
begun One look is all it took To remember that sweet surrender And there they
go, cause I do My sweet surrender I don't know, I don't care Cause I'm living
without you baby Even when I know what's going on Yeah, it only took one look
One glance would have set my heart Set my romance One look is all it took To
remember that sweet surrender My sweet surrender My sweet surrender Yeah One
look is all it took To remember One look is all it took To remember I don't
know, I don't care American 9-0, I could be LTV Hey, look at the world Yooo This
is the way I'm living without you baby Even when I know what's going on Yeah, it
only took one look One glance would have set my heart Set my romance One look is
all it took To remember that sweet surrender My sweet surrender My sweet
surrender My sweet surrender I don't know, I don't care Cause I'm living without
you baby Even when I know what's going on Yeah, it only took one look Aso mena
lia kiu fai wanetia na ma tista Isa na angrumi tunra shippa Isa ti tengasami
shifika Matu gana wania urapapyo Fou mena wanayi nye Lenganzaw Fai elita pokosi
Sati bandi pesosi Te tene nom nasa fato kumariasi Nimuzin mumitena babarati Isa
na voosana zute shoppin Le fama fana fana te pisin Kwe Mano nomadi Faa ngay ruma
hayam tangangadi Hanga tan bulsik erong shoppin Mi fangenskens tia ngati asi Ki,
anak tia tsa velis lesan El fau we elita wan meden Tene nom nasa kirubabja O ele
sukna elama tuin medhiam tsi I na shua Ha fahyan legan hata ngatanana Sa hua
niya lamhi sinyi Te huiteu El fau we ra hako na mula Elita leksi Ana in Ana in
Huiteu Huiteu Ana in e Huiteu Huiteu Ana in Ana in Huiteu se mafe Ana in ye
Huiteu se mafe Huiteu Huiteu Huiteu Huiteuushing? Matzi arwi riu pasan tsi Asha
mi zaai Mjadjanao funao Nala vija zaanu misjanao Gula manan tsi faisi lai Ftuna
aita kwa nao Mjadjanao ashanau Tsi anari tsu ki tsu ki saka Gula mi nua chan
matu ki fan I fan nu tsu afeenao insha shaped nao Ganefa tsu kivya Tsu kietchaka
Famiandja chan Laifi berinana Mianja nao Fou nao Nala vicha Sanu misyanao Mula
mana den Leyan djwirai Aita kwa nao Mianja nao Acha nyao Tsiya na ritu Kichu
kietchaka Mula minwa chan Matu kifa Ifan utwa minnao Mianja nao Fou nao Mula
mite buku nifu Mada la vicha Sanu misyanao Ilayen rikyao Nukwi tui jao Wano wako
Utsa rukuwa Wansari kyuwao Kila ya na ranao Na tsi kinao Tsi matyu hununa Awan
pukuwa Awan pukuwa Awan pukuwa Awan pukuwa Kwa fwa misu wa inna kwa tiran Sendra
manda law chan Gwama mangi fangi saun menga ja Tuka chan nae ruititi rapare Wila
nginbarta fitgen chan mupeye Misifu tuwa nga zaun ba neki kivi Tso tana la veri
san pi man ngon vani mit Eli tship tshup tshap tende ya fafuk man nakan Kara
ulan devu sbit tjavanan Mamula va bat kuzala e Mamula van e fes fujko Mamula va
malan fana e Samma tuk fombol iyo bisamnya mare Mamula va bat kuzala e Mamula
van e fes fujko Mamula va malan fana e Samma tuk fombol iyo bisamnya mare Mamula
va bat kuzala e Mamula van e fes fujko Mamula va malan fana e Samma tuk fombol
iyo bisamnya mare Mamula va bat kuzala e Mamula van e fes fujko Mamula va malan
fana e Samma tuk fombol iyo bisamnya mare Azala zaimra za tantana Nanyala ilu
anadju Tungyadetsu das futsuni Kizi unu e mbula tuk kapu Tungu le papi jetuni
futon Andasa kriza mule fom Newa lunfuk ba itungandran Zaun tia la yin baku
itungman Wa si na piti titaka tu Zombula etwa lunfanta tu Nleku mangin ala
mitumon Yadendans jaun jaun fon Nu vakan tuteun i tantar Nu kanyans wi znanan ba
Anamam etfa tanya U li vene twam tyan Leom kila laulun ya dalan Tzere yechali
tuts mataman Angamam etfa tanya Kani vene twam tyan Divi tuk akwi Mbela luv kil
yande Lazawa svan tibi Tembula mja jas fon ne Azala zain azat natana Nganyala ye
luwana atku Tunga ditu jas futuni Kizi unu e mbula tuk kapu Tungu le papi jetuni
futon Andasa kriza mule fom Newa lunfuk ba itungandran Zaun tya la ye maku
itungman Waafsina piti tipakatru Zambula itwalu mfantatru Leom kila laulun ya
dalan Yadendans jaun jaun fon Nganyala ye luwana atku Tungu le papi jetuni futon
Andasa kriza mule fom Nganyala ye maku itungman Waafsina piti tipakatru Zambula
itwalu mfantatru Leom kila laulun ya dalan Yadendans jaun jaun fon Aha aha ha yo
yo Aha aha ha yo yo Jas jas menna mnau Zam tx zam tx Swag zam tx La mudja mmi
zaun txisare Butx o ma nhir jeks nepe Am txak bling bling zaun otetch O jas
menna zaan makuamena Za kul efa swag lech za zamena Andri aza lat aza manjena
Alo utya txismena eda yo We are swag that's why we love swag Swag swag swag swag
We are swag that's why we love swag Angat e ban na za kalama Dibata flaxiyo za
mandamo Tik tik tik khamne maranchi Faneva na mi sarangachimi la fancha Akora
toki enga txisa nou swagge Nyang nam nou sans na ajabe Swag ko fadesa atone budi
word Swag ko fadesa twerk twerk We are swag that's why we love swag Akora toki
enga txisa nou swagge Work that body work work that body Twerk that body twerk
twerk that body We are swag that's why we love swag She was so beautiful You
know what I'm sayin' J'avoue quand je t'ai fue Ce n'était rien qu'un mirage
C'est imputent d'image Je veux pas répé la rage Qui est en moi Je te vois dans
un style plus hard de corps Alors que mon coeur me colle Et dès qu'il y a ton
doigt Tu es vraiment le genre de girl De mon côté bestial Fancy molo nour et
fais pas l'animal Sur un flow de vieux freestyles Je veux que t'aime plus la vie
Tu es la vie de la vie Tu es la vie de la vie Tu es la vie de la vie Tu es la
vie de la vie Tu es la vie de la vie Tu es la vie de la vie Tu es la vie de la
vie Tu es la vie de la vie Dters stress Me dis Les humains Calmes No No Calmes
O! Te donne pite mon affection Andalinda ou la perfection O! Tu retorne la
divinite Afrodisa kote me pense O! Laouj iraissu sura ou tu ira Je le sens klo
se le bou karma O ma lady, fafou ainsi Je crois pas tu es trop divin O ney, je
me le s'chandele s'e kome a ga' et se tejones O ma lady, s'en va pas Kus a le
destin kifei to za Je le foulai ne pas domi Kuma j'en sou je le laissou O sou
Andalinda, india l'a mai Andalinda, india l'a mai O! Je ne parli beaucoup d'ambe
Je te la bouge O! Oui, ça! Je n'ai jamais voulu te voler Ni ton amour ni ton
amitié Je voulais jusque tu sache Que ton père serait quand même vache Et si
jamais tu m'en voulait T'avais vu k'tu m'as manke Alors, si pour y'a que'n fois
Je te demande pardon C'est plus fort que moi Andalinda, india l'a mai Andalinda,
india l'a mai Walking down the street I'm a baby No, you make me crazy Je n'ai
jamais voulu te voler Ni ton amour ni ton amitié Je voulais jusque tu sache Que
ton père serait quand même vache Andalinda, india l'a mai Andalinda, india l'a
mai Walking down the street I'm a baby No, you make me crazy Je n'ai jamais
voulu te voler Ni ton amour ni ton amitié Je voulais jusque tu sache Que ton
père serait quand même vache Andalinda, india l'a mai Andalinda, india l'a mai
Walking down the street I'm a baby No, you make me crazy K'un j'eve t'on le t'on
pa Asi ma vi n'ave mi ouke sa San no man k'a shake fukke j'ai pa So delicious is
what you are Andolinda te mon se l'espoi Andolinda, did you know Andolinda, j'ai
dit j'ai dit j'ai dit J'ai pari de moi, nan la j'te K'a doj'e f'evi mei J'e s'a
le po l'eutonio J'ai doj'e f'evi mei J'e po l'e j'euske te s'ache K'e te pej se
rej k'a ma fa J'e si j'avdik tu m'en voulait T'avoli k'e tu va m'envouler A l'or
tu s'es f'evi a ke foie J'e te demande pas dans et tu Toke a Andolina, did you
love me Andolina, did you kiss me J'e pari de moi, nan la j'te K'a doj'e f'evi
me J'e s'a le po l'eutonio J'e s'a le po l'eutonio J'e s'a le po l'eutonio J'e
po l'e j'euske te s'ache K'e te pej se rej k'a ma fa J'e si j'avdik tu m'en
voulait T'avoli k'e tu va m'envouler A l'or tu s'es f'evi a ke foie J'e te
demande pas dans et tu Toke a Andolina, did you love me Andolina, did you kiss
me J'e s'a le po l'eutonio J'e s'a le po l'eutonio J'e s'a le po l'eutonio I
thought that you'd be loving me I thought you were the one who'd stay forever
But now forever's come and gone And I'm still here alone Cause you were only
playing You were only playing with my heart I was never waiting I was never
waiting for the tears to start It was you who put the clouds of blue It was you
who made the tears fall down It was you who broke my heart in pieces It was you
who made my blue eyes blue Never should have trusted I thought that I'd be all
you need In your eyes I thought I'd saw my end And now my heaven's gone away And
I'm out in the cold Cause you had me believing You had me believing in a lie I
guess I couldn't see it I guess I couldn't see it till I saw goodbye It was you
who put the clouds of blue It was you who made the tears fall down It was you
who broke my heart in pieces It was you who made my blue eyes blue Never should
have trusted Cause you were only playing You were only playing with my heart I
was never waiting I was never waiting for the tears to start It was you who put
the clouds of blue It was you who put the clouds of blue It was you who made the
tears fall down It was you who broke my heart in pieces It was you who made my
blue eyes blue Never should have trusted Cause you were only playing Never
should have trusted Cause you were only playing Never should have trusted Never
should have trusted Never should have trusted If you meet the strain I'm on You
will know that I am gone You can hear the whistle blow a hundred miles Lord, I'm
one, Lord, I'm two Lord, I'm three, Lord, I'm four Lord, I'm five hundred miles
away from home Five hundred miles, five hundred miles Five hundred miles, five
hundred miles Lord, I'm five hundred miles away from home No shirt on my back
Not a penny to my name Lord, I can't go on home this away This away, this away
This away, this away Lord, I can't go back home this away So if you miss this
train I'm on You will know that I am gone You can hear the whistle blow A
hundred miles You can hear the whistle blow A hundred miles You can hear the
whistle blow A hundred miles You can hear the whistle blow 100 miles Deni na laf
ka shanta ne nyawa na tu na ka shanta ne nyawa tsuwe tsuwa pangarewane nyawa na
laf ka shanta ne nyawa na tu na ka shanta ne nyawa na laf ka shanta ne nyawa na
tu na ka shanta ne nyawa na laf ka shanta ne nyawa na tu na ka shanta ne nyawa
na laf ka shanta ne nyawa na tu na ka shanta ne nyawa na laf ka shanta ne nyawa
na tu na ka shanta ne nyawa na laf ka shanta ne nyawa na tu na ka shanta ne
nyawa na laf ka shanta ne nyawa na tu na ka shanta ne nyawa na laf ka shanta ne
nyawa na tu na ka shanta ne nyawa na laf ka shanta ne nyawa na tu na ka shanta
ne nyawa na laf ka shanta ne nyawa na tu na ka shanta ne nyawa na laf ka shanta
ne nyawa na tu na ka shanta ne nyawa na laf ka shanta ne nyawa na tu na ka
shanta ne nyawa na laf ka shanta ne nyawa na tu na ka shanta ne nyawa na laf ka
shanta ne nyawa na tu na ka shanta ne nyawa na laf ka shanta ne nyawa na tu na
ka shanta ne nyawa na laf ka shanta ne nyawa na tu na ka shanta ne nyawa na laf
ka shanta ne nyawa na tu na ka shanta ne nyawa na laf ka shanta ne nyawa na tu
na ka shanta ne nyawa favorable N'uwa kunjisi hamida cha fana Hamida cha fana
N'uwa kunjita hamida Tuka namdina Fana wa aiza, na wa aiza E nila naun ki krisia
N'uwa kunjisi hamida cha Hamida cha fana Fana wa aiza, na wa aiza E nila naun ki
krisia N'uwa kunjita hamida Cha fana Hamida cha fana Hamida cha fana Sheenien
otiaa ko diya biti ma fitanbi Ma nela reki tibi Otimai kaun o shidiko
N'ukumagamanyen kichi Tepudya min tse Sheenien otiaa ko diya biti ma fitanbi Ma
nela reki tibi Otimai kaun o shidiko N'ukumagamanyen kichi Tepudya min tse Ano
neti apu Diya kuti apaka luku Ano fesa fi Peshka nati un fo kwa to Je t'enla la
poja Je te ga anti bebe Je t'enla la poja Je te ga anti bebe Chida si bwila
Hayanya predominantly Me s exp tiefya Kamua hai Han capari ma tukissan tinpwera,
ma f'yera ma nana nozao na ma'e rumana gitara, ma tissi ma suetana ma tukissan
ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga na tame ma siwe, na muta pe faunke sh'e ni
s'antinpwera, ma f'yera ma nana nozao na ma'e rumana gitara, ma tissi ma suetano
sh'e niko ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga ma zara ma suetana, ma
soton sh'e a non e tiakou, tiakou tsia ka kalou a non fa za piliku, petka na din
fo pato je t'en malo, je te le garantis bebe je t'en bon mon maje, moi je te le
jure a non e tiakou, tiakou tsia ka kalou a non fa za piliku, petka na din fo
pato je t'en malo, je te le garantis bebe je t'en bon mon maje, moi je te le
jure sh'e ni s'antinpwera, ma f'yera ma nana nozao na ma'e rumana gitara, ma
tissi ma suetano ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga ma zara ma
suetana, ma muta pe faunke sh'e ni s'antinpwera, ma f'yera ma nana nozao na ma'e
rumana gitara, ma tissi ma suetano sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a
rumayezama na jatenga ma zara ma suetana, ma muta pe faunke sh'e ni
s'antinpwera, ma f'yera ma nana nozao na ma'e rumana gitara, ma tussi ma suetana
ma zara ma suetana, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga ma zara ma
suetana, ma muta pe faunke sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga ma zara ma
suetana, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tussi ma
suetana, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga ma zara ma suetana, ma
tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a
rumayezama na jatenga ma zara ma suetana, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tussi ma suetana, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tussi ma suetana, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga ma zara ma suetana, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni
lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma
lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola,
a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na
jatenga sh'e ni lola, ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga sh'e ni lola,
ma tukissan ma lola, a rumayezama na jatenga ma tia wanafo na izahu, layna
mecha'atku nifuku tunga wamiya ja na fona hu, si situni nituluku ma tia wanafo
na izahu, layna mecha'atku nifuku tunga wamiya ja na fona hu, si situni nituluku
si situni nituluku ma tia wanafo na izahu, layna mecha'atku nifuku tunga wamiya
ja na fona hu, si situni nituluku ma tia wanafo na izahu, layna mecha'atku
nifuku tunga wamiya ja na fona hu, si situni nituluku shore za di, muka ja ja
ta, aysu na huware ooo, oorizan, ooo, oorizan shuknu mila na oorizan, shuknu
mila na ooriz fa fa fa, fa fa fa, fa fa fa fa fa fa, fa fa fa, fa fa fa aya,
sande ken, aya, aya aya, aya, aya aya, aya aya, aya aya, aya aya, aya aya, aya
di shemana, shore za din re, ta shota, aysu na huware ooo, oorizan, ooo, oorizan
ooo, oorizan, ooo, oorizan fa fa fa, fa fa fa, fa fa fa fa fa fa, fa fa fa, fa
fa fa fa fa fa, fa fa fa, fa fa fa ndana hoi za di lamdi lamdi lamda hoi za zo
di lamdi lamdi lamda hoi za zo di lamdi lamda hoi za aase nora utha kampa uri
kusin fidja liku deza kaa aase nora utha panna sambara kelu geto tam de kulu
kuchiu veri ve chile na kurenga ba uyao mita tarla mzaimandu netu maiz nan tan
fata kao nilu netu ratni anwaan fara pitsu su za diye fawa sura ta fwa kampa mza
kan yas fidja liku tam manana kapo kakelu bisu tu le ram siti aase nora inwa
famar ram zaka faori na fulu avu eni nun ya nao tcha kyanora inwa kan efatim su
kababa kelekuri iziro na mita lao eza initi suru jene tavanen kelekun ya kivin
foma ika vula mena was ni mangin foma ika rena was kiun fia fin na defa ira nuwa
naza iz ti ta ki kyan nao jadaat fara mbo lamiz fufu na ina biduru ya leon mita
aase nora inwa faol yon zaka tena ten zo so temba ni awari na nu tizaka tcha
kyanora inwa famaf tura mafra ni yawa ni la pinanu yin reo mandat la yampua
nananoti muinam ninana tono tusi ni maya nao anaw pinotofi avus kan efana desan
azati mnokus nilua ruwa lantan tena ka tsa hu ina yampua mula net maule na si
puta kaku ramandini tan tsa lu ya wajan nani fanyava na rati na sila lai na tsa
joe rahamu nelape mazanu rakaparti valin zaya tonba mandat hafu itota vente
namba waizamu ita tsa yare na tove rizu tsa liozen nyanachi surumu rum tam ram
manda kil sipat ku zayan nam nya vanan pitulu para indan zaya tonba mandat hafu
itota vente namba waizamu itota vane namba waizamu tsa liozen nyanachi surumu
rum tam ram manda kil sipat ku zayan nam nya vanan pitulu para indan zaya tonba
mandat hafu itota vente namba waizamu itota vane namba waizan tsa liozen
nyanachi surumu rum tam ram manda kil sipat ku zayan nam nya vanan pitulu para
indan zaya tonba mandat hafu T'ya kuwa tumni, tatuwa tonokera nanjuni ndaba
Ambero ze somba mispa tsuwa ku'a ngiwan Kaifunakua minomalala Aivita panawiyani,
fal si falia minotukuneya T'ya kurenda renda, t'ya kufita pitaka T'u talua sote
nanatukyanaw Fa'aminiza hu hita kuano nyuba Ispiye vitjano danila za zani yoban
Fomeka mitumu sibe vitjawa kuano Harifata rakumiditantang, jimidika renda renda
Fa'aminiza karabula asamba tajika Fa'aminiza karabula asamba tajika Kuwasenit
Yara kie zake sikkaru, ande senga nunzadiya'e nanah Ambero sumunga nistanu, anga
rakanauniya Nasaru chani fia'e nanah, namuna Hunwa anga rakanaunzaun, tisani
sange niya fatena marina Ambero sumunga nistanu, fosafatena tiyana Nafake
vitjara kami naniya, yara kami nomanda kisai Anga tawamba ba sinin kuzaun
Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan changu Fartit ya kuwadya anga tiyu wadzor kuwa
yala tananga Soma na hiram nyanjara wabe Anga tawamba ba sinin kuzaun Tanokwa
tengavunga lang pitchan changu Fartit ya kuwadya anga tiyu wadzor kuwa yala
tananga Soma na hiram nyanjara wabe Fosafatena tiyu wadzor kuwa yala tananga
Soma na hiram nyanjara wabe Fosafatena tiyu wadzor kuwa yala tananga Soma na
hiram nyanjara wabe Anga tawamba ba sinin kuzaun Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan
changu Fartit ya kuwadya anga tiyu wabe Anga tawamba ba sinin kuzaun Tanokwa
tengavunga lang pitchan changu Fosafatena tiyu wadzor kuwa yala tananga Soma na
hiram nyanjara wabe Anga tawamba ba sinin kuzaun Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan
changu Fosafatena tiyu wadzor kuwa yala tananga Soma na hiram nyanjara wabe Anga
tawamba ba sinin kuzaun Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan changu Fosafatena tiyu
wadzor kuwa yala tananga Soma na hiram nyanjara wabe Anga tawamba ba sinin
kuzaun Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan changu Fosafatena tiyu wadzor kuwa yala
tananga Soma na hiram nyanjara wabe Anga tawamba ba sinin kuzaun Tanokwa
tengavunga lang pitchan changu Fosafatena tiyu wadzor kuwa yala tananga Soma na
hiram nyanjara wabe Anga tawamba ba sinin kuzaun Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan
changu Fosafatena tiyu wadzor kuwa yala tananga Soma na hiram nyanjara wabe Anga
tawamba ba sinin kuzaun Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan changu Fosafatena tiyu
wadzor kuwa yala tananga Soma na hiram nyanjara wabe Anga tawamba ba sinin
kuzaun Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan changu Fosafatena tiyu wadzor kuwa yala
tananga Soma na hiram nyanjara wabe Anga tawamba ba sinin kuzaun Tanokwa
tengavunga lang pitchan changu Fosafatena tiyu wadzor kuwa yala tananga Soma na
hiram nyanjara wabe Anga tawamba ba sinin kuzaun Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan
changu Fosafatena tiyu wadzor kuwa yala tananga Soma na hiram nyanjara wabe Anga
tawamba ba sinin kuzaun Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan changu Fosafatena tiyu
wadzor kuwa yala tananga Soma na hiram nyanjara wabe Anga tawamba ba sinin
kuzaun Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan changu Fosafatena tiyu wadzor kuwa yala
tananga Soma na hiram nyanjara wabe Anga tawamba ba sinin kuzaun Tanokwa
tengavunga lang pitchan changu Fosafatena tiyu wadzor kuwa yala tananga Soma na
hiram nyanjara wabe Anga tawamba ba sinin kuzaun Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan
changu Fosafatena tiyu wadzor kuwa yala tananga Soma na hiram nyanjara wabe Anga
tawamba ba sinin kuzaun Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan changu Fosafatena tiyu
wadzor kuwa yala tananga Soma na hiram nyanjara wabe Anga tawamba ba sinin
kuzaun Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan changu Fosafatena tiyu wadzor kuwa yala
tananga Soma na hiram nyanjara wabe Anga tawamba ba sinin kuzaun Tanokwa
tengavunga lang pitchan changu Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan changu Fosafatena
tiyu wadzor kuwa yala tananga Soma na hiram nyanjara wabe Anga tawamba ba sinin
kuzaun Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan changu Fosafatena tiyu wadzor kuwa yala
tananga Soma na hiram nyanjara wabe Anga tawamba ba sinin kuzaun Tanokwa
tengavunga lang pitchan changu Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan changu Tanokwa
tengavunga lang pitchan changu Fosafatena tiyu wadzor kuwa yala tananga Soma na
hiram nyanjara wabe Anga tawamba ba sinin kuzaun Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan
changu Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan changu Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan
changu Fosafatena tiyu wadzor kuwa yala tananga Soma na hiram nyanjara wabe Anga
tawamba ba sinin kuzaun Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan changu Tanokwa
tengavunga lang pitchan changu Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan changu Fosafatena
tiyu wadzor kuwa yala tananga Soma na hiram nyanjara wabe Anga tawamba ba sinin
kuzaun Tanokwa tengavunga lang pitchan changu Repanin skaji ga ula Ape la wite,
jirupulu mandara Jirupulu jirupulu mandara Jirupulu jirupulu mandara Na iro la
para Ape la wite, jirupulu jirupulu mandara Sa tizaw sa nao, na yadam inasa
Azamanai, aswas ni asu Oh, oh, yewa Mame la para, ya to pa wala Mitiri ta sa
nya, una peri leu Yawa kana, iti ba me ti ni mara Na iro ijanga, na iro ije Bidi
mose, dahiti mada mati Katiyi lupi, jannam bai luna Siti la di bana, sila takkan
nati Na iro ki ada, na iro ki luna Ape la wite, jirupulu mandara Jirupulu
jirupulu mandara Ape la wite, jirupulu jirupulu mandara Sa tizaw sa nao, na
yadam inasa Ape la wite, jirupulu mandara Na iro la para Na iro ki ada, na iro
ki luna Sa tizaw sa nao, na yadam inasa Azamanai, aswas ni asu Na iro ki ada, na
iro ki luna Ape la wite, jirupulu mandara Ja potiki re, na yadam inasa Jirupulu
jiri ye, sa tizaw sa nao, na yadam inasa Ape la wite, jirupulu mandara Ja potiki
re, na iro la para Na yadam inasa Sa tizaw sa nao, na yadam inasa Azamanai,
aswas ni asu ndi Ni su e su nao Tovo ma ya, ma pitumbo Inai fitiava quasi sai
Tzisai la zainau No faka anu vizai Na tzuru, kaikuru Na niri, na kulalana Na isi
fanda rana Titi kiwi zikiu tia Sai tisaraka Farani nae, ma fi uri na suvonuda
Titi tina ma tuja, fita fanda Farani nae, ma fi uri na suvonuda Titi tina ma
tuja, fita fanda Titi tina ma tuja, fita fanda Sai tizai la zainau Tovo ma ya,
mi fanka ti Mitumbusi, ma fani la fiti Mitumbusi, ma fanka ti Mitumbusi, ma
fanka ti Titi tina ma tuja, fita fanda Titi tina ma tuja, fita fanda Titi tina
ma tuja, fita fanda Sai tisaraka Fafu ira, mumita wata Mufa maraka Sai tisaraka
Na umura na usauta Farani nae, ma fi uri na suvonuda Titi tina ma tuja, fita
fanda Watau kusa, karakara fi vanzara Numinawai mandra ki zai Watau kusa,
karakara fi vanzara Numinawai mandra ki zai Farani nae, ma fi uri na suvonuda
Titi tina ma tuja, fita fanda Farani nae, ma fi uri na suvonuda Titi tina ma
tuja, fita fanda En kita na dani chamu En puktu kuki ume na na Anga ba tuvo
tanisi tu Tenredire, efisana giza You are the one, you are my queen Aida ba kwa
ti, fi siti You are my love, my mandana queen Sbisu na sara kaya mina Danisi
anaw ti kuisa Yang sik yan fute puirai Alekan kima patia Vanfuku e fano kazan
miaia Aida kya ya Az asi na ya ya ya Yeah, oh, yeah My queen, aida kya ya
Efabikun vitachi za Eftya banti kya rekbya ma fan Alemba un fona zain ya iya
Flai kwa din ta fi ufana tina You are the one, you are my queen Aida ba kwa ti,
fi siti You are my love, my mandana queen Sbisu na sara kaya mina Danisi anaw ti
kuisa Yang sik yan fute puirai Alekan kima patia Vanfuku e fano kazan miaia You
are the one, you are my queen Aida ba kwa ti, fi siti You are my love, my
mandana queen Sbisu na sara kaya mina Az asi na ya ya ya My queen, aida kya ya
You are the one, you are my queen Fana ninu na ya na, tinanda lintsu Tu ilay
fana una, ure famba tinisi ya tao za jana Sala teninu la za, tizakana Kana ninju
na tu, tinu na fana mafuyana Tenu ra si nota min fu, ila bazi bazi natoku Nya
paneni tao antaikyu, nya paneni tao antaikyu Tenu ra si nota min fu, ila bazi
bazi natoku Nya paneni tao antaikyu, nya paneni tao antaikyu Fana ninu na ya na,
tinanda lintsu Tu ilay fana una, ure famba tinisi ya tao za jana Ani aninu na
tao, kandu tsi fanta tchau Ne fanye fanyi gen, iro masu kumi teriana Tenu ra si
nota min fu, ila bazi bazi natoku Nya paneni tao antaikyu, nya paneni tao
antaikyu Tenu ra si nota min fu, ila bazi bazi natoku Nya paneni tao antaikyu,
nya paneni tao antaikyu Kaunahita naute lau, wanirina fen tao apu Ani aninu na
tao, waniti kwan ba fanta tchau Tenu ra si nota min fu, ila bazi bazi natoku Nya
paneni tao antaikyu, nya paneni tao antaikyu Tenu ra si nota min fu, ila bazi
bazi natoku Nya paneni tao antaikyu, nya paneni tao antaikyu Tenu ra si nota min
fu, ila bazi bazi natoku Nya paneni tao antaikyu, nya paneni tao antaikyu Tenu
ra si nota min fu, ila bazi bazi natoku Nya paneni tao antaikyu, nya paneni tao
antaikyu Tenu ra si nota min fu, ila bazi bazi natoku Nya paneni tao antaikyu,
nya paneni tao antaikyu Tenu ra si nota min fu, ila bazi bazi natoku Tenu ra si
nota min fu, ila bazi bazi natoku Aseja nya enku Tiro rano masu nao E fadzari
sita rano enku Lu lala naa nu diabi nao E fani sidi ya tuu buchu Kami ya vizana
nao Are rani fisa enku Nya re ti naure yet E faru fi kiu talu Reu ditzi nisi fec
lu diabi ku avuku Ka ti maa ga ga ra gizao Tafara i si kiaru Reu re ye cha cha
ena rau E fani ya ra kia rikiu Tafara i si kiaru Tiro fi fali ya nao Ti ke kiu
ya rikiu Kami ya sambara nao Na aje tri kiai tu ku Ni fi tiava nao ni tir Fi
tiava ku na muu Vuka tra sa ma ka tir Nga ra miu ti si kiaru Ka ti maa ga ga ra
gizao Tafara i si kiaru Reu re ye cha cha ena rau E fani ya ra kia rikiu Tafara
i si kiaru Tafara i si kiaru Nya re ti nao re yec E faru fi kiu talu Reu ditzi
nisi fec lu diabi ku avuku Ka ti maa ga ga ra gizao Tafara i si kiaru Reu re ye
cha cha ena rau E fani ya ra kia rikiu Ka ti maa ga ga ra gizao Tafara i si
kiaru Reu re ye cha cha ena rau E fani ya ra kia rikiu Tafara i si kiaru Tafara
i si kiaru Tafara i si kiaru Tafara i si kiaru Aai, si chiaru Tafare si chiaru
Tafare si chiaru Ma na hirana ma hakihi Fal sa hirana famaru be ngaki Dok si wa
raka hi sisi Ne fara lanaka de maru nipa niri Joka bravao Mara nani tu de isa
nima Mutan uti amba va fu Fa na hava rina rimufa ki ru De tiaun pi ma hava ki lu
To ma hava ni le fama uti janu To tiaun hi tu ni lima na bakaji Ni anara na ja
mirai fangalu Karira hi nadu ima haza haru Na hi mirana na hi janu Na hi kiutu
mila tu di mila hela Ki fo hirana na hi andu Na hi fara mila sa tukasi anu De va
bravao Batunga ni fe ti sa mite Si de tu hirandire Ni li fa bravao Ti va janu ru
Fa tiaun pi ma hava ki lu To ma hava ni le fama uti janu To tiaun hi tu ni lima
na bakaji Ni anara na ja mirai fangalu Karira hi nadu ima haza haru Batunga ni
fe ti sa mite Si de tu hirandire Ni li fa bravao Ti va janu ru Fa tiaun pi ma
hava ki lu To ma hava ni le fama uti janu To tiaun hi tu ni lima na bakaji Ni
anara na ja mirai fangalu Karira hi nadu ima haza haru Mansfera Mansfera
Mansfera Mansfera Mansfera Bama haza mandef tiyele Ano jau na ira kukuwa Iskuots
ma hafad Bama haza mandef tiyele Ano mboti na ira kukuwa Iskuots ma hafad Bama
haza mandef tiyele Ano mboti na ira kukuwa Iskuots ma hafad Bama haza mandef
tiyele Ano mboti na ira kukuwa Iskuots ma hafad Bama haza mandef tiyele Ano
mboti na ira kukuwa Iskuots ma hafad Iskuots ma hafad Ix kwana ro sami bisht
alabea Bama hanzo mi famena ergo Ix kwana ro sami rex manabo Ix kwana ro sami
rex manabo Bama hanzo mi famena ergo Mandep bici man raja kazamba miyadi Mandep
bici ma fan haki bonga tade Mandep bici manura zengi wi dadi Tzuru tzuru tzuru
Twechi zi wita mora Rezom manami tsobo mi pua hello Nyenenon hama renna zi hako
wi zengi Bada dbad kini fiyena na Mandep bici man raja kazamba miyadi Mandep
bici man raja kazamba miyadi Tzuru tzuru tzuru Twechi zi wita mora Mandep bici
man raja kazamba miyadi Bada dbad kini fiyena na Mandep bici ma fan haki bonga
tade Mandep bici ma fan haki bonga tade Mandep bici ma fan haki bonga tade Aira
ngudo, si maita ngira rine Fe, draimu si tjaliya se toha pesara ke Anda wi
fangat, anda wi tabat se Tu ini tanako, rampe su lungu Dessaurati ratte, tia
naua vako Musa kabinu, arem zela vo Draia ta fita, sombu lungu naua vau Tu ini
tanako, rampe su lungu Dessaurati ratte, tia naua vako Musa kabinu, arem zela vo
Draia ta fita, sombu lungu naua vau Pusengyo nanetu ye Tamiya sarutu nanako Kebi
tebi love, ama rekombo tsu fantase Fi hava ana kwae, nataka lutala Aira ngudo,
si maita ngira rine Fe, draimu si tjaliya se toha pesara ke Anda wi fangat, anda
wi tabat se Tu ini tanako, rampe su lungu Dessaurati ratte, tia naua vako Musa
kabinu, arem zela vo Draia ta fita, sombu lungu naua vau Tu ini tanako, rampe su
lungu Dessaurati ratte, tia naua vako Musa kabinu, arem zela vo Draia ta fita,
sombu lungu naua vau Draia mi tjale, sombu lungu naua vau Tu ini tanako, rampe
su lungu Dressaurati ratte, tia naua vako Musa kabinu, arem zela vo Dressaurati
ratte, tia naua vako Tu ini tanako, rampe su lungu Dressaurati ratte, tia naua
vako Musa kabinu, arem zela vo Dressaurati ratte, tia naua vako Tu ini tanako,
rampe su lungu Dressaurati ratte, tia naua vako Musa kabinu, arem zela vo
Dressaurati ratte, tia naua vako Tu ini tanako, rampe su lungu Musa kabinu, arem
zela vo Tu ini tanako, rampe su lungu Musa kabinu, arem zela vako Musa kabinu,
arem zela vako Musa kabinu, arem zela vako Tu ini tanako, rampe su lungu Musa
kabinu, arem zela vako Musa kabinu, arem zela vako Musa kabinu, arem zela vako
Musa kabinu, arem zela vako Tu ini tanako, rampe su lungu Musa kabinu, arem zela
vako Tu ini tanako, rampe su lungu Musa kabinu, arem zela vako Musa kabinu, arem
zela vako Tia mara kanawa Toa din kwa thkuni e doan buni tan Fani masa kanduni
we wanila no yan E wanila no yan, e Katirara insa i tse yan ya bat bat yan Fani
za vachi la eten e wanila no wacha E wanila no wacha nwa Ya No no Zara dira dana
No no no no E me Leit i tjanos na xtim kats baze Ka matna xami leit tsa bakoaze
Katina de tananao, katini anaanao Fati ana raka na Lefe o nomale fade faka tteni
Zemla piton kani foko e nemdini Katunga de tanakyan, katina tsinamekyan Fati ana
raka na Kazume latin kya we la satsambay Favona ita noa de tsa mawe landey
Katina la satsambay kadetsi tsa mawe Zavonata za nanon de la satsambay La
satsambay nita Vomata za nanon satea lala nita Fati ana raka na Fati ana raka na
La satsambay nita Lefe o ma ita noa manarla mami tsao Fati ana raka na Fati ana
raka noa Doa din kwa fku ni atombu ni tan Fani masa kandumi ewa nila noya Ewa
nila noya ne Katina la insaib zeyana matbatsyai Fani zaba tsi la eti ewa nila
noya shan Ewa nila noya shan Eddi piya tsi kya recha rech Tunga ba re, tunga ba
re Tunga ba mamangin tanana mesenai Tunga ba zaan sala sala wa Tunga ba manaraka
niya rabi Sem tunda makani Tunga ba re, tunga ba re Tunga ba mamangin tanana
mesenai Tunga ba zaan sala sala wa Tunga ba manaraka niya rabi Sem tunda makani
Wadiin no da ular su suri Sul suru mande raka na Wadiin no da ular teb tebi Tep
tebo mande raka noa Anza ma ta wita na wane Elanuna na alanuna na miyarakambe
wakama Sehi ya watanana Anza ma ta wita na wane Elanuna na alanuna na
miyarakambe wakama Sehi ya watanana Fata jela fe ra me musara La timba mdendura
ti kitara La timba mtsukara ti farara Fata jela fe ra me musara La timba
mdendura ti kitara La timba mtsukara ti farara Wode Wode Fits fits enkunga ti
Fantsasana na un di pe Fits fits enkunga ti Fantsasana na un di pe Fati Fati
nsova ka la sa ire Fati Fati nsova ka la sa ire Fati Fatu fatsitsen fiyana
Nufetsi feytin Mmaa taratarana Isa mwa wane ta Aro tonan fana dalaki Zai ova ma
lana Fata ra pita pita chaka Fata ra fita pita chaka Fata ra pita pita chaka Zai
na mutelela mutelela Mudi saun famendakwa Zai na mutelela mutelela Mudi saun
famendakwa Fernute gena putir namako Tshifool agafamile fta ra gamakwa Timbarna
timba makriyawako Fitikana faro makino papikyu Ey mamee faka kaka Ey mamee faka
kaka aru aru aru nemo tse kwe tula tsa fiza kwenoreni tsa ruku ya biswani fana
munti nemo buko tu ya bifizanti kareni ta didu kusu wa mifana kibute tsa ukua la
fenyenga na tsa kwe tsa kumbu zaewatu ne matiti faiye tsa ukua la fenyenga na
tsa kwe tsa muntaviyente ya zonik si numinju rafaf tja ri ba ri ba matiaru sa
fusta puna rezao alfa mi pegiti tu fusta to mani mani bifizanti karezao rafaf
aviti a ri ba ri ba matiaru sa fusta puna rezao alfa mi pegiti tu fusta to mani
mani bifizanti karezao tse kwe la ra otana ila luwa izanano e tse kwe la rasa
manda kwe tsilay na levi ba ve iftia van ni wange suvidan le tinfu iftia van ni
wange ma rezaan le muguntu aino pe le umal fan fuk penon loba loba anno e ri de
tnuk fwana le umal fan fftia van oma sika la be la belande tse kratati tnoren
bami la nou za gyal ila mila le bumal bami la nou za gyal sika rumba ya ri fa
bami la nou za gyal ila mila le bumal bami la nou za gyal sika rumba ya ri fa
rafaf aviti a ri ba ri ba matiaru sa fusta puna rezao alfa mi pegiti tu fusta to
mani mani bifizanti karezao rafaf aviti a ri ba ri ba matiaru sa fusta puna
rezao alfa mi pegiti tu fusta to mani mani bifizanti karezao sa tsi punga niari
tena matiaru sa fusta puna rezao e gyan li fukwane ania mi nou i san anwe ri de
tati no venu male fuk sote nen tale malut da oden ban e sa zo sarfa u en ban
kane bami la nou za gyal ila mila le bumal bami la nou za gyal sika rumba ya ri
fa bami la nou za gyal ila mila le bumal bami la nou za gyal sika rumba ya ri fa
tena tipi taji azo nou sta dima ya tena tia za kubole mara rizare mia giza giza
enu nou za wadon fi meza matiaru kade rira na fafia bti a ri ba ri ba matiaru sa
fusta puna rezao alfa mi pegiti tu fusta to mani mani bifizanti karezao alfa mi
pegiti tu fusta to mani mani bifizanti karezao Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Tena
kiko usagimami kyu Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Pafi tjavana pava, pjavana pava
Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Tena kiko usagimami kyu Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava
Pina litimi yu tanifikasaku Yara daala naninou panday kizan Tiwan yu nani fa
ulambanaku Na nuseta gezani ku yu fapyankindu Pafi tjavana pava, pjavana pava
Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Tena kiko usagimami kyu Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava
Pafi tjavana pava, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Tena kiko usagimami
kyu Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Pafi tjavana pava, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Tena kiko usagimami kyu Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Pafi tjavana,
pjavana pava Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana,
pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana,
pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana,
pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana,
pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana,
pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana,
pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana,
pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana,
pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana,
pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana,
pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana,
pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana,
pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana,
pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana,
pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana,
pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana,
pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana,
pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana, pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Pafi tjavana,
pjavana pava Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Nuwa tunotjo,
tunotjo wana Nuwa tunotjo, tunotjo wana Long live the king, you know it King
already, you know it Top everything, everything, you know it King already,
already, you know it Long live the king, you are king, you know it Top
everything, everything, you know it Shoot out the will, you know it You know it
Bismang a bunbuntena Mis mga bunbuntenga Azza mga bunbuntenga Mis mga
bunbuntenga Aya, iwo, aya, iwo Mis mga bunbuntenga Mis mga bunbuntenga Azza mga
bunbuntenga Iwo Tayunga tengah Tayunga tengah Tayunga tengah Tayunga tengah Aya,
iwo, aya, iwo Mis mga bunbuntenga Mis mga bunbuntenga Azza mga bunbuntenga Mis
mga bunbuntenga Aya, iwo Tayunga tengah Tayunga tengah Tayunga tengah Tayunga
tengah Nanuluti umede Mga bande Mga mbune Mga nibu Ang sisne Mga bande Mga mbune
Mga nibu Ang sisne Aya, iwo, aya, iwo Azza mga bunbuntenga Azza mga bunbuntenga
Mis mga bunbuntenga Aya, iwo Tayunga tengah Tayunga tengah Mis mga bunbuntenga
Tayunga tengah Tayunga tengah Mis mga bunbuntenga Mga bande Mga mbune Mga nibu
Ang sisne Mga bande Mga mbune Mga nibu Ang sisne Aya, iwo Aya, iwo Mis mga
bunbuntenga Mga mbune Mga mbune Mga mbune Aya, iwo Tayunga tengah Mga mbune Mga
mbune Aya, iwo Tayunga tengah Mga mbune Aya, iwo Tayunga tengah Mga mbune Mga
mbune Aya, iwo Tayunga tengah Tayunga tengah Mga mbune Mga mbune Mga mbune Aya,
iwo Aya, iwo Tayunga tengah Mga mbune Mga mbune Aya, iwo Tayunga tengah Mga
mbune Aya, iwo Aya, iwo Tayunga tengah Aya, iwo Tayunga tengah Aya, iwo If you
ship saise, That is the way it is, but The sea belongs to everyone There's no
slaves here No chance here No, no, no, no, no No freedom here No, no, no, no, no
No freedom here Violence Sorrow Ignorance Cherim Violence Pain Insistence Always
the same No, no, no, no, no No freedom here No, no, no, no, no No freedom here
They're talking, shouting, begging, dying, fighting, bidding, losing, but trying
again No, no, no, no, no, no No freedom here No, no, no, no, no No freedom here
They're talking, shouting, begging, dying, fighting, bidding, losing, but trying
again No, no, no, no, no No freedom here Tzima it San nati vedewwe Indra
imandigana Dewe lan tamigana Sirigana Life deep Donu la zainafa We wuman mdra
kiza Nuwa haretan niza fitya Valtikiza Nefara vo Indru fasenda Niyalundran Nau
man kanuwan Fatu dzongan life deep Ma ha gaga iyan Izanifyu van zani Fanyu
malina Pifari Diya tumang zarma pidali Sirikyan fanka Timni fangieri Mudeti mi
Fanka lala Fanka lala Izanifyu van zani Fanyu malina Pifari Diya tumang zarma
pidali Sirikyan fanka Timni fangieri Mudeti mi Tzima it San nati vedewwe Indra
imandigana Dewe lan tamigana Dewe lan tamigana Sirikyan fanka Timni fanga San
nati vedewwe Indra imandigana Dewe lan tamigana Sirikyan fanka Life deep
Izanifyu van zani Fanyu malina Pifari Diya tumang zarma pidali Sirikyan fanka
Timni fanka Timni fanka Sirikyan fanka Izanifyu van zani Fanyu malina Dewe lan
tamigana Dewe lan tamigana Sirikyan fanka Timni fanka Izanifyu van zani Fanyu
malina Dewe lan tamigana Sirikyan fanka Timni fanka Tzima it San nati vedewwe
Indra imandigiana Dewe lan tamigana Sirikyan fanka Timni fanka Timni fanka
Izanifyu van zani Fanyu malina tuvo Me te reste pas tout seul Tu es celui qui
m'entraînera Vers la lumière avec toi Je traverserai le désert Avec toi jusqu'à
la puna Les montagnes Toi et moi nous bâtirons avec toi Toi c'est moi, moi c'est
toi To se moa mo se toa toa e moa e ni pou la ve Mo s'ho e mo s'ho se rondaj a
bebele Ton am mon am se rond konfondi avec l'eternite de l'amou Mo s'ho e mo
s'ho se rondaj a bebele Ton am mon am se rond konfondi avec l'eternite de l'amou
Mo s'ho e mo s'ho se rond konfondi avec l'eternite de l'amou Ka n'otra amour ira
houdela des or Houdela des montagne, houdela les mer Il n'a d'or a naissance a
une amprime d'étoile Les millions d'étoiles d'amou To se moa mo se toa toa e moa
e ni pou la ve To se moa mo se toa toa e moa e ni pou la ve To se moa mo se toa
toa e moa e ni pou la ve To se moa mo se toa toa e moa e ni pou la ve La La
La... La La La... La La La... T'u lé t'aqa Ouuu baby T'u lé t'aqa T'u lé t'aqa
T'u lé t'aqa T'u lé t'aqa Ouuu baby Rattatatatatatatai Yaman, special
combination Justin Schellar Original Chord Yaman, respect all time Leson parlé
les gens Leson parlé les gens Moi je viens d'Afrique et tu viens d'ailleurs Et
alors? Je viens des sentis et moi je vis ailleurs Et alors? On dit que chez toi
les hommes sont tous beaux parleurs Et alors? On dit du mal sur vos hommes et
leur valeur On s'en fout Leson parlé les gens Leson parlé les gens Leson parlé
les gens Vas-y vas-y Leson parlé les gens Leson parlé les gens Leson parlé les
gens Leson parlé les gens Leson parlé les gens Leson parlé les gens Leson parlé
les gens Leson parlé les gens On dit c'est pas lui le père du dernier Et alors?
On dit que t'as des fâtes tu rare payer Et alors? Tu es pour ça c'est partout
les vitiés On s'en fout Ê ma sœur, si tu en prête le chemin de je m'enfous Ni
leson parli les jaun Ni les parli les jaun C'est bon sa Ba chaché mouner a draj
Ba chaché mouner a draj J'accord La kata kata kata kata Aroule ba chaché mouner
a draj La kata kata kata kata Aroule ba chaché mouner a draj Oui, va Qu'est-ce
qu'<|fr|><|transcribe|> Laisse parler les jaun Laisse parler les jaun n'a t'i
tja kha ni kha ni uva nanga t'i tja t'i n'a kui tjini kha ni fara nali kha
sambar nali ila idina fa li za vedi adinu kha adinu kha ni n'a tjui reri t'i
tjini kha ni rina di sunyali t'i tjini kha ni uva nanga adinu kha kha ni rina di
sunyali adinu kha ni kha ni uva nanga kha sambar nali kha ni uva nanga kha ni
uva nanga uvaba Ang gina La la la la la la la la La la la la la la la Amparam
siya fenin anna'u Pani zayulu ni zayi Nubehi kuri fu kuwati zay Siya ni'u fa'u
ma'a dak'i zay Siya ni'u fa'u ma'a dak'i zay Amparam siya fenin anna'u Pani
zayulu ni zayi Nubehi kuri fu kuwati zay Siya ni'u fa'u ma'a dak'i zay Siya ni'u
fa'u ma'a dak'i zay Rasena zi ita ni ta va ni Ni bas'u anna'a gala zani Ni duki
da rogi ni va va ni Ka didi kwan zani da ve zani Isha bu na maju ni diya Zey
veri ni kwa kuri u sazi Siya ni'u fa'u ma'a dak'i zay Siya ni'u fa'u ma'a dak'i
zay Rasena zi ita ni ta va ni Ni bas'u anna'a gala zani Ni duki da rogi ni va va
ni Ka didi kwan zani da ve zani Isha bu na maju ni diya Zey veri ni kwa kuri u
sazi Siya ni'u fa'u ma'a dak'i zay Kuru ma'a dak'i zau Ananda zi Kuru ma'a dak'i
zau Ananda zi Mi kuru ma'a dak'i zau Kuru ma'a dak'i zau Ananda zi Ni tsu Ni tsu
Ni tsu Ni tsu Ni tsu Ni tsu Ni tsu Ni tsu Ni tsu Ni tsu Nizaza o mokatu mafali
ni rai Andu va fitai na raqatjiza Nizaza mafilu ma pauri ni renini Mafafui ni
anju iren Fitia vanjai, fitia vanjeni Mi tsi zuni zana ni Mi raadisu, laa vo mi
te ni Ma pasu ni ana tsa unbe ni Nong tsi ma na tsa ni raasiri nao Te umaru anju
si anin naenao Fi zanme ma na tsa nume bu ni na itcha Nizami si azi unina fi
umaritcha Fitia vanjai, fitia vanjeni Mi tsi zuni zana ni Mi raadisu, laa vo mi
te ni Ma pasu ni ana tsa unbe ni Fitia vanjai, fitia vanjeni Mi tsi zuni zana ni
Mi raadisu, laa vo mi te ni Ma pasu ni ana tsa unbe ni Mi tsi zuni zana ni Mi
raadisu, laa vo mi te ni Ma pasu ni ana tsa unbe ni Ti ni fuku ndi su raesu anza
kao Fa ma lutu ni uta izao Uwe ku fona tumpu osa ni antsu nao Ni fa mi ni ti mi
ainoa Infi pi ru i anao nuni ta di ai Fa mi apina nao nunatao Susa fidi auka ni
ina Sde ala la ni antsa ranau Raesua, raesu Ia nou na makua za va rina A ra ra
od fada su ti anau Na di ama roza ni asa ni ma izina Infi ki fada su unba nao
Infi pi ru i anao nuni ta di ai Fa mi apina nao nunatao Susa fidi auka ni ina
Sde ala la ni antsa ranau Ma mi laa anna Fa bu na zi su ko i perinao A fa mi in
si mi ara kaminao Ti si an ina ni wa riku An pi laa ta na nao Infi pi ru i anao
nuni antsu wa Anan buja ila ela la ku Raesila ja te fi u tis Ia nou maa jaki za
eduri Raesua, raesu Infi pi ru i anao nuni ta di ai Re si laa jao te fi u tis
Infi pi ru i anao nunam elana Raesua, raesu Infi pi ru i anao nuni antsu wa Re
si laa jao te fi u tis Infi pi ru i anao nunam elana Raesua, raesu Infi pi ru i
anao nuni ta di ai Inzane uram ba ra tha Nuruza kami sangi ma lait sainda si
fana Inzane kucho ba ra tha Bidubu kami na ku wa ku awila vita Atupa atupa ndibu
ta ni ra vi kiazu Adula dula neto ma di ana ti vasu Atupa atupa ka falina ire ni
ranu Ka tunga naa maa naa wawa uma wu Abana ma di bi urana Vuruna mi falia fanza
Andha u ilala urana Andha u mi falia fanza Nanna na na Inzane uram ba ra tha
Bidu takami shagima daid besay na sifana Nidhani kucho barada Bidu buka manaku
waku wavi lavidya Atupa dupan jivutani ravi kazu Atula dula nitu mandi anati
vasu Atupa dupan ka falina irani ranu Ka tunga na manna veba un babu Abana mandi
bi urana Oguru na iye mi falia bantha Ada wa ilala urana Ada i falia bantha Tata
tu ere i Fasa lani adumu ti ngai Iso timi uva fati asi Fasa ula zaina uvazi vazi
tiani uviani uduri Uyana umi ziangye manitla Utzi misaina na wakuri Niyali nisi
tsi naturi fadi mila lafiti Abela uau zini fi tsi a vakumi anfati Fana marina za
izala zaina Tsi mani nona falekuyani mia leja Anati di javanan lan rinata abela
Uyana umi ziangye manitla Utzi misaina na wakuri Niyali nisi tsi naturi fadi
mila lafiti Hazata tada inaunya dalani Nituwe tani titati na u Tsi manpaninunai
izani tiku izi hampi za Abela uau zini fi tsi a vakumi anfati Fana marina za
izala zaina Tsi maninunai falekuyani mia leja Anati di javanan lan rinata abela
Abela uau zini fi tsi a vakumi anfati Fana marina za izala zaina Tsi maninunai
falekuyani mia leja Anati di javanan lan rinata abela Abela Abela uau zini fi
tsi a vakumi anfati Fana marina za izala zaina Tsi maninunai Abela uau zini fi
tsi a vakumi anfati Fana marina za izala zaina Abela uau Abela uau zini fi tsi a
vakumi anfati Fana marina za izala zaina Tsi maninunai falekuyani mia leja Anati
di javanan lan rinata abela Abela uau zini fi tsi a vakumi anfati Fana marina za
izala zaina Tsi maninunai falekuyani mia leja Anati di javanan lan rinata abela
Uuuu uuuu uuuu Tu es el kime den des el si bello natural Asi plakke le koulodan
akansial amadou Sama belle du fond du kyan set an apel Tu love and es i belle
Tulu jo ton visaj ta kwa ton reka man s'orsel Kwa ma je si formel J'me batre
pour toi ma belle Pour allumer la flamme Je sere ton étincelle J'irai au bout du
tunnel Bien loin du superficiel Fou n'etre sincer et vrai Tu es mon essentiel
J'ai trop de respect pour toi Pour te faire de la peine oh princess Je sere
toujours la pour toi Te garderai de moi Mon coeur s'envole my love J'ai trop de
respect pour toi Pour te faire de la peine oh princess Je sere toujours la pour
toi Te garderai de moi J'aimerai tant que le temps d'utre Que tu es confiance en
moi Tonight is the end Et pour toi baby c'est show time J'irai déprocher la lune
pour toi mon étoile Me laisse pas mon coeur pleurer De n'pas être a tes cotés
Car tu es ma princess My lover of musical J'suis un peu charmant sans consent
gentleman Ne cherche pas plus loin baby J'suis ton idéal Ensemble long time Pour
moi le principal C'est vivre a tes cotés Que le bonheur s'installe J'ai trop de
respect pour toi Pour te faire de la peine oh princess Je sere toujours la pour
toi Te garderai de moi Mon coeur s'envole my love My love J'ai trop de respect
pour toi Pour te faire de la peine oh princess Je sere toujours la pour toi Te
garderai de moi J'aimerai tant que le temps d'utre Se que tu aies confiance en
moi J'inventerai des mots Même s'il le faut Car ceux de mon cerveau Ne sont plus
a la hauteur Voici ma baby Les dictants de la langue de mon coeur Oh oh oh Tu es
mon moteur Mon inspiration a mon coeur Tu es l'air de mes poumons Vive sans toi
c'est l'oppression J'ai trop de respect pour toi Pour te faire de la peine oh
princess Je sere toujours la pour toi Te garderai de moi Mon coeur s'envole my
love J'ai trop de respect pour toi Pour te faire de la peine oh princess Je sere
toujours la pour toi Te garderai de moi J'inventerai des mots Même s'il le faut
Car ceux de mon cerveau My princess You remind me To never back to tonight I
could tell you bye bye My princess You remind me To never back to tonight My
heart burns on the beat My princess You remind me To never back to tonight I
could tell you bye bye My princess You remind me To never back to tonight I
could tell you bye bye No no no Bye bye Bye bye Bye bye Bye bye L'ombre soleil
mi shen te soukha songe vakans na pasi sa te troube mi shen ou pavire sa
c'etelon ka rin sentivo sa c'etelon l'er di ma du toug e kiyo I love you l'on
m'konae mi shen fe m'arrivé la solega kushe ou fe tendresse entré enko enwen sa
c'etelon ka rin sentivo sa c'etelon l'er di ma du toug e kiyo mi shen sa
c'etelon ka rin sentivo sa c'etelon ka rin sentivo mi shen espire ou jire enko
enwen sa c'etelon kumara se mwen kussele plon pire toudou kumara se mwen kussele
kumara nija passe kumara se mwen kussele asu konti se vo kumara se mwen kussele
pwose pale le kussele le maten lan kussele jodeye sume pol la prelan lan kussele
L'onou se ne La galame la pata ribe ne n'ou jola L'onou se ne Piyo mwen chan
jiste vou kika moke L'onou se ne L'onou se ne, michel J'saf ke pey la, skalki le
poussa Maji a tshel la te inspirai O ou virei Kaj santi voh Kaj santi voh L'er
du mou de tu, di kiero I love you L'onou vani, michel O fè mwen ribe la, la line
kaleve O fè tandoeste rentre O ke mwen S'afke pey la Kaj santi voh S'afke pey la
O ou virei Kaj santi voh S'afke pey la O fè tandoeste rentre O fè tandoeste
rentre O fè tandoeste rentre O fè tandoeste rentre O fè tandoeste rentre O fè
mwen S'afke pey la O fè mwen S'afke pey la O fè tandoeste rentre O fè me mwen
S'afke pey la O fè mwen Owe Longu o solei Si baga nomelan bagari meh mechon la
Longu o solei Piyon mo change se bou kikamon kye Longu o solei On fekalete to se
le matin Longu o solei Fon di su meh vola piyon moin Longu o solei Si baga
nomelan bagari meh mechon la Longu o solei Piyon mo change se bou kikamon kye
Longu o solei Radio Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music
Music Music